Here is the translation: And it has come to me in vision that I will complete this for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything altogether, so is the science destroyed and dismembered, and nothing remains except for small descriptions in old books that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed and knowledge is estranged.
Or it seems to me that I will bring it back to life by putting together this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of instruments for cauterization, and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And because of this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And it is necessary for whoever undertakes this to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the joints of members, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of vertebrae, and the arrangement and moving and resting muscles, and the place from which they issue.
And therefore says Hippocrates that a name without a name is much, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said beforehand, should beware lest he err and kill men; thus I have often seen many who undertake this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish doctor who cut open an abscess on the neck of a woman and cut into the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in an old man's body and the stone was large; so he took out with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been summoned to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it was not removed he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took charge of treating a duke from our land who had a broken leg and with the break was also wounded; and the ignorant doctor forced the break onto the wound, binding it tightly with strong ligatures, and did not allow any cleansing to take place, and left it thus until the end; and he told him not to loosen it at all; and it remained thus so that the leg became all inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him and I hastened to come to loosen the leg; and when I had loosened it so it became quiet and he felt no pain.
But all the same the corruption was already confirmed in the member and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was entirely lost.
And I saw another doctor who burst open an abscess that had become inflamed and then infected through the evil of his treatment.
For when a chancre is pure of melancholic humor, it is not good to touch it with iron unless one can completely remove what is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, one where there is danger in several dispositions; and I will show each place in this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you take care to protect yourself, so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you.
So take your remedies in good order, and begin to treat your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the frightful diseases of grievous sickness; and lay aside your weapons from those things that make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on a bad disease unless you are called a foolish doctor."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal cauterizations, and it is the chapter ordered from head to foot; and of the forms of instruments, and the procedures for cauterization, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and poultices and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter ordered with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is ordered from head to foot, with the forms of instruments.
Moreover, so that we remember the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of the aid and harm of each temperament.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle science, and the secret answer; and many wise men spoke about this, and agreed with it; and I suffice little for my words, because I fear length.
I say that cauterization helps universally in all temperaments where there is material, except for two temperaments: namely, hot temperament with material and dry temperament with material.
In hot and dry temperament with material, some divided and said that cauterization is great help; and others said the opposite: that cauterization is not worth anything in disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured with heat or dryness; and says he who said the opposite that cauterization does great help in hot and dry disease that comes into the bodies of men. For when you comprehend the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it to be true at times through experience.
And all the same, do not meddle with it at all except he who has tried it and knows by long use the book of cauterizations, and the diversity of human temperaments, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the surprises and pace of time; from other temperaments we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians assembled and agreed on cauterization.
And know, son, that cauterization is among the secrets of cures, and of greater goodliness than fiery cauterization.
For fire is simple, and does not spread to any other member except the one that is burned, and harms no other member if it bears its name.
The fiery medicines come from one member to another, and bring diseases of great suffering to the sick person; and by chance, they kill the patient.
Fire due to its height and the goodness of its substance does not do this if there is no excessiveness.
And I have found this by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to take from you the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases of the body, just as philosophers say in demonstrating; receive this in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, and selected patients.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harm that follows is mitigated by the aid of cauterization; and similarly, if cauterizations are for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for a later time when greater evil may come to the member.
And never think this, dear son, as foolish doctors do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they think, because cauterizations are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more effective than medicine due to its hastiness of valor, and the virtue of its work and power.
And it is a possibility that the disease may come to pass according to the complexion of the patient and the site of the disease and its virtue; and the superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless it is cauterization administered at the right time or place where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauterizations for dens due to pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intention is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. Therefore it appears well that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that gold cauterizers are more effective than iron ones, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the location of cauterization does not cause corruption, but it is not true because I have tested it, and I found that it is true in some men; and gold cauterizers are more effective than iron ones, just as they said.
And anyway, when you heat an instrument of gold, you don't know when it's charred by the color of the gold, and it has cooled off soon after; and if you heat it too much, it makes a noise in the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And therefore we use cauterization of iron because we have found it suitable for our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter to end here, so that the view is more lightened to find.
of the olive cauterization
This cauterization is effective for moisture and chill on the brain, and there are two reasons why it is done due to a disease that is called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and because of a multitude of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and also all diseases that come from chill, such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cauterization is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, moistening the head 3-4 times, according to what the virtues and age and habit of the patient can endure; and then make the head of the patient red.
And then make him sit with his hands crossed between yours, and place your hands on the crown of his head; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let it come to where your fingers will touch, and then let blood flow out and reheat the cauterization called "olivare", which is the form:
And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make your hand move slowly and evenly in a circular motion; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see the bone 1 small span deep; and if you don't see it, repeat the cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take 1 small piece of silk, and put it in soft and moist cotton within, and place it on the spot, and let it stay for 3 days; after that apply a warm poultice in butter; and leave it on until the eschar is removed; after that cure the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmac", until it is healed.
And the ancients said that when the wound remains open longer, the more it purges; and therefore it is aided by this.
And some of them said that one should let the cauterization continue until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it should be healed.
And the others said that one should let the cauterization continue so long as to burn the bone as wide as a vermicelli thread that women put in their hair for the humors to be purged out; and one should leave the wound open long enough; after that, it should be cured and sutured.
And these two ways of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in all cases, except in some people where there is a sign of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it; for the head of the patient is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witness in other members; and also when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salubrious and purifying for me, and from this principle I work in order to gather a remedy.
of ancient pain of the head
When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, the patient should use yarrow and pills called "cochie", and purging of the head, oils, and plasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have spoken of before, it is not worth it.
Take care if the patient's head is of strong constitution, and it is not too cold; then cauterize under that same cautery as we have said above.
After that, make a cautery on each horn of the head right up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and there is one place where you put poultices; and hold your hand so close to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns be more subtle than those for cauterizing the middle part of the head, and that's the shape:
of the head's cautery When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the disease extends as far as the eye, and the head is purged by mundane medicines, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases have been tried, and none of it helps: then he makes cauterizations according to two ways, namely medicine and fire.
The medicine cautery of the aloe is such that you take an aloes berry, and remove the bark and pound it into one pot as two heads, and then make the temple or the spot where the pain is held in such a way that you can pour the aloes berry below the skin; and when it has been poured, bind and tighten it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; then release it and treat the aloes berry further for two or three days; afterwards put on a poultice in butter until pus forms.
After the ointment treatment until it is healed; and if you see, then make those of some burning medicines that I have written or in treating with burning medicines.
The fire cautery is such according to this manner. Heat the cauterizing iron to this shape:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or a small cup with a slight curvature; and hold it over the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, until half of the powder from the burning is consumed; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flow abundantly of blood.
After put cotton in the shape of a seal, and put it on the spot for three days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", do so at all points, and take care not to cut off the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
of a migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the preceding cauterizations with medicine and fire do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then apply it to the painful spot a line half a thumb's length long, and hold your hand once, and strain so that you do not cut off the artery and come up to the bone; and take care of the jawbone that moves when eating, and the nerves have regard for it and spasms do not occur to the patient, and take care of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if there is great fear and also in one who does not know and is not an expert; and leave the work in my way; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and show you where it belongs in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have said or in the chapter on extracting the artery, with the cautery having two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from part coldness
When pain comes to the ear from cold and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures as we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cauterizing iron called "poins" to this shape:
After, prick all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and withdraw slightly from the root of the ear since you have marked the spot to be cauterized; and make 10 pricks around each ear; afterwards cure the wound until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease; and do not make any cauterizations for similar cases that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torture that moves from phlegm and idleness, and spitting up and gargling, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another slightly outside the temple, and the third at the seam of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on the top of the head above a small cup of the head, and one other in the temple as long as a thumb's length; and leave the cautery until half of the powder from the burning is consumed; and this is the shape of the cautery:
And this is the same as the "cultellare" that we have said before, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary that the knives be a bit thicker; afterwards cure the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the spot called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
From lethargy
To this illness, it is necessary to give the patient great year's pills and mondified brain medication; afterwards, he should raise his head all together, and place on the back of the patient's head the plaster of mustard that is written in the treatise on plasters; and that is the manner of the cautery: if one does it as I said.
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, then one makes three cauterizations around the head descending to the neck, with a space of two fingers between each one, and cures it as with the others; and if you see anything swollen or inflamed, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, make two more on the two horns, and cure until he is healed; and let the cautery be called "olivare", as I said before.
of the chill of the head It is necessary that the head be mondified with years and what we said before; afterwards, raise the patient's head, then make a cautery in the head and on each horn, and two behind and three on the backbone of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, make four cauterizations on the backbone of the back; and leave it until the most of the heat is burned away, then lift your hand; afterwards, cure until he is healed, and let the cautery be called "olivare" that we said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first mondify the brain with years and other cures that we said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from a lack of medical treatment.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure this, make him gargle and massage the brain often with good meats; afterwards, raise his head in the middle, and make one cautery according to what we said before, and one on the vertebra, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I said for someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the backbone of the back and neck, and let it be an olive cautery in the manner that I said.
If the patient is a child, make one subtle cautery according to this manner:
When due to melancholy the superfluities or moistures are corrupted and thickened phlegm forms, then make those same cauterizations as we said for someone who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him something to drink by which his brain may be mondified, according to what is before in the division.
After raising the patient's head; after that, make one linen bandage well made, like a circle, and put it around his head; and the patient should be crossed and held firmly from all sides; afterwards, apply the liniment, and anoint with old butter of herbs; then heat it over tempered fire, so that the patient can endure it being applied to their body; after that, empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool down; and do this for the patient once a week for each subsequent week with good governance until he is healed.
Or, if you see that the cautery is causing more than one point on the whole of the cautery. This manner of cautery cools the brain sufficiently; and then place a damp cloth on top in butter and goose grease.
of the eyesight When awe comes first to the eyes through the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that mondifies the head, and guard against all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times on an empty stomach.
After that, command the patient to lower his head, and make a cautery in the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples if the descent of awe is to both eyes together, or to one eye; and close off all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and take care not to cause bloodshed, and if you see too much blood coming out, then staunch it as well as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and at the incision how to staunch it; and never make a cautery or hatereil under the two posterior bones.
of the tears of the body
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the surface of the head; and one sees that it is cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: one cautery in the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and three cauterizations or hatereil under the two posterior bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize slowly over the entire little cautery.
of the tears of the body within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three cooked nuts to drink; afterwards, raise his head, and make a cautery on the olive-shaped part of the cautery; and make two cauterizations of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two temples, one a little below the hairline; and take care not to cover the artery. And that is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare". This is its form:
And if you see that one makes two cauterizations on the two temples as long as the scalp is; and do not leave your hand there except until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I said.
of the hair that points at the oil Never happens when the hairs of the eyes are converted to the forehead, and point at the oil, and one makes cauterizations according to two manners: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
Or, the cautery by fire commands the patient to leave the hairs as long and equal as they are; and if they point to their birthplace, then bind the eyes so that they do not move until they are born.
When they grow and are equal, then put the patient in good health; after that, sign above the paper of eyes a figure like that of a myrtle leaf, and it should be the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then put cotton soaked in egg white and musk extract on the eye, then warm the fire cautery to its form.
After cauterizing above the figure you signed in small strokes many times, so that the burns are red and raw around there; and the sign of health from the work is when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the level of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be like this for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the scabbing is removed; after that, anoint with oil until they are healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come and the paper is softened, then start again with the cautery on that same place, just as you did at first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and be equal, and do not prick the hairs into the eye.
The fire cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment form like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and living coal, each one-third, and mix well together; and do it hastily, so it does not cool down, then spread the mixture on the form you made, like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of eyes; and if the patient has only one eye affected, you should work on that one alone, and if both eyes equally, and put cotton soaked in egg yolk under the eye; and the patient's head should be in good health and hold your hand showing over the medicine, and press gently a little and often whenever the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for it feels like biting as if from fire. When you have done this, then remove the medicine from your hand. And when the biting has passed, then lift up the eyelid and look to see if the paper is raised as if it were lifted by constriction of fire or incision; and if so, it is well. If not, then put more medicine on the eye or the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are in order; then put cotton soaked in butter until the red burns are gone, after that, anoint with oil called "dyafenis" and others, until they are healed.
And if you need to be careful with your work by great care that the medicine does not harm the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then start again with the medicine on that same place which is softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; after that, anoint until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle leaf:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and according to this be your constraining signs; and do not assume the right way for him whose study is this art.
(Note: This appears to be a new section heading, rather than a translation of a sentence. The text may continue with instructions on treating fistulas by cauterization.)
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not help, then it is necessary that you make him cauterized according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand; and hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does it turn away its head; after that, put cotton soaked in egg yolk or persimmon juice on the eye; after that, warm the cautery which is like this: and it should be shaped at the head as if it were the shape of a vulture's feather, together with the cautery; if you see, then it will be apointed from one chief to another, and if you see, then it will be like a tent; but all the same, what is shaped is worth moving for your work.
After that, press the fistula if it is open, and remove the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work it open, and draw out the bowel; after that, put hot cautery on top, and hold your hand at the cautery to the part of the eye above the oil, so that your hands do not make a fool of themselves; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be well. If not, then start again with the cautery once more, and another time if necessary, and leave it for three days; after that, put cotton soaked in butter on top, and the cure of drying oil until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and the rest according to what comes to its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand by fistula, and make an opening; after that, put in the opening one subtle camel hair of which it has the form: and it makes up the quantity of one-third of a pound; and hold your hand or camel hair firmly, and do not let the patient move until the melted wax does not run to their eye; and it is necessary to put cotton soaked in egg yolks or water on the eye of the patient: the wax thus closes the opening of the fistula, and heals it by marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have said, that's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a perforation in the eye, and bring the fistula back into its natural place in the eye according to what is needed for its own proper seat.
(Note: This appears to be a new section heading, rather than a translation of a sentence.) Often there occur cracks in lips that are called "piles", and even in the lips of children.
When you cure these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not help, then warm a small cutaneous cautery according to this form:
And put it on the cracks hastily so that it becomes a pustule; after that, anoint with oil of cerasin until it is healed.
(Note: This appears to be a new section heading, rather than a translation of a sentence.)
When aposteme comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth; and it makes pus and runs and is enveloped and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help: then it is necessary that you make one cautery according to the size of the fistula; after that, burn or perforate the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes hot enough to melt away the pus, and the wound behind; and do it once or twice, after that, follow the cure as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, that's good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the wound and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
of tooth movement
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the patient's head in your hand; afterwards heat the cautery that will form hereafter in this way as if you were putting a cord on a tooth; and place the hot cautery inside quickly, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and reapply the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and keep it an hour and let it be rich in furs.
And in this way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gums softened are restrained, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
of tooth pain
When tooth pain comes from cold or heat, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to apply a cautery in two ways: the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end of it in an iron or earthen bowl; afterwards take cotton and wrap around the point of a tent, and soak it in hot butter, and place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and do so often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth; and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and apply one hot iron until the fire comes to the crown of the tooth.
The fire cauterization together is such that you take a cord of iron or earthenware, and make it thick so that the fire does not come to the patient's mouth; afterwards heat the cautery, so that the form will come hereafter, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the excitement of that cautery, and then richly furrows; and this is the form of the cautery:
When scrofulas are of mucus and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery so that the form will come hereafter, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from the other part; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it comes to the head of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and wrap with moist cotton in butter until the inflammation is removed; afterwards care for the joint with ointments and tents until it is healed.
When the moisture conquers on the channels of the throat, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first by soluble medicines; afterwards do a cautery at the root of the neck, and take care not to come too close to the neck, and burn only slightly. Afterwards do another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and this cautery is called "clavicle" which we have the form before; and care for the joint as we said before until it is healed.
of coughing When all the illnesses of the throat are from cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and it is an old illness, then do two cauterizations on the breast in visible places; and one other cautery inside the chest between the nipples; and this cautery is called "clavicle" according to the form which was said before.
And if you see, do a cautery in piercing all the cautery which is called "points" of which the form is here before in the illness of the ears; and be the points up to 30, or around that. Afterwards care for the joint according to what was said before, and be the cauterizations at three rains according to this form:
And because of that are the cauterizations lighter, because you make them in triplicate.
of the shoulder dislocation See previous translation. This is the same text again. Afterwards be mindful of the patient on his back and on his side; afterwards lift the skin that is inside the titillated area with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has two handles as this form shows:
and cauterize the skin until it is pierced up to the side, and the figure of the cautery will come together with three cauterizations; and because of this, the cautery is made with the cautery that has three handles, so that the figure of cauterization are six cauterizations; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three handles:
And once it is added to this one nerve, so that there are eight cauterizations.
Afterwards apply the cautery with powdered silk; afterwards make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then do a cautery on the thick part of the clavicle cautery, or many cauterizations in piercing. For the joint is refilled, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
of the pleurisy cautery
The ancients said that one must make pleurisy cauterizations with Aristologe roots, and in this way: take a long root of Aristologe, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and then apply it to the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the breastbone and the collarbone, and two small cauterizations a little lower down in the part that is below the beard; and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little; and one cautery inside the chest, and one above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the sides of the chest after the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it openly just as in smelling.
And they said some old one that someone uses a fire cautery like a razor, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs, so long as it comes to that abscess; and then the pain is gone, just as we have said about the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
Of the mouse.
When you cure the disease of the mouse in the way we have said for the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three manners of cauterization that all are good.
Of which one manner is that you make three cauterizations, or four, in lining according to the length of the mouse, following the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand all over the cauterization, and let the patient be mindful on his back.
And another manner of cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer which has two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the key which is near the mouse, or where the patient's skin comes towards his left side, and be the elevations which you lift the key according to the shape, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization be according to the width of the body.
Afterwards insert the two handles and heat them until the key is pierced from the other side, and then take away the cauterizer, and thus there will be four. And if you see, so cauterize all the cauterizer with three handles. After that, cure when it has gotten putridity after a long time, and this is better than the other cures mentioned before.
Of dropsy.
Cautery is not good for dropsy, unless it is the manner called "asclytes". When you cure according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cauterizations be well close to the skin of the key.
Afterwards leave the cauterization open to get putridity after a long time, and do not cease the cure of the patient after the cauterization; and healing would hasten, and will be together with the two intentions with the aid of God.
The shape of the cauterizer for the belly is the one that we have shown before; and the one for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it was set forth here before.
Of the swelling of the feet. When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish moisture, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cauterizer so as not to turn. And do not enter too deeply into the flesh, otherwise the yellowish moisture would be forced out, and let the cauterizations be according to this shape:
Afterwards make two cauterizations on each leg, one in front of the kneecap and the other behind it, in the middle of the leg; and let the cauterizations be long, one below the knee joint in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizations open for a long time without curing, until the moisture goes away; afterwards cure with the other cures that we have said.
Of menstruation.
When there is a solution of the womb that comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, then make one great cauterization on the stomach according to what was spoken here before about the cauterization of the stomach, at the cauterization of the circulation; and three fine cauterizations around the belly, as subtle as each single cauterizer is subtle, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moistures abounding and the patient suffering, make a cauterization on the palm of the hand, and one on each elbow, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the great one, because the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are on the fundament, one or more, and are old and consist of gross, cold, moist, corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that one which is entirely behind almecdate pock and pock in triangulating, and one cauterization under the belly. Two must;
And if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face inflamed, then make a great cauterization on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse, with the whole cauterizer sharp; and leave the cauterization open for a long time. After that, cure the patient until he is healed.
Of the scrofula which is called "thelul".
When you cut into the scrofula, heat the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the scrofula cut; and I leave my hand there until the cauterization comes to the opening of the vein, so that the blood flows out; make this once or twice, and if there is much scrofula, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards cure with ointments which are profitable until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a great cauterizer on the scrotum, it will have greater aid.
Of an ill-cured wound.
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes this illness that cannot be healed unless by cauterization.
When a fistula comes to anyone, and is inflamed and discharges corrupted purulence and moisture, you should then prove the entire tent fine, and make sure you know exactly how deep it is. After that, heat the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the depth of the tent that has entered, and continue the cauterization until the corrupted flesh and purulence are burned away, once, twice, or three times, depending on the amount needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, then be cautious of these parts, and do not make any fires except in a charnel house, and think that it is not perilous; after that, cure the patient until he is healed, and if the lump is sauced, and the matters are removed long time, then know that the lump is entirely healed; and if the matters are not removed, know that the lump is torn, and corrupted the bone to the font; and thus as one of those who we will tell in its place.
Of the disease of the kidneys When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and from great windy-ness, and it does not take on the nature of a woman, then you should make a fire cauterization on the kidneys one side and the other at the fire cauldron that we have previously said; and if we were to cauterize in the middle, there would be three cauterizations in line, and they will do greater good.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cauterization on the part outside of the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow on the urethra, and one on the right side and one on the left, and each should be as long as a nose; and make one cauterization behind the back, or two if you need them; and let the fire cauldron be according to the form previously said.
Of the womb When the womb is cold and moist, and does not cease from conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is late; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the belly, as we have said in the fire cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the fire cauldron be as we have said.
Of the groin
When the viscous moistures descend to the cleft of the groin, and because of this cause it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together; and the lump at the departure is found, then you should cauterize the patient on the cleft of the groin with one cauterization like a circle, and sign before the lump around the cleft as it turns, so that the cleft be within the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those for which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three great cauterizations on the olfactory nerve, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the colors; and heal until it is whole.
Of the pain of the groin When pain comes to the cleft of the groin, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not hold, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or other good-smelling pills similar to these.
Then make a cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization. Fire cauterization is according to many manners, one of which is: that you cauterize three triangular cauterizations on the cleft of the groin, in this shape, and make a good deepness and size, and have between each cauterization the width of a doek, and let the cauterizations be like those of the olivaire; sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on the head of the groin, so that there are four according to this shape:
And if you see that, then make the cauterization at the fire cauldron that we have previously said in the dislocation of the groin; but make it in this manner so that the circles contain all the cleft of the groin, and all the edges of the color are burned.
And that is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain stays in the groin and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg. And if it reaches as far as the thigh and leg, then make two cauterizations on the outside where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization above the ankle three doeks from the left side; and let the cauterizations be cutellate, and let the edges of the color be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as the two bones of the foot or almost there, then make it where they feel the pain three points or four at the fire cauldron called "points".
And if it is necessary, make more of them; and if it seems that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cauterization at the cutellate or circular fire cauldron, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cauterization so long that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the toes also, and was pierced and corrupted all the toes. After a purging of the belly which caused his death.
And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cauterization in one and in the other, according to this manner.
And it should be scalded until it is entirely red and feels sensations, then place it on the hollow of the armpit of the sick person, and be turned over on its healthy side; and one cautery may be applied once .i. time and leave it for three days; then make an application with butter, and let the wound remain open a long time; after the treatment by bathing until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use this cautery for the fear of his gaze, and if we see someone who uses it; and nevertheless, this is good cautery, which can be borne by those where it occurs.
of the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, either by falling or percussion or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearance of cold matter spread out, none of these similarities are worth cauterization, except that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient be void of fetid pills or others similar, and that one make signs on his back, where the pain is located, three lines marked by enches, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cauterization be done according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see, do three cauterizations or four at the middle of the cauterization key according to this form:
This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight back when they lift themselves up, and fear; and you will find in the last spine of the back and in our appearance which comes on the other spines.
When you see this and you see it to be cured, then cauterize it at the cautery of that sort according to this form.
So that the cautery penetrates each part of the spine equally. And if you see, then cauterize around the spine at the piercing cautery two lines or three, and let the points be close to one another. After the cure is done so that it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cautery in gibbosity which is in spasms of nerve.
of the pain in the joints
When pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which doctors properly call "podagre", and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterization be olive-like according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you apply to the face of the foot, if it makes a cautery in its entirety which we call "point". And if pains come up to the knees and to other joints, and this often happens, then make cauterization on each knee .iii. cauterizations or .iiii. from each part, all olive-like; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand there longer than until the sparks of the fire are burned out.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains any pain in the shoulders, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the ribs or down to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and do good government to the patient and give medicines. For if you do good government and purge phlegm, he will be healed by the aid of God.
of the pustules of the itch
When pustules come in blisters, and the boils descend to the groin and this is new, then it is necessary that when you see it to be cured, that he does not move at all that day; and that he uses things which loosen his bowels, so that the fiend descends from his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath as long as the boils are repaired, and then reposition them in your hands, and sign with a stroke of an enche below the pustules on the bone of the elbow, and let it be all one sign like the half of a circle above the body; then scald the cautery according to that form:
until it is white and emits sensations. Then reposition the boils to their place; and have him hold his hand over so that they do not return; and work well on the patient's hips, and put a cushion under him and a servant above the hips, and another above the chest which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it at first, then continue doing it again until you reach the bone; and beware subtly that the boil does not burst when you make the cautery; so that you do not burn him; and so that through this the patient does not die or suffer other evils.
And know that when you do not reach the bone at the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing. And it is necessary that children's cauterizations be subtle according to their measure, and those of great people also great according to theirs; after .iii. days, cure the wound of butter so that the scaling is removed; after that, treat with other ointments until he is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for .xl. days so that the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that his nourishments be reduced long enough so that the boil does not burst when he gets up to go into chambers.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, give him a bed well made, and let it be so for .xl. other days; and have good rest, that he trouble himself little and beware of too great repletion of drinking and eating, and of too loud speaking; and when he does this instruction, then is he healed entirely. And I will say after this in his chapter the cure of cutting. of the pustules of the belly
When pustules come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make one cautery of the same sort according to its quantity, and let the third of fire be burned; after that, cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at the cautery in three angles according to this form:
but sign the first stroke at the beginning of the enche and make one line above the pustule's width and another below, and have your hand in the middle of the entire cautery like a hinge. But the first cauterization is lighter and more gentle.
of ancient pain in any member When pain comes to any member, whether from falling or wounding, and that pain lasts long, and the remedies of medicine are not worth it, then it is necessary for him to be cauterized with the fire called "poins", and the cauteries should be made according to the length of the member, its thinness, feebleness, virtue, and location of twists and pains. If he is healed from the first cautery, that's good; if not, begin another one on top of it, for such a habit is that it must change in the member that is closest, so you should make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
of mending
The ulcers are helped sometimes by fire cautery with great aid, and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it has been treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not worsen or remain, and you doubt whether corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make .v. cauteres on the head: one inside the head nine fingers deep, and another towards the forehead to the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the occipital bone; and leave your hand until the cauteries reach the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of gross humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
And if the mending is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then you should cauterize with those cauteries that we have said on the head, and one on the nape of the neck, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the croup and another below, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the backside, lest you burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I do of cauterizing, the more it brings aid and profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cautery as healthy people do, because the body is already quite corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron. Afterward, cure the place with flour of wheat mixed with honey and other cures until he is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then one makes cauteries on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauteries be a little bit inside the substance of the skin. Then cure with ointments until he is healed. And sometimes make a cautery at the hand, foot, or back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and yet one should not intervene unless one knows the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of ulcers
When the disease called "ulbaras" is entrenched and the art of medicine is not worth anything, then one cauterizes with a cautery a little bit deep, according to the thickness of the skin, until the blanching is removed, and its color is changed; then cure with flour of wheat and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colt and blood of almond, each in equal parts; and mix everything together, and tie it up with a cloth, and apply it to the place until he is healed.
the cure for chancres by cauterization
When chancres come at the beginning and you see them stopping, then one should cauterize around the chancre with a circle-shaped cautery, entirely encircling it. And although wise men say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen once; and a more right thing is that it be cauterized around, with the circle-shaped cautery as we have said in many cauterizations.
of the swelling that cannot subside
When some person has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays in subside or because of the superfluousness that it makes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or because of time; and you see it hastening to subside: then one should cauterize around with many small cauteries in succession; after which leave it thus. For it will hasten to subside.
And if you see it piercing all the way through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery so that the form remains:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the skin, and be such that the patient feels it outside in this manner that the course of the purging is alleviated. After which cure him until he is perfectly healed.
the cure by fire with iron
Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing other than a wasting away of the member, for it wastes away the members just like fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can suffer cauterization with fire, then heat the cauteries very little and great, according to what is necessary at the place or the disease; after which cauterize all around until you have removed all the corruption, so that nothing remains but everything that was corrupted is gone. And then leave it for three days, and put on the burned areas a poultice with oil so that the eschars of fire are removed, and all the corruption is gone. Afterward, cure with ointments engendering flesh. If you see after three days that healthy skin does not appear, it's good; and if not, then begin again the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places. And this wasting away has sometimes been cured by medicine alone in place of fire cauterization; but nonetheless, fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of the medicinal water in the division: take it as you need it.
of stones which come to the feet
Very many times it happens that on the feet due to external causes there comes a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large excrescence that hurts the foot. And the cauterization for this disease is done in two manners. It's to know cauterization by fire, and cauterization by hot water. Cauterization by fire is when you heat one cautery instrument like a comb of vulture's feathers, and it should be made of good iron at the measure that it can pierce through all parts, and that there are subtle margins; after, put it all hot on the excrescence, and turn your hand entirely around the excrescence until it comes to the top of the excrescence; and then leave it thus three days until it begins to decay; then make an ointment of wild savages' berries mixed with oil, and let the ointment be on all the night, and the excrescence will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the foot with oil greasing as much as it is healed.
And if they are converted by external causes in the body, and many times it happens on hands and feet, then it is necessary that you bring hot water cauterization; and it is done in this manner: take a clay or iron rod, or a comb of vulture's feathers, and put it on the excrescence and the edges, that is to say, rough stones; and put the rod on so that it pierces all around, then add a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the excrescence, and can find the hot water's way to the root; and let the patient suffer a little the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself from all its roots. Thus do one after another, until you have reached all those that are in the body, then cure them with ointments that engender flesh.
the cure of trembling
When some people shake from cold or nerves, or quartan fever or other, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one on the hip, and one on the stomach at the olivaire cautery; then the shaker will stop shaking, and the sickness will hasten to health.
the foul pustules
Sometimes they appear on the skin due to internal causes or foul pustules that come from corrupt matter. Then it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, so that the point is seized by fire, or of long aristologe root, or of lenticular cautery. And sometimes when we cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further ahead, but the superfluities from which they come are broken up, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times it happens that great bleeding occurs from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes due to external causes, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous thing to stop.
And yet when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold them very tightly so that the blood is calmed under your fingers, and no more drips out; then take several small and large olive cauterizers until they are all red; then take one, great or small according to the size of the wound and the area in which the artery is severed, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your two fingers, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
And if blood spurts forth when you lift your fingers off the vein, and the cauterizer has gone out, then take hastily one other of the cauterizers that are in the fire.
And do not cease to do this one after another until the bleeding is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, one cannot well stop it again, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a strong bandage with thread, or by medicines applied which have power to stop blood; and let it be bound and strained accordingly.
Whoever brings about the stoppage of blood by binding it tightly with cloth or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, unless there is no benefit at all.
And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a mirror or medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press tightly until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but moisten with cold water often when it is very cold so that the blood congeals and thickens and stops; and make inquiries ahead about what he needs in terms of cauterizers and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the uses, causes, and forms of cauterizations; and I put that chapter from head to foot, and I will continue this chapter by the same way so that what one wants to find may be found more easily.
And therefore as I begin this, dear son, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about cauterizations, and because of this it is necessary to be more careful.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to take foolishness. For many types of people come into cures. Some come with such a bad disease that they will die quickly because of the harsh treatment they find for their illness, and the great wickedness of their malady; and one should have fear of these things. And of these I say that it gives its sense to you, and says: "wait, I am healed"; and the patient is spiteful. It does not become necessary for you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about those things of which you are certain, and about which you can take and hold; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients for the sake of their salvation; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Most dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter to you by chapters, according as it is before the chapter of cauterizations, which I have divided from the head to the feet, so that you may find more readily what you will need.
from the top full of water
Know that this illness often comes to children during childbirth, and when the nurse holds too tightly the child's head; and sometimes it happens without known cause.
And I never saw this illness occur except in children, and all those whom I have seen died quickly; and therefore it seems to me that one should hasten the work in such cures.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could no longer be sustained; and it swelled so much from moisture that it seemed dead, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the suture, between the skull and the bone; and the work is such when the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you cut a gap in the head as wide as two fingers, so long as the moisture runs; and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more swollen and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs you see are the commissures of the head open on each side, and the water jumps forth when you press it with your hand from inside, and this does not seem to be responding: then it is necessary that you cut three cuts in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture outside. Then, close the cuts with cloth and powder, and put wine and oil in them, and leave it like that for five days; then untie, and treat the wound by tenting and anointings, and let the head dry evenly, and only allow the patient to eat dry food without much moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you observe where the abscess opens up, and where the moisture gathers; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then at the spot where the abscess opens up and the moisture gathers, and make the incision according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut into the artery; and if there is bleeding of blood, so that the patient may die from the depletion of blood and evacuation of moisture.
of rheum
When it happens to someone a disease that is called "cater" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is old-fashioned, and the treatment of medicine does not help at all, then the last cure is cauterization with what one will cut off the two arteries.
Then it is necessary, when you see them to be cut, that the patient makes a retrograde motion with his head; after which, rub the place with an asperous cloth until the arteries appear; then extract the patient's neck by means of one cloth; then look where the vein bites, and the two leeches are afterwards behind the ears, and they are not responding; then mark the places with a small notch; then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula to two parts, so that the incision comes down to the bone, and this is done by the width of the head.
And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting in the same way as two must cross over.
And when the vein is cut, blood will spring out continuously outside.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the length of the space between three fingers, then mark with an incision and cut down to the bone; and what needs to be done about the blood is to let it flow outside for 6-7 c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to how much the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point of the suture, cut off any abscess that may come, then drain the wound and bandage it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
of migraine
When ancient migraine comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and an old-fashioned forsenee and similar things, and it is treated by means of medicines and all that does not help him at all, we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes a retrograde motion with his eyebrows, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it beats well and is hardly responded outside except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responded, then extract the patient's neck with certain cloths, then rub the place with an asperous cloth, and apply hot water to raise the skin until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which there is the form:
then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then grasp it at the top with pincers, and detach it well from the tissues that are below each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it to the point of the unicorn, and cut off that part according to the length of two fingers. For if it is not cut off, blood will not flow out completely.
And treat the blood that flows for 6-7 c/, until it is reduced to 3; and if the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a double strand of strong silk thread, so that no bleeding occurs before the wound is closed, and there is a continuous flow of blood; then cut off the excess tissue that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the artery with a surgical cauterizer down to the bone until the incision is made; and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and is of hot complexion.
Because fire cauterization is aid to finish off moisture: for this reason it is of greater aid against moles. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries to fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made tents; and when you untie them, be careful with dry medicines that bring forth flesh, and tents, until they are healed; and if there is no need for the artery so long as you work on it, hasten by cauterization, or apply vitriol to the place and strain it in your hand until the blood is stemmed; and if you do not have what is present, put a cloth on the place so that the blood congeals, and raise the place with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be strained as needed; and what is more beneficial and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein with this cauterizing, cutting off .ij. parts, but the cutting be well-spaced so that it can ward off their heat for a longer time. Because when the instruments are too tight, they hold less heat. And it should have between the two knives one space of good size, and then when you have signed on to open the two places, and burn the hot iron on it so that it comes up to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and be separated between the two joints because it is not united by this cauterization from head to foot; and this is the form of the cauterization.
tears
When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are on top of the forehead of the chief part of the head, and it is not benefiting at all from the medicine being applied, and you see the face of the patient growing pale, and feeling a numbness in the forehead as if it were trembling; and the skin around the eyes are tense and moist so that the hairs of the papier are fallen, and the papier are scorching with the heat of the tears, then there is need for this treatment.
And they used to call the ancient "contused cure", and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease the hairs on his forehead, then make three incisions on his forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions be as two together in the middle of the forehead going down just to the nose, and the other two between the eyebrows above the papier, and take care not to cut into the arteries that are at the edges above the papier; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and each wound be the quantity of three fingers across joints.
from the incision that is above the temple just to the second incision; and scrape out all the matter that is between the two incisions up to the syphilis that is on the bone, then make another application from the middle incision just to the other second one, and then extract this spittle.
and put into the first incision the instrument which is called "cultellare", and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting at all on the other side, and this is the form: And place the blunt edge towards the charred bone and the sharp edge towards the flesh, and put it so that it comes to the middle incision. And cut off all the vessels that are descending from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to what appears from the bone, and then make another application in the middle incision just to the other incision; and then extract the blood equally, and express the place for the blood taken; then put a cloth of old cotton into each incision, and put wet cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and ashes on top, and take care that abscesses do not form; and on the third day untie the bandage, and administer a great quantity of cold water, then apply the ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until he is healed.
of the tears of the eyes
When someone comes with a great and usual catarrh, and you see the eyes tense and small, and weakening the sight, and the papier burned; and the hairs falling off, and on the forehead intense pain, and the patient is suffering; then you know by these accidents that those matters and that catarrh do not come forth except from many veins, and the more beneficial cure that is there, it is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to open his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead and another on either side, one inch apart. And begin from the incision at the left temple to the right temple, and be the incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move towards eating; and when the bone is exposed, so that all the blood flows onto a sponge, and then dry between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton there, and cloths of linen; then bind with wet cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, and take care to prevent hot abscesses from forming; when it is healed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then apply the cure for things that cause flesh to be born.
In the same way: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of camphor, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to bring forth flesh throughout.
of the purging of the ears
All that flows from the ears is one of the three things: or grains, or beasts, or pebbles of mine or similar things like iron; or seeds, such as jesses, beans, peas; or flowing things, such as water and ash and similar things.
When it flows from the ear a pebble or another thing that does not belong to the ear and is not growing in the ear, nor fitting into the ear, then place the ear in the sun. If you see the pebble, distill a small amount of violet oil or sesame oil, then apply extraction; and make it suffer from condensation, and stop up the nostrils when the suffering comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and leave the ear above. Many times it will come forth through this cure; and if it does not come forth, then apply extraction with subtle tweezers, which is the form:
If it jumps out through the tweezers, that's good; if not, then apply extraction with a small, fine pair of forceps; and if it doesn't jump out through that, then make a wire chain and put the end of the chain or pierce the ear strongly, and stop up what is around the chain with soft wax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then treat it carefully, for many times it will come forth as we have said; and if it doesn't come forth in this way, then take a small quantity of glue from which birds take their eggs, and put some instrument at a point to do this, and wrap a little bit of cotton around; then press the glue on top of the pebble or whatever it is, and treat it further. And if it does not jump beyond all these things that we have said, then you should hasten to cut the ear before the abscess comes forth and spasms; and the manner of cutting is such that you first make the patient bleed from the cephalic vein, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat or dependent place; and let the incision be like the moon, as long as you come to the stone, then remove it by your power, and suck it hastenedly into your mouth; and the cure until it is healed. And if it is a swelling that is inside and fills, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer one spoonful of subtle ointment according to this form:
and administer an incision to that swelling. But do not do this when you think the swelling is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
In the water that drips into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use condiments first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let them sit on top of that same ear where the water is. If it jumps further because of this, it's good. If not, then take many pieces according to the length you deem fit, light and thin, and heat one piece in the fire; and have the patient put one or two small pieces of their own ear in, and slide one piece from the other side, and hit another piece on top of the ear that is in the ear; and do not stop making these piecings upon piecings until all the water drips out, and then it jumps all the way out; and if you see, take one reed, and push one end into the ear, and the other end burns with fire until the most of the reed is burned; then repeat on the other side pieces until all the water dries out, as we have said in the stone.
In the removal of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a mouse and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large-bodied and can be felt, then administer an extraction with pincers; and this is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the removal of worms from the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary to look at the ear towards the sun: if any worms appear, then treat them with subtle pincers; and if none appear, then take the cane that has this form:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert the most subtle end into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly all along the cane; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, then stop around the cane with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, according to this form which is as you see:
And let it be of silver or bronze with a narrow opening below and a wide one above for distilling; and to press inside the distillation with a well-made instrument of bronze for this purpose. And if you see, take a scraper and envelop it around the pointed tip in a way that is pleasing to coton; then pour your oil or juice into it, and all that you have of your medicines in the cane, and let the cane be in the ear; then push inside the scraper with all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or comes forth from the ear. And let the patient feel inside, and let the distillation be a little warmed up by fire as you distill it into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the stoppering of ears
No child is born without some perforation in their ears; and the same thing happens to men through stoppering of a wound or a piece of wax born inside the ear, and this stoppering comes sometimes quite far into the ear if one cannot see it; and sometimes there occurs a little bit too much outside the perforation, and one can see it well.
That which comes quite far in and cannot be seen is of severe inflammation in multiple dispositions, and in that one can see, it is necessary to put the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opacity apparent, then work with all this spatula-like instrument according to this form:
And be gentle and careful in front and back of the entire ear, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the opacity is due to wax or flesh of the ear, then take it with subtle pincers and gently scrape it out until all the wax is removed.
And if the opacity is quite far in the ear, then take a subtle and light scraper and heat it slightly over the fire, then put it on the flesh of the ear. If you sense the opacity that the patient senses as greasiness to hear, scrape lightly, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian mummy.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on vitriol broom; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary to remove the tent and put another moistened tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure him until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhaging of blood comes, then plunge a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the bleeding of blood which are described in the treatment of distillations.
of the wax of paper
This wax that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch with tongs and pincers, and scrape out with a spatula-like instrument from its roots; then put on the surface vitriol broom.
And if the wax is removed, then cauterize with a delicate lenticular cautery, and the cauterizing after the incision is worth more; and many times repair them, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burnt and do not come back.
of the hazelnut
Many times things that seem like hazelnuts in their shape and hardness come from the eyes on paper, and because of this, this illness is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the works are such: be careful if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know; then do what's necessary with a wide margin, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with tweezers, and cut. If you can't cut it without piercing the paper slightly, don't hurt the patient; and if the opening is large, assemble a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do nothing at all, for the ointments restore the skin soon and make it healthy again.
And if the grandine is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper over and take hold of the grandine with tweezers, cut and press it on both sides; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, don't hurt anything; and when the grandine is cut, pour in salted water, and cure the area where the skin has been restored until the patient is healed.
of the fat from the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is produced in the tissues of paper above, and this happens more with children than with anyone else, and it causes great trouble to their eyes, and they come to have catharres in the mornings, and are unable to look at the light of the sun because the tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep, and their papers below their eyebrows are moistened by the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the way to perform this operation is that the patient puts their head in your lap; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, then place it on top of them; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle; then make a cut in the medium of moisture at the spatula-like trench cutting a slit of moderate size, not greater than the wound one makes when opening a vein; and make the skin smooth as far as you can get to the exinach; and in multiple dispositions, the exinach comes from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then pull it out as one piece of cloth wrappings between your fingers at the far end, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread; and be careful not to insert into the slit, lest you injure all the spatula-like trench just up to the eye.
And if the exinach does not appear at the beginning of the slit, then open the slit slightly more until it appears; then pull it out as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and place them on the area, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who break and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then cure it until it is healed. And if the abscess comes to a boil, then cure it with poultices soothing until it is healed.
of the hairs of the papers
When hairs grow on paper other than their natural state, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and bring forth manners of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albugine, until it is a cause of destruction to the eyes; and there is a cure according to three ways: or by fire cautery together, or by medicinal water as described in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suture or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper from the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, then insert a needle into every thread above; and be this above the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow on those hairs, and guide one thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs added, all along the spatula-like trench, from the great tear down to the small; then pull out one thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the paper, then sign on the paper a figure like the foliage of myrtle, and though it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see the paper divide itself into all.
And if there is one who needs to cut a large quantity of paper according to what the paper has softened; then make all along the spatula-like trench above the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the great tear down to small; and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two angles of the key, then scrape it off entirely; then assemble the two lips with a seam using an awl for every thread of fine wool, and dry up the blood, and make the excess threads smooth on the two eyebrows above all sticky things, if you see fit to do so; and if not, then don't bother, and leave the seam and threads just for three or four days; then cure the wound without a seam using drying and constraining things, because the paper revives at the moment of the wound's healing and assembly with it, but the seam is corrupting (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear.
and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the foliage of myrtle, as we have counted, with three loose threads according to the shape that is here:
then cut what rises above in small equal forces according to the shape that is here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps, and the things are not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and put it inside the figure; and put another thread near the great tear, and the second thread near the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above where you have signed, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound with a seam, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to the incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar ointments calming.
and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: if this is so, then you should use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of the sinew is thus: and it is that you convert the paper and the thread within according to what I have said, and then make two sinews by art, and two thin strings as long as the paper and wide as the spatula is; and tie the two ends of each part where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of what rises from the paper of oil, and bring the two sinews together from both parts; and let it be thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will mortify and become numb and hard, until it falls away by itself.
If it delays, then make it stronger by coping, and cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prickle with hair; and this is the form of the two sinews that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
The operation is such that you take a subtle needle, and insert one silk thread that is soft and subtle; then assemble the ends and tie one and the other subtly, and make the length of the threads about the length of a palm; then order another thread in the chase, subtlety, and tie the head of the thread; then put the patient's head on your shoulder; and be below the sun so that the operation is disclosed, for this is a subtle and minor operation; then insert the needle throughout the entire chase into the root of the adjacent hair, and make it pierce in the paper hastily as long as you pull it out above the natural hair; then draw out your hand until the hairs grow forth all over the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, you will pull out the chase beneath all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase comes forth from above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it rest for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh swells up; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural eyebrows, and be raised with that one or leave it as you are, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
of the pouring of the oil
When this disease called "aleacrati" or the pouring comes into the oil, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly through wound, cutting, or burning, and through similar things.
And the manner of the operation is that you break open that seam, and pry open the lips of it, and put in linen cloths, and bind it until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use in its treatment things that dry and tighten. For if you do so, the disease will come back worse than the first one; but it works with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rose water or althea and flaxseed cooked, and oil of lily flower melted into any of the oils, and wrap it in a cloth, and treat it thus.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care to ensure it does not heal in the same form as it was before; and this operation that we have said is nothing but a remedy for this disease, so that it does not return in the same form as it was before.
of the flesh that comes into the oil
This disease that is below and truly is called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound, cutting, or burning, and similar things; and the way of the operation in it is that you take a needle with two threads, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce all the way to the right arm, so that the thread comes out on both sides of the flesh; then set the flesh above all the needle, and cut at one spatula wide.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is necessary, that's good; if not, then take a scraper and put it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or cut along one side inside the paper; and let the edges of the two incisions be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, so that when they are assembled, the figure will be like the figure of a letter which has no name "one Greek"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity of its sides is worn away below, from what is left on the paper; then join the two separated parts and sew with a thread of linen; then perform the treatment as we have said, using softening medicines and cloths, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from cutting or sewing or burning, then it is necessary to cut a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what was said before; then separate between the two lips of a cloth, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an engine of all their power in order to make the figure return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and various instruments and dispositions.
of the suddenness of the paper
When this swelling occurs in the same way as the paper above is swelled with oil, and cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you insert the point of a scraper beneath the paper, and lift it up; and hold it with pincers, until you cut what is there at the subtle spatula, which is not too worn away nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot bear having the spatula too worn away or bleed into the oil; and make your incision, from which you scrape off that assembled piece, slightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and have that assembly entirely healed, and sometimes in the oil water salted, and lift out sweet water and vinegar; then put between the paper and oil a cloth of linen, and place above the oil moist wool abundant with egg white; and after three days use the vinegar and similar things until it is healed.
of the grime of the oil
The ungle is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard, dry scab, and another that is not nervous but resembles white moisture congealed. And one begins to form towards the great eye, and grows little by little until it covers all the view and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient places their head in thy hand, then opens the eyes; and raises the paper with thy other hand, then coils the ungle into pinceures of small doubleure, and stretches it above. Then take a needle, and insert one hair from a horse, ox, or cow, and a strong thread; and bend the point of the needle slightly and thrust it into the ungle, and pierce all the way to the needle, and tie the ungle with one thread and stretch it above, and skin off all the hair along the side of the ungle that leads to the pruneal membrane and the silk to the hair just up to the head. Then cut the remaining part at the root of the eye in all the subtle spatula-like tissues and small forces, and leave the natural flesh or the eye as it is, so that by incision the body does not normally produce tears; and sometimes the ungle remains only on the ringlet, and on the thread, as we have said.
And take care that the spatula-like tissue does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the pruneal membrane is not pierced. And after the incision, pour a little bit of boiled silk into the eye, and a powder made from litargyrite, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be done so that the patient becomes healthy.
And if the ungle is not nervous and you cannot push the needle in, and the ringlet cannot enter, often this resemblance of ungle is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have told in the division, and if you see it growing, then treat the patient's eye, and take the spatula-like tissue gently but firmly according to this form.
And remove the ungle above gently, and if you see that it does not decrease and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a powder made of litargyrite, red powder, and boiled silk, and stop the eye until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
If nothing is contrary in the eye, as a boil appears, then bathe it, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healthy, then continue the work as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eye socket harms the eye by great harm, then suspend it from the ringlet, and cut off a part but not all, so that tears do not come; then distill into the eye a red powder made of litargyrite.
of the flesh which grows on the pruneal membrane
And some men's eyes grow a red flesh, and it covers the pruneal membrane and restrains itself above the papery layers and turns backwards, and seems like a baluster rose; and the work is that the patient places their head in thy hand, then opens the eyes, and coils all that flesh into suitable ringlets, and sustains it with force; then cut off the first layer, and go cutting to the scraper just to the end, and take care not to bruise the eye in the operation; and let the incision of the spatula-like tissue be as we have said in the incision of the ungle and the small forces by which one removes the scab, as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then fill the eye with boiled silk or distill a red powder and similar corrosive medicines into it, and place a cotton cloth with egg white on top of the eye so that it is secure from hot aposteme; and if there remains nothing, and the wound begins to swell, and you suspect hot aposteme, then leave the eye alone and cure the aposteme with soothing things for hot aposteme; then return to your work until it is healthy, and thus make all the flesh that has been removed from the eye by this resemblance.
But it is necessary that you accelerate the cure of each weak eye by natural means; and by accidental means, in iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from this operation.
of the veins of the eyes
Scabs are red veins that are covered on the eye, and tolerate its work and weaken the eye forever. It is necessary then to first examine whether the eye has a scab, if it is bad and there is no other disease except for the scab; at which point coil them in this manner: instruct the patient to place their head in thy hand, then suspend those veins on all the ringlets according to thy wisdom, and be the ringlets subtle threads double as per this form.
And let there be two ringlets by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then coil those veins gently with the forces, and squeeze out the blood hour after hour until you see the veins removed from the eye; and take care not to bruise the eye at all points of the spatula-like tissue, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut off more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red powder to corrupt what remains of the scab.
And if you are unable to coil all of it in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and are secure from hot aposteme, then continue according to this manner which is before, until it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The physician is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cauterization and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a reason in it that you cut into the aposteme, where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then scrape it with all the instruments according to this form; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron until one end, and be pointed like a file as in the present form.
And place it on top of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that corruption is gone; and do this some time, then restore the bone with medicinal remedies.
If the bone is united, and flesh grows, and the body of the bowels is united, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew itself and is not apostemated, and bad occurrences do not come to pass, know that he is healed; if this is not so, then there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula to its original place in the navel according to this form: and that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicinal remedies, and when it is uncovered take one stick according to this form, and let the point of the iron be at three angles, and let the stick be thinned out just as far as you see here.
Then place it on top of the bone next to the flesh, and remove your hand from the oil a little, then turn the stick all around until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the blood vessels if they keep their hand on their navel; and then restore the bone with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the bones, the matter goes to the navel; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
From the issue of oil.
When the eyes are fully open and there is no obstruction to the navel or diminishment, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal them, then apply poultices or hot compresses with a piece of iron to suck out, then place on top of the oil one made from aloe, encens, and sarcocolla, and then restrain the oil, and emplace it on with bandages and drapes; and the manner of the drapes is that you take soft drapes, double each one four times, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes need; then bind it tightly above with a strong bandage, and resume the poultices to suck without causing harm; then remove the poultices and leave the oil restrained day and night, and if the lien softens, it is necessary that you restrain it much; then remove the lien after a day and night, and if you see the oil repairing itself, that is good; if not, then resume the emplacement and drapes and lien and poultices until they are healed.
From the bursting forth of a uveous fabric.
When a rupture comes in the uveous fabric, then opens up, and comes forth like a resin grain, and it is astonishing to see; at that point, if you see it open, the work is such that you put an awl into the root of the part below just as far as the top, then put another awl where there is a double thread from the navel; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to the disposition; then cut the double thread and tie a part of the uve around, and restrain it well, then extract the awl and place on top of the oil a moistened linen cloth soaked in egg white; and let it be until the thread chooses with the uve, then treat the oil with soothing things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the uve each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce them with a subtle spatula that comes from within the oil, and drain the moist albigenous substance and lower the eyes, and enter into it soon enough; then extract it until it is healed.
from the bottom of the oil.
This disease called "alcunnati" is not other than the bowel that is assembled in the oil, appearing like water descending, and it's not actually water; and the manner of its appearance is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your hands from two parts, and make them move until you see the bowel come up to your eyes; then insert it, and do not let it descend and be disordered with light, and see the patient's things as they used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bowel is not prepared as we have said. Then make the patient sit in your hands, then take a subtle spatula and insert it into the corneous tissue a little bit along the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneous tissue and the crown, until the bowel issues; and when it has issued, then distill hot water mixed with honey or water or fenugreek boiled in honey, and be cured by another cure until it is healed.
from the waters of the oil.
We have the appearances of waters in division, and what is necessary to pierce; then work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, far from the light for the sun, and tie the healthy oil very tightly; then place the paper with the oil on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a finger in that corner of the oil near the lesser navel, and then thrust the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and turn your hand until it pierces into the corner of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the espace which is from the prune to the end of the nourishment; and that is the crown of the oil. Then you will see the bone in that paper by the brightness of the corneous tissue, and then place the instrument just below where the water is, or express it under one path after another. If the water descends now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his oil.
After a little rest, and if the water rises again in the second path, place the force with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise further, gently extract almagda by rotating your hand slightly; then put back into the water a little bit of gemstone oil, and leave what's inside the oil. Then place a cloth or linen cloth soaked in rose oil and egg white on top of the oil, and tie with healthy oil. We, and those who are of our time, spread this as we have learned from our teacher.
And if the almond cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men whose eyes are too hard, so you must take the instrument called "alberit" by which this form is.
And then pierce only the conjunctive, and not go too far inwards, but make one subtle move, then put in the almond, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a bed rest that is fitting, where he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be careful of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move your head to the right or left, and follow their disposition until the third day; then loosen it in the same dark room, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the treatment or after the incision now, but rather let it heal quickly, because the water rises quickly.
If an abscess comes forth, then loosen the eye before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then loosen the sight and put on a bandage over it for some time, and be in that dark house. And then go out of the house step by step, and turn back to his condition; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us from the land of Yrach who told us that in his country people made a habit of piercing the almond, by which they succeed in drawing out the water, but I never saw anyone do it in our land nor did I read about it in the books of the ancients; and by chance it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almond, because he who does not know them sees them; and they are of pure earth.
And the heads of these are of this same subtlety, and the ends in three angled points.
of the flesh on the navel
Sometimes births or navel flesh are irregularly shaped, of which some appear like scorpions in many pieces; and if there are such ones where the flesh is enchanted with a flux of color, and if there is flesh that is smooth of bone color. In that then of these flesh pieces that is smooth, and not enchanted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour the poultice onto those flesh pieces, and treat them warmly; then remove what you can sustain with the subtle needle from one side, as long as you know that all the flesh is completely loosened.
And if there remains any part that cannot be removed, then open it all with one of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without pain, or abscess comes forth, then cauterize as is necessary; and if these are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize until the blood is stopped and all the flesh pieces are removed, then pour oil, water, or wine onto the navel.
If the navel opens and moisture comes to the palace, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not flow as it should, know that there is flesh born in the bone above, so that the instruments do not come to cut: then it is necessary that you put a linen thread about an inch thick into one's hands, well oiled and with a span of less than a hand's width between each knot; and place the patient's head at the end of the thread in his navel at his own power, and guide it so that it comes out through the navel into the mouth; and many times children do this at school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the chief that comes from the navel with one hand, and the other chief that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other as they are coming out through the thread. Do this until you know that the night has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back into the navel just like before; do this three days or more, until the ointments corrode all the remaining flesh; and then place a linen cord around the navel some days until it is healed, and if one needs medicines such as these, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the chief, by which they distill oils and medicines from the navel.
And it should be of silver or of earth, resembling an open lamp, like a cord, and lead it thus; and if you see fit, make a closed cord, and the instruments should be full to purge the chief; and have one handle at the chief to hold it when heating the oil or some liquid.
of the flesh on the navel
Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the chief of the navel and grows and becomes large over time, until it is visible to behold; and therefore it is necessary that you remove it at the beginning, and take away all the fat, then put on the cauter or burning medicine; and if one delays in removing it until it is large, then beware if it is hard, of a flux of color, or poor sensation: do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, for when you remove it some times, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touchment, not of flux of color, and you see that one can remove it entirely, then empty the patient's head of fear, and cure the navel with things restraining.
when the navel is cut and cauterized
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these worked cartilages, it profits little, worse than for some men. It is necessary then to do as follows for anyone who has this condition, if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring together the two lips at a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated from each other on one side or the other, it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their fur as they heal, then bring together the two lips at a seam, and bind them, and powder with blood of dragon, and incense burn; and put on the powders a piece of plaister of good or another plaister binding, and leave it until it falls apart by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the seam is that you bring together the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the wound of the belly; or by thread, as I have made known.
Abscesses of the lips
Within the lips, there is an abscess hard and resembling grains of millet, both small and large; then you must turn the lips, and incise each one, and take out the pus and cut into each part; then pour wine over the wound after the vitriol has been applied, until the blood is stopped; and then leave it be, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healed.
of the flesh of the gums
Often there is a hard-grown flesh on the gums which they call "albulus"; then you must hold it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let blood or pus flow; then put vitriol or other drying and restraining powders on the wound; and if that flesh comes back after incision, and often happens, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not come back after cauterization; and these are the forms of treatment for cutting.
of the tonsils
Sometimes they are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and unpleasant skin; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; then it is necessary that you have the patient sit in your hands, and his jaws be set in a holy way, and remove the teeth or the rough skin as much as there is nothing left; and thus do with the blackness, yellowness, and greenness, and other stains, until they are cleaned; and if one removes what is at the first reason, that is good; but if not, then one begins again on the second day and the third, until you have removed all; and know that teeth have need of various forms of treatment to be cleaned, according to what the work shows, because those who remove teeth from between the gums have other forms than those who remove from between the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you wait as long as you can to draw it out, for this should not be done at all; for it is a very high substance, so one has no excuse for pulling. Then when the patient is constrained to pull, you must be certain of the tooth's condition. Many times the pain deceived the patient, and they thought it was a good tooth, and caused a healthy tooth to be pulled; and yet the pain did not depart because of this, until the bad tooth was extracted, for we have already learned to do this with these sages; and when you are well certain of the tooth's condition, you must scrape all around the tooth in every direction, making it very strong to protect the gum from all sides; then move it to your thumbs or subtle forceps at the first notch, until it is well extracted, then firmly secure the forceps; and have the patient's jaws in a holy way between your knees, and hold it thus so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side lightly, and then move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, it is necessary that you fill it with cloth or gauze, where the holes are; and then extract it subtly with forceps, so that it does not break while being extracted; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take good care that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and the patient will suffer greater pains from the root than the first one. And be careful that you do not act like the ignorant sages who, in their haste and boldness, sometimes break the cartilage and do not bring what we have described; but they often bring great diseases through the roots that remain or because of the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the wound with wine or with water and vinegar; and if blood comes out, which often happens, pour vitriol powder on the wound; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
The forms of instruments with which one should extract teeth first are those with long points and thick handles, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And should be of thick handles so that they do not bend when pulling, and should be made of well-forged iron, and should have teeth to hold firmly.
of the roots of the teeth When the root remains at the pulling, it is necessary that you put a moist cotton ball on the wound .i. day or two, until the wound is softened, then put in forceps called "algefri", by which the jaw seems to be a fine file; and they are made inside as a reamer, and this is the form:
And if the roots do not come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a rasp, by which it is the form:
And should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out by this, that is good; but if not, then use all the instruments, by which the forms come as follows:
And if one uses this instrument with two handles, it is the form:
and other fasteners that are before in the ratio of teeth, and this instrument which seems like large forceps, and this is the form:
And this instrument is good because it cannot break; and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise master subtle finds by himself his own instrument, according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are such diseases where the ancient did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of cases, or if one breaks the cartilage or another bone, or it can be done, then he searches for instruments that are needed, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, this is the form: And should be strong and well-made to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove; and then restore the wound with medicines suitable for this case, and if there is a putrefaction in the bone and it is small, then extract it with all these instruments:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural place in the body, and the form is ugly, and especially in young women, it is necessary that you know whether the tooth is new after the jawbone or is not in the right place, and cannot be cleaned or filed: then scrape it; and if it is rough with the tooth, take this instrument which has this form, and is like a small beak, and should be made of sharp iron in the tip:
And the gum grows and grows a little each day due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you don't move the others, and if it is apparent that we can file it, then one should file with a small file as there is its shape:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and as one files the tooth a little each day slightly, so that it does not move until it is fixed; then the plane in the end has become entirely smooth, and if the teeth are too sharp and wound the tongue, then it is necessary to file away the roughness until it is even, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt speech.
when the teeth decay
When the front teeth decay, either by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press down on what he eats without spitting it out, and you have cured them with restricting medicines, but they do not help; then one must restrain them with a gold thread, because silver threads become green and rot, but gold does not change; and be the middle thread neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see directing the teeth, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then put the hooks between the false teeth, if there is one or more, so that they come out just to the healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover the covering up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and gradually until it does not move; and be your finger at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then file the hooks with a pair of pincers, and assemble them, and re-point them between the healthy tooth, and put them in such a way that they do not wound the tongue; and then leave it in this state as long as it can remain, and if it becomes loose or the thread breaks, one should restrain it with another thread; if it stays and serves thus for all time, and that is the form of the teeth and the figure of directing the two healthy teeth, and the two false ones, just as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if one sets it back in its place, gradually, as we have said; and does not intervene except by someone who is wise and patient, and sometimes one makes the shape of a whalebone tooth, and sets it in the place where there is a defect, and one strains it as we have said, and remains and serves thus for a long time.
to remove the ligament from the tongue
At times this ligament comes from under the tongue by nature, as one is born with it; or by accident of a healed wound; and the work is such that you will treat the patient's mouth, and have their head in your own hand, and lift up the tongue; then remove the nervous ligament from the wide one, so that the tongue is dislodged from its dwelling, and if there is stiffness or swelling, and it is due to a sudden wound, then apply an unguent and file the ligament on the wide one; and take care that the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is underneath; and when you have finished, lift up the tongue with rosewater and ease, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen tent; and each night, wash the patient's mouth so that the tongue cannot stick together. And if blood comes out, put vitriol powder on top of it; and if the blood flows, cauterize it with a slow fire cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
And if you see it as being fusible, either colored or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards blenchor, and there is moisture, then apply an unguent and file with a subtle spatula, and deliver from one side to the other; and if the blood flows at your work, put vitriol powder on top until it subsides, then return to your work as long as you are treating everything thoroughly; then lift up the tongue with ease and silk, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of abscesses in the throat
At times, boils called "godath" come inside the throat, and one properly calls them two almonds; and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is a hard abscess of little sense and fusible color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also because of the bleeding; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will cut it open, or it would burst on its own; and if it is white and rough, and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to file, but look first if the abscess has calmed down and is appeased. Then sit the patient in front of the sun, with their hands in your hand, and work the mouth and take hold of the serjeant between the lips, and press the tongue underneath all the instrument, this being the form; and it should be of silver or subtle iron, just like knives:
Can you press the tongue onto all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take an unguent and insert it into the almond, and draw it out above as much as you can; and do not mix anything with it, then file at the instrument, this being the form, which seems like a force; and although the head is curved, and one side to the other, and are very acute, and are made of iron or lead:
And if you do not have this instrument available, then file with pincers, this being the form:
And it should be sharp on one side and smooth on the other; and when you have filed one of the almonds, then file the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and with warm and easy water, and if bleeding comes out, gargle the patient with cold water, or cooked apple scraps, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is subsided; then cure it until it is healed; and at times, other abscesses are born in the throat than the two almonds, so file them then as the two almonds are similarly filed.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born inside her throat, namely one abscess of little sense; and I had already carefully closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the obstructed airway, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she had remained like this for just one day or two. The abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two fingers through the two openings of the navel. I hastened then, and inserted an unguent into one of them, then drew it out above, and drew a large amount of pus; then refilled the other opening with an unguent, and worked on the mouth and pressed the tongue; afterwards, I inserted the unguent into this abscess, and filed part of it, and only a little blood flowed out; and thus the airway in the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess kept growing back, filling up the space I had emptied, until it became very large. Then I opened it again and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left those parts, and knew only what God did with them after me.
of the eye
When swelling appears in the eye and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and if it is below a lump and rounded, it is called "uve". When it is cured as we said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the apostemes are appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to scrape it; and that which is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of flesh color or black, then it is necessary to avoid cutting into it. Because there is great danger on the patient. It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, to make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue onto the instrument we have made a note of before; then insert the needle into the eye, and treat it below, and scrape away at .i. or .ii. instruments that I said in the incision of two almonds. And it is necessary not to scrape more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you scrape more, you will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of two almonds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear of scraping, then it is necessary to use cunning at the cauterization without fear. And the manner of cautery is sharp as water. And that is when the patient puts his head on your shoulder, and then presses his tongue onto the instrument we said in the chapter of cautery, and confesses with living water, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and in using the handle of this instrument, by which is the form:
And the patient has a beard or hair on his head that is placed with medicine, just as the hairs of a comb are, and places the instrument all over the medicine on the eye; and the patient lies on their side on their couch, so that the saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat or the wound. Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it congealed and the medicinal lesions are appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument into all the cotton in the cane above, until the cotton reaches the eye; and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to restart the medicinal cauterization, start again, and after the cauterization wash around the eye with cold water, and be cured of gargles until they are healed.
This cure is safer than incision, or cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and add a little water, and make it boil; and the pots should be well glazed with firm earth, and within the pot have one instrument carved according to this manner: And it should be of silver or tin, and one of the keys should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is mortified; after that, repeat often, until the eye dries, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the development of the aposteme heat, for many things happen then; and do not make it more than at the declination of aposteme heat. And if this instrument is not present, then take a tube and put an eggshell into the head, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to weigh on the mouth, and it is good care together with salvation.
Many times it appears at the throat as bone or fish spine, or nothing; therefore, it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue onto the sun for all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move; and what does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if something appears through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or .i. piece of dry bread; and tie one end of the sponge to a thread, then swallow it; and when it comes out, it will stick, then you will pull on it; and if it does not come out as we have said, then take an instrument made of lead according to this form:
And the instrument should be curved at the top so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all life come to an end, nor push the bone inside; and note well that the patient puts the instrument in, because it is necessary or something is forced out; then they put it down, or pull it back up evenly with all the instrument, until it is pulled out.
of the mucus of the throat
No medicine is effective against the mucus, as I said in the division, by medical cure; and when that does not benefit, then look into the throat of the patient at the sun, then press their tongue onto the instrument that I told you. And if you see the mucus, scrape it off with a small needle or fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose. And if that doesn't work, take a carved tube and insert it into the throat of the patient, then put the handle of the tube into a hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient holds water all day, then take a full vial of cold water, open their mouth, pour it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the mucus feels the water, it will fall.
And if it doesn't fall as we said, then suffumigate the patient with asefetide at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without resistance. And the manner of the fumigation is as follows: take a pot or one that has burning coals, and have the lid covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that hole be the keys of the instrument; then pour your fumigation into it, and the patient puts the end of the tube in their mouth and closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but reaches just to the mucus; and now the mucus will fall, and if it doesn't, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer from thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and not drink water; and then it will be necessary for it to come out through this governance.
And the shape of the instrument with which one removes sweat is this: when it can be seen, it resembles curved scissors for entering the throat; and has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and has a sharpness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and behold its shape.
The chapters on abscesses
Many likenesses of abscesses are, according to the remembrance that comes after this in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and there are two manners by which one is similar to itself, and because it holds moisture. And the second manner is for those who are at the body's core. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the soft part are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if one does not need to pierce the abscess until it is mature according to its completion; and if there are such that one must pierce when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, as those abscesses which are near joints. For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves them so long that they putrefy around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, thereby causing contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is on the principal member, and you delay perforation until it is matured, it will harm the principal member; or if it is on the foundation, one must pierce it immediately when it is dead; and it is not necessary to pierce a hard abscess without digestion being completed, except for that which is on the foundation, lest it become perforated and be elongated within, and thus a fistula forms; and it cannot heal in a long term.
And it is necessary that you know the manner of perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is assuaged, and the departures of fever, and the diminution of pain and heat, and of swelling and inflammation of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation at the place where it opens up; and be the perforation as long as the body's length; and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pain.
In those that ache with pain, according to that member. And when abscesses are in the soft part, it is worth noting that you should leave the perforation until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before that, the body's flesh will be stretched out by the pus, and it will be full of much ordure; and by chance harden the lips and bottom parts of it. And for some abscesses that are pierced according to the length of the body, according to what the members need. And it is necessary that you make small perforations for small abscesses, small cuts; and for large abscesses, large cuts, and many slits according to the similarity of the grandeur of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where one must cut the key, and cover; when it has become as dry as a rag, and is exhausted, then you should do as one does with babies: and if there are those that are split into three angles, and if there are those where one cuts as the myrtle's leaf, like abscesses of the kidneys; and if there are those where one makes a circular cut, and other cuts and similar covering.
Those who have no head, such as a soft and superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it thoroughly; and when the abscess is large and has collected great pus, and you pierce it, do not pull out all the pus at once, but pull out part of it; then stop the abscess just until the next day, then pull out nothing more above; do this several times as needed, until the pus is completely gone; similarly if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the hopes may sometimes be shaken by the issue of the pus, which by chance might kill the patient, and you would not be prepared. Therefore, proceed with this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, dress the wound, and see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cutting, make tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many cuts, it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that they come together; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have removed it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or flax rags without moisture, and tie it just until the third day; then remove it, and care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if there is bleeding from the abscess at your work, make cold compresses of linen or cloth soaked in water, and apply them to the bleeding area several times. And if the bleeding persists, apply governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is during winter, and the flesh or abscess is very nervous, it is necessary that you put on wet compresses and cloths soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it is during summer, and the flesh is soft, it is necessary that you use wet compresses and cloths soaked in water and oil, or cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; then remove the abscess and clean and care for it as needed, until it is healed.
And this is how one should know universally in the treatment of abscesses: and I have told you how to proceed with the treatments of abscesses, and behold this chapter.
of swarings
Or the swarings that come from the head, they are small abscesses, and they are like webs, as if a spider had woven them; there are many similar ones. Some of these are fat and moist, like pustules; and some are hard and stony, like to be cut open, and there is no doubt that the artery will not agree with it. The operation of cutting is this: you must try all sorts of instruments called "entromissoires", from which the shape comes as follows, whatever they contain.
Et the boil on the apostema pearly and moist, is lighter, for it contains little blood. And if some of these boils or chief do not have moisture, and there was one apostema that I copied from a old woman's head; and I found the apostema just like a stone rough, harsh and white, and could not break it; and if someone had worked on it, they would have made a wound as with a stone. In other boils coming to the chief, more than those coming to children's heads and ear roots, the opening should always be at most dependent on the place where the bowel will come out; and the cure should be done accordingly.
The next sentence to translate:
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, and desoz les asseles, and ens angres, and aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, and sont mout, and sont enjanrees l'une avec l'autre.
Et si tu copes la voinne ou l'artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l'acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s'il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s'il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d'un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.
And if you cut out the entire scrophule, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any superfluity due to the size of the scrophule. It is necessary that you understand how to cut out the root of it and draw forth the pus, and then sew it as we have said. Those scrophules that retain superfluity, pierce through where it appears to be more; and pierce it thus, as was previously mentioned, in a dependent manner, then apply poultices with ointment and similar things, so that what remains of the corruption corrupts; and when the wound is well cleansed, apply ointment to promote flesh growth, until it is healed.
de squance
The ancient ones spoke and talked about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their speech.
To those who have squance, it is necessary that the opening of the throat called "epiglote" be avoided; and one does not help them by doing so, because all the veins and the pommel of the patient are warm in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both shoulders. When the sickness is in the channel of the pommel, it is necessary to cut open the epiglote to flee from the perdition that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary, when we want to cut open the epiglote, that we cut it under three circles or four, a small opening from across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the syphac's cut, not in the cartilage;
and those things are suitable for the cutting of the epiglote so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all its length, then cuts it as far as the canal; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the syphac, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the phlegm in the canal which bursts forth through the broken part and by the failure of the voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed by which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the cut, and sew it all around without cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until he is healed.
Albucasis says that one should not do this just yet until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dying, and death is approaching. Then cut open the epiglote because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
and for this reason the ancient ones command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took one dagger and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels of the pommel;
and I was called to heal him, and I found him just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and I knew that it had not been cut open or drained except for the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was clean.
and nothing happened to the maiden except that she regained her voice, and returned after to her normal state.
therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglote there should be no fear.
of the thick throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the greenish color of jasper, and it is very common in women;
and it occurs according to two ways: natural and accidental; or the natural one has no cause.
And the accidental one occurs according to two ways, where one is similar to a boil in us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery; and there is fear, and it is not necessary to work with force except in that which is small, and test and search through all the surrounding parts: if you find it just like a small boil, and cannot be cut by any vein, then cut it, as one cuts the nose, and treat it all over, if there is no part. and search well throughout, and heal it as it needs to be healed, until it is perfectly well.
of the nose
Many kinds of noses are, which I will tell all their likenesses;
and now it is necessary that I say the entire difference that is between nose and exit.
I say that exit is hot and feverish holding on, until the ebullition has passed, and the purging is completed; then the fever and heat cease.
With the nose there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains one pus, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins like a greenish hue, and becomes large;
and they are according to two likenesses, or fat or moist, and very much in color as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the nose, that you first inspect and examine it thoroughly with all the instruments that are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will reveal or hide which is afterwards.
Et the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you take or find the most moist place within the abscess, and turn your two fingers in and out, as much as you know the instruments have pierced the core, then it should be according to the greatness of the abscess.
Then extract the instrument, and take care that it does not jump forward.
If the moist part is cut short, regardless of what its color may be, then cut it as I have said about other abscesses.
and if after the instrument no more moist comes forth, know that it is fat, then cut it in a cross shape, and take hold of it with pincers, and scrape it lightly on each side and watch the part where it lies so that you may bring it out safely with the needle.
and if you cannot bring it out safe, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
For if there is anything left, then the abscess will return many times.
and if there remains just a little bit and the blood grieves you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and hold it tight, and put on soothing things to hot abscesses, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
and if the abscess is great, then cut off the two edges of the wound, and treat it with those things that are contrary to flesh.
and if the vein is contraindicated or another such thing is against you and you hasten and apply the place with vitriol powder, and leave it for two or three days until the wound purrs, and let the ebullition of blood subside; then return to what remains from the needle.
Behold the forms of the instruments used for opening abscesses, and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are also three kinds: great, medium, and small, in order to surround fistulae.
and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorcerers, and they are of citrine stone, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most valuable, and are more tried by black lead to surround the clogs of fistulae.
and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
The forms of the needles are of many similarities, such as you see here: great, medium, and small; and there are also needles that have two clogs of three kinds similarly.
and there are needles that have three clogs, and they are also of three kinds; and there are needles that have two clogs, and single-needle clogs, and they are all of three kinds; and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these instruments are cutting, and there are some that do not cut much more than one side, with which we scrape abscesses, so that one does not cut the vein or the nerve.
and these instruments have handles wrapped in cloth, so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see.
and one does not use them more than in a place that is hard to reach, such as joints, and arms, and shoulders, and at angles, and in similar places.
and sometimes one makes a small instrument that looks like a scrapper of fistulas, according to this form, by which blood is staunched.
and one puts it sometimes in the place that stops bleeding of veins and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form.
Sometimes the breasts of some men begin to swell when they start to be corrupted, so much that they seem like woman's breasts.
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should follow this form of this line from b to .g. then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine that is contrary to flesh, then bring together the two edges of the wound at a seam, and treat it until it is healed.
and if the breast sags down and is moistened because of its size just like it happens in women, then cut it into two seams above, by two similar cuts. so that one is joined to the other at the end of both, so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form from this line .b. to the line .g.. then scrape off the skin that is between the two edges, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about seams and powders, and everything that is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed or the incision is not entirely finished because the patient does not wish to rest or because of the discharge of blood, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive oil. and leave it so that the remaining and fat dissolve, then treat it until it is healed.
Note: This appears to be the title of the next section in the text, which has not been translated yet.
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofulas or those with edges, and some contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture then need to be cut according to this form from line b to line g:. And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with oil suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then cut it as we have said in scrofula cuts, and if the wound discharges pus, then apply cautery as we have said before.
Note: This appears to be the title of the next section in the text, which has not been translated yet.
When the artery is torn and the skin that is above is bound, then abscesses come forth many times, and it also happens to the vein when it becomes swollen and an abscess forms.
and if one knows how to recognize this when it is due to the artery, then the abscess is long and deep. and when you feel it in your hands, you feel a strangeness; and when it is due to the vein, then it appears as if it were going outward.
and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and even more so when it is under the armpits and among the shoulders and at the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is necessary therefore to seek the treatment of fire, and he who is at the head should also seek it, and in that one who is swollen from an artery flowing above the long skin.
It is necessary therefore to seek the treatment of fire, and he who is at the head should also seek it, and in that one who is swollen from an artery flowing above the long skin. then work on the size of the once, and depart beautifully the artery from the skins, so that it is uncovered.
then put a needle below the one and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
then prick the place that is between the two ties of an introducer until the blood comes out which is there, and let the abscess be released.
then administer the treatment as before, until the ligature falls off. then treat those with ointment suitable for this, until they are healed.
and if the abscess is for the sake of the vein, then it is necessary that you make yourself ready with your hand to cover what you can of the abscess to all the skin. then put the needle below the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have one double thread, so that you draw it from the other side. then bind the abscess, just as I told you, or tie one of the two parts to the two keys of the thread.
and if you doubt that the threads are not strong enough, then rebite another needle at every one of the threads below all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
then cover the abscess until the superfluities flow out, then cover the superfluity of the skin and leave what is bound.
then put on one damp cloth moistened with wine and oil, then administer treatments of tents and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses in the nerves
Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come on the nerves when they are fatigued, or by too great a labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the joints and tendons and in all places where there are articulations, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of flesh, and it occurs in many dispositions without pain.
and when one is strained strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depths of the body, but below the skin.
and it can be felt from all sides, and does not move forward or backward, nor below or above, and he who is in the joints should not be covered with fire: perhaps there would be contraction.
and he who is on the head or on the forehead, makes the skin at the splenium. If the abscess is small, then hold it with tweezers and cover its root.
and if it is large, then suspend it with an awl, and scrape it, then cut it out and assemble the wound to the seam, and care for it until it is healed.
of great hanging boils Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere than the vulva, and it is a disease which is called "fung" by the resemblance of oes, and it has subtle roots and big seeds; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were already split open, and were corroding away with moisture.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6, and the work in the incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the articular tissue is white and moist and with a subtle root.
so cut at the splenium, and be present with the cautery by fire. For when cutting comes, it often brings forth too great a flow of blood, and if the patient faints, then hasten with the cauterizer.
and if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the incision with iron, then take one well-made thread of linen, and bind the articular tissue as we have said, and leave it for two days.
and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the linen thread until it cuts through the articular tissue, and choose by it with great care; and if the roots are large, then beware of cutting even more for the belly, but you can well cut off half.
then cauterize it so that it does not revive; then care for the wound, and beware that you do not cut through the articular tissue which is of a foul color and poor sense and of little regard.
For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancres hereafter.
when the bowel is full
If the appearance of the bowel comes from cautery of wound or fissure of syphilis, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other wounds, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from windiness;
and if it is due to the wound of syphilis and by the issue of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and appears with diverse issues. And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers it springs back, and then returns, and by chance it may be swollen, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and from great exertion.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and appears well when you press it with your hand, not constraining at all; and if it is due to blood, then it appears by these signs: the abscess is big and hard, and is fixed according to a certain quantity.
and if it is due to windiness, then it is sensitive to being touched, and the works are such that you look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery, or vein, or windiness. So it is necessary that you leave the treatment alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, due to the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his breath, and be stretched straight, then sign above all around the belly; then command him to sit comfortably between your hands, then go around the place you signed on all four sides, then stretch the half of the abscess above to the great incision;
then work on the half of the abscess stretched above the binding, and put your thumb index, and seek out the intestine; if you find it caught on the binding, then untie it, and push the intestine outward from the belly;
and if you find the bowel, then take hold of it at the incision, and remove the superfluity;
and if the artery gives you trouble or the vein, then go around gently, then come back to your work and take two needles, and put two forked threads on them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross that you made perforate;
then strain the abscess in three places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the place be until it purrs, and cut off the dead flesh by itself; or you cut it when it is subtle and purrs, then cure it as needed, and close the abscess just as we have said;
or you cut it when it is subtle and purrs, then cure it as needed, and close the abscess just as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as needed, and bind the place.
of the chancre
We have said in the division the likenesses of chancre, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure by fire; and we say that chancre begins in the knees, and great caution is needed in the cure, and the ancients said that when chancres are on a limb or on a place where it can be scratched, as in armpits, and in the groin, and in similar places, one must completely remove it when it begins; and when it is old and large, then it does not become necessary to approach it, for I have never seen anyone cured of it; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
And the operations, when it is on a limb or in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient with black bile at times; then make him sicker if he has manifest repletion; then prepare the patient one good limb to do the operation; then cut out your incision or chancre, and remove it from all sides, leaving nothing behind; and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the place with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you contrary, then cauterize it until the bleeding is stopped; then cure him with another cure until he is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: it shines only; and one should not touch iron to these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy that is called "eclites" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as all stomach trouble and similar things; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he only has dropsy and is neither too young nor too old, then you should operate thus: lift the patient straight up onto your hands, and the minister presses on the belly pushing out the water to the lowest part of the abdomen, then take the spinal column according to this form: And it should be cut off at two points, to a point, and yet not so deep that it can come all the way to the intestine when one puts it in, and cannot injure;
then look if the dropsy is spreading towards the intestines: if necessary, you should cut into the belly three fingers deep from below at the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly three fingers deep; and if it is due to gallstones, then it should be on the right side, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow onto that weak part.
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and bind it, and lift your hand to all the spinal column between the skin and the sacral bone just as when scorching at the quantity of an fingernail or in a circle; then pierce the sacral bone until the spinal column comes to the right position, and that is the place of the water, then remove it, and bind this instrument which is the shape: And it resembles a silver thread subtle, and it is made of lead or of archaic light metal, and at the lower part there is one small perforation; and on the side of one part, three perforations; and two on another part, and one on another; and are the keys cut like a feather, and that is the shape of the incision from which the writers cut the pen:
at the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it now descends on the instrument; empty then half or one-third part, for if you drain more than it is necessary in this hour, by chance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he will faint, or he will approach death.
but empty it according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the signs of his virtue signify, and his pulses; then take the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now for the cure that stops the perforation which is on the sacral bone, as I have said, so that you pierce in this manner; then recommence the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from these things, and draw out a small quantity of the water.
do this every day, and be careful not to leave more than a small amount of water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you let out too much water, then the cure will be of the sepulcher or sand burning, and by excessive sweating or bathing in the sun, and he will darken his skin from drinking; and the cure with desiccative medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach, on the liver, and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the penis No child is born without a foreskin on the penis, or the foreskin is small, or it is not in its place. If so, it is necessary to pierce at once .i. spatula very fine according to this form: then put on the foreskin .i. clasp fine of lead, and tie it and hold thus three days or four, and when it wants to make urine, let the clasp be removed, and let it urinate, and then put it back; and by chance there is no need, for the urine that comes forth does not allow the foreskin to close. Those whose foreskin is small are treated with a clasp of lead, as we have said, and it will expand. Those who do not have their foreskin in its place are afflicted, for no one is born with the foreskin at the head of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift up their penis; and they cannot evacuate because the material cannot reach the uterus, and that's a bad disease.
And the manner of working is that the patient lies on their back, then raises the head of the penis and trims it to the size of a feather, so that the foreskin can be cut as needed; and take care not to let blood flow which often comes forth, and if it does, stop it with whatever stops blood, and cure the wound until they are healed.
of pustules of the penis Many times these ulcers come on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; therefore, you should take them to a subtle surgeon, and cut and cleanse all of them, then put on wet cotton in Egyptian ointment; then cure with divine ointment until they are healed. And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, it is necessary to apply a cautery. When you have cut it open, and the ulcer is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is sealed, then cure what remains outside. For if you cure it together, the head of the penis is not assuredly not pierced, and there comes blackness and corruption in its place and in the groin; therefore, cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the bark of green pomegranates and willow leaves, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
And if blood flows out, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterization is useful for two dispositions together: that is to say, at the flow of blood and at corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a lead tube into the urethra of the penis, and make the patient urinate through it; and when the skin is rough at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or it has due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a hairy instrument until the ligaments are loosened, and be delivered the head of the penis from all parts.
and if this is a grievous thing to scrape them away, it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula some pommade at the head of the penis and skin; then scrape gently between two, and put on a thin cloth of wet linen in cold water, so that it does not become rough again.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not the removal of continuity as with other wounds; yet when we do this work at our own discretion, and properly for children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the most gentle for salvation.
I say that the ancient people did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of the masters and sages who performed circumcision around one foot, and with great force, and all in one blow; it was like the hours because there are two skins, and by chance if you cut above and leave below.
And then it is necessary to cut again, and the pain is double, and at the cleansing which is of the foot, the tip of the member is not assured; and at the cleansing of the wound by chance the iron escapes, and the work is spoiled, and many times it happens that there is no need for cleansing and I have seen this.
Of the cleansing which is done at the forces to all the thread of silk I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally well in every direction; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and the manner of the first work is this: make the child think, if they understand, that you are not doing anything more than binding the thread around the penis, just so much, and then let it hang loose in all ways that you can. then make it stay between your hands straight, and pull the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow gently, and pull it up as high as the head of the penis is; then cleanse well from the filth that is assembled there, then bind the signet with a double thread, then tie under one piece to another string; and hold it with two strings by the second binding at the pouch and the right index, and cut between the two threads, then lift the skin above hastily and pull the head of the penis.
then make it stay between your hands straight, and pull the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the instruments; then place your hand on the penis and blow gently, and pull it up as high as the head of the penis is; then cleanse well from the filth that is assembled there, then bind the signet with a double thread, then tie under one piece to another string; and hold it with two strings by the second binding at the pouch and the right index, and cut between the two threads, then lift the skin above hastily and pull the head of the penis. then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on and on a cloth glued with egg white cooked in rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it there until the next day, and then cure with another cure until it is healed.
The form of the forces for cleansing is this: two fingers should be held and should be cutting, and the fingers should be as great as the thumb equally.
the error of cleansing is when the wound inside bleeds at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you spread it to your nail, so that the flesh makes an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
And if it lasts three days, and what is below the penis becomes swollen, then leave it until the abscess is appeased, and scrape lightly; if it cuts as you can see, and take care of the part of the penis, so that nothing will harm it.
Treat then the joint of sudden powder wound, which we have said or treated about powders, and if it is cut outside measure, and it goes up above, so do not harm; treat it then, as we have said, until it be sound.
Retention of urine.
Retention of urine is due to blockage of stone, or blood congealed, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things, which we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to stone in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent down on his knees; and his feet should be placed upon the back, and he should stretch out his belly from the part above the back, and have the patient strain himself as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone above, so that the urine is released.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", of which this is the form: and let it be made of subtle silver hair, like a bird's feather; and let the cane be one and a half palm long, and let it be fine at the head.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie it at the top with a small piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the siringue; and cut off the excess thread and tie it just to the head of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and egg white, and have the patient sit on a stool, and raise his bladder and penis with moist and olive oil and lukewarm water.
then put the siringue lightly into the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the belly; then insert the siringue ahead just to the bladder, and let the patient feel it come to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless the conductor or guide is twisted; then pull out the thread all the way along with the wool piece, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out far, and make the urine flow.
and repeat the siringue until the bladder is empty, and have the patient relieved.
of the diseases of the bladder
When bleeding or blood comes into the bladder, or putridity is assembled there, and you see it distilling waters and medicines, then make use of all the instrument called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the leaves are arranged in such a way that the medicine flows well into the penis without addition, so that we can draw out moisture and pour when needed.
and when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, put the head of the instrument in the moisture, and draw it back as far as it will go; then pull out the moisture with the instrument, and then push it back firmly; so that the moisture will enter and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle syringe with which one catheterizes the bladder: thus it is:
And it is made of silver or bronze, and the head is higher; and below it is one seam or the ties fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see catheterizing the bladder into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat one end of that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the syringe into the penis, then strain your hand onto the bladder all the moisture has gone in, until the patient feels that that moisture has come to the bladder.
and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tile, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stone and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone that is embedded in the reins and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate by size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder happens more often in children, and it is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears to be hair-like, and grates the patient's penis, and makes them fart many times, and then becomes inflamed; and many of these stones fall into the foundations; and the healing of children is much lighter until they are three years old, and it is very grievous in elderly people, and it happens most often in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is much easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient by catheterization, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders finding the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and lift him up and move him downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes falls from the top; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in its place, then hasten now to cut on top of the stone. And if it does not fall at first touch, moisten your two middle fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is young, or your two ring fingers, if the patient is youthful and complete; and put them in its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your two fingers, then guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press down on your two fingers, and push it out further ahead where you see cutting.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out his right hand above, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the coions in the part where one makes the incision; then insert the spatula carefully, and this is the form:
And make between that which is between the kidneys and the fundament not in the middle but on the left side of the naively; and be straight above the stone, and your two feet should be at the fundament, and be the shape of the crossbar so it is wide enough to cover, and inside narrow, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
By chance, if the pressure on the fundament is such that it jumps forth without labor; and know that there are some stones which have angles and margins: if they are hard to come out; and there are others which are smooth, resembling a glaze, and rounded, from which the issue is light.
To that stone which has angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not jump forth, then you must strain above with forceps which are like a file at the head, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you put beneath one subtle instrument curved at the head; and if you cannot shape it thus, then enlarge one small hole in the perforation, and if the stone decays, then bind it with vitriol.
And if there is more than one stone, then bind the largest to the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove it forth, and the small ones afterwards if there are several. And if it is very large, then you must split it, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes forth in abundance, so that the flesh cannot heal; but still strive to extract it, or to break it apart with forceps, as much as you can, until you remove it piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tight, and place a wet cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then revive the patient on his back, and do not release the bandage until the third day.
And when you release it, then arise the patient very well with oil and water, then anoint him with ointment of dragon's blood and ointment of balsam, until he is healed.
And if apostemes of heat come to the wound and corrosion, and congealment of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by that, which is known in such a way that it does not jump out with the urine: then bind your finger tightly in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and destroy it.
Then lift the wound with vinegar and egg white and silk, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works that you do to cure him, that you bind his two hips together, and assemble the medicines on the bed.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and fixed inside, and the urine cannot come out; then cure him as I say, that you cut into it many times, or excuse yourself from cutting because of this cure. I have already proved it thus.
Take one iron rod shaped according to this form and fixed at three angles in one point:
Then take one thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come out into the bladder; then insert the rod into the penis lightly, until you reach the stone; and turn the rod to your hand in small pieces and small pieces, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; and soon the urine will come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the penis. It is soon broken, and jumps forth with the urine, and the patient is cured.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread under the stone and another above, then bend the penis near the stone between the two threads, then pull it forth, and release the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure him until he is healed.
Of women's stones
It often happens that stones are lodged in women, and if it does happen sometimes, then the cure is difficult, and it is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who reveals herself to the mirrors, especially when she is cast.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of medicine; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deeply seated than the stone of man, therefore it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear.
And if necessity demands this, then it is necessary that you take a wise and knowledgeable midwife, and at all costs find one who knows how to do it, or else a subtle and skilled midwife; and the present moment requires a well-informed woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone.
and look very well to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that she put her hand on the fundament and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, then she constrains it beneath her hand, and recommends that she puts her hand on the fundament with the patient, and presses her left hand strongly on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it slowly from the entrance of the bladder down to beneath, as much as she comes to the root of the thigh; then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where it appears in that part; and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and make the incision at the first small opening.
Then bind the rag in the incision, if you feel the stone so far along the wound that it can come forth, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges; and know the likenesses to know the outcome.
And if the blood overflows, then put vitriol powder at the wound site, and hold it for an hour until the blood is stanched; then return to your work, as much as the stone comes forth, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men, to aid you in your work.
And if the blood overflows, and it is from the artery that was cut, then put powder on the wound site and strain of tents and bandages, and do not start again with these things, and leave the stone and don't pull it anymore, lest the patient might die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of blood is calmed, and the flesh is restored, then return to your work until the stone is worn out.
Of fleshy hernia
Fleshy hernia is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white discharge, which is below the key of the womb, that contains the egg; and it is called "syphac", and sometimes it is properly in the mesh of the egg, as if it were another egg; and it's the skin of the womb between the white discharge that we have said; and this only happens through no fault.
And the generation of this fleshy hernia is due to weakness that comes from the womb, and it spreads that material.
And sometimes it comes from striking on the womb, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and so it happens more.
and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is in white discharge that we have said, then there is a swelling or tumor, as long as an egg, and does not open up the womb, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper mesh, then there is a swelling or tumor with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it's another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the womb and the white discharge, then it feels well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine the entire surrounding quarter, from which the shape is as before. Accordingly, then, what comes after the surrounding quarter, judge what is inside.
Accordingly, then, what comes after the surrounding quarter, judge what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to our power and the replenishment of his body; then bind him on his back, on a thing about a foot high, and put many cloths under him.
then sit on his left side, and command the servant to sit on his right, and stretch the cord to one of the two sides of the womb.
then take the spatula left-handed, and cut the skin of the womb between it and the long one down to the point, and let your incision be entirely straight as you cut through the skin of the womb up to the white discharge, and scrape subtilly according to our power.
then pierce the white discharge with an instrument to a large opening, and extract all the water, and then put in your fingers, and lift the white discharge upwards; and do not touch the womb of the woman, but only the white discharge; cut it out or by pieces equally on both sides of it subtilly, so that if you do not cut it well sufficiently, the water will return.
and if the egg jumps forth from your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white discharge; then bind together the two leaves of the womb to a suture, then treat it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, while doubting the hemorrhaging of blood; then cut the womb to all the suspended parts, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the water is gathered together into two parts together, know that these are two fleshy hernias; then cut the other part as you did the first equally, then dry the blood, and put a soft moist cloth in oil rose to the wound.
and put another soft cloth in wine and oil, and place it on the two wombs, and place double cloths above them, and tie it up to all the string that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and fill them with flax according to this likeness and let them be bound together by a suture in the waist of the breeches, and one of the strings take hold on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the point; and the other take head above the two shoulders, and be all assembled in the restriction in the buckle of the breech.
and sometimes this fleshy hernia is cured with a fire cauterization in place of iron surgery, and it is that you take one subtle cultellaire cautery and cut the skin of the womb, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white discharge that contains water is revealed.
then take the cauter according to this form, and pierce that white discharge with your fingers, and scrape it away with this subtle hot cauter.
And cut it in all the ways you can, until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and keep watch over hemorrhaging of blood, and be more careful with iron works.
and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscess or hemorrhaging of blood or anything else, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horribleness, then perform a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that fleshy hernia is there,
then make the patient sit on a soft seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part to all the spatula wide, and place the perforation of the long of the body; and be wide the openings, so that all the water flows forth.
then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and let the remaining water flow forth, then treat it until the wound is healed.
and if the white discharge does not let water come out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you insert a pin or an instrument like the one used to treat the water of dropsy, as described before; and enlarge the wound by about a foot, and know that the water will return, and be assembled after six months or so, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
Of the abscess of the womb
Know that in the cutting of this fleshy hernia there are many dispositions, for which it seems to me that it is better not to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and the likenesses of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from the body, and indeed from the womb; and it is through many cases.
It is to know by bitter superfluity and ague, which spreads to the womb, or from percussion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and finds no pain, and the abscess is heavy;
and by chance there are heavy abscesses that are poor and stony, of foul color, and sometimes come from a wound or an swelling of the vein.
When it is by a wound of an artery, then it is known by the warm abscess, when you press it to your finger. and it does not behoove that you touch it.
He who is made from a swelling of the vein is known by its disposition to the expression of touching with the fingers,
and can well make an incision on this appearance, and on other abscesses; and that you open the key of the abscesses, then let it be in the top, and treat the white sac with a poultice, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all parts of the sac.
If the sac is already hardened with these abscesses, then it behooves that you treat the sac and the abscess.
and if it is inflamed on the sac, or in those things that are inside the blisters, then it behooves that you deliver all that thickness and cut it again.
And if the birth of the abscess is behind, then it behooves that you cut it all, and extract the sac, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then apply the wound with a wet cloth in rose oil and wine, then care for it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess enveloped in a swelling similar to a fig, with the softening of the testicles, and if the patient groans grievously when he walks;
and the cure for this disease is just as painful as that previously mentioned,
and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It behooves that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then bind the suspensory ligament of the testicles down to your fingers, to all the blisters that are close to the penis, and the master will tie them up, and stretch them strongly;
then cut into the scrotum with a sharp instrument, cutting wide in the direction of the blisters, until they are uncovered,
and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein comes out, and tie it again on the other side. then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupt moles;
then care for the wound as you would with others who are injured in the bowels, so that no blister forms that nourishes one of the testicles;
for by this there is no harm that comes, and if all the blisters come together, then it behooves to pull out the testicles at all the blisters; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the blisters, and dry up and are unable to be helped.
of the rupture of the sac. The occurrence of this rupture is by the section that comes from the sac, or the extension above the belly in the part of the groin, for which the intestines descend from this rupture to one of the testicles.
and this rupture is either from the sac or from its extension, and comes in two ways due to various causes: either by percussion, or by jumping, or by braying, or by lifting a heavy load, and similar things.
and the signs when it is from the extension of the sac are that there is a gradual increase and decrease, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and it is the abscesses that are equal up to the very depth, because the sac presses upon the intestine.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the sac that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin nearby, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body being pushed out of the sac.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to be suffered by the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron cures that bring fear, therefore it behooves to escape from them.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to push the intestine back into its place with his hand inside the wound, if it can be inserted. then press down on his neck between your hands, and lift up the pubic bone.
then pull the key up above, and cut all the skin of the testicles from top to bottom. then bind the strips of cloth tightly around the wound according to what you need to open the wound, and make them such that the eyes can emerge.
then scrape away the sac that is beneath the skin of the testicles, until the white sac is completely uncovered on all sides.
then insert your two index fingers into the opening of the testicle, between the white sac that is beneath the skin of the scrotum, and between the second sac.
and depart that which is behind the scrotum, and between the second sac; and then move your right hand into the key of the testicles, and raise the white sac to your left hand, and lift the scrotum up to all the sac towards the belly. and instruct the assistant to stretch the scrotum upwards and release that which is above the ligament.
and ask your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped around or white sac remaining, and if you find anything, then bind it to the belly beneath.
then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and bind it in the back part of the sac, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the belly, then cut the knots that appear from the threads, as many as there are three threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the sac, which we have said is beneath the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligament of two parts. then wrap the threads around each other and tie them together with two parts, so that no blisters that nourish them can enter in or out, lest an abscess come to harm. and tie the ligament above with the first long ligament twice that size, and after those two ligaments leave a space of about the width of a great fingernail below the key of the kidneys.
and afterwards tie the rest according to the roundness that an egg bears; then cut in the part that is below the skin of the kidneys, until the blood flows and the bowel moves, as we have said before.
then apply moist wool in oil, and put it on wounds, and I apply the ligament that we have said. And never is the white space that we have said cauterized after the incision, due to fear of excessive bleeding.
For it often happens and leave the ligament until it takes its course; and if it tarries in taking its course, then warm water is applied, and put on what we have said, until it takes its course.
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
of flesh hernia
In this case I never saw anyone dare to make the treatment by fire.
And the ancient ones say that it is done in the manner of the vine that grows together with the tree, in such a way that you tie the bundles, after cutting above and lightly below.
then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the bundles drop; and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
At no time does a rupture come in the inguinal region, as we have said, and open up the veins; and not one of the intestines should descend to the kidneys, and if it does, it is little, and repair at all hours.
and yet if he stays too long in this position, the wound or abscess grows, until the intestine descends.
and this happens through the extension of the abscess that is in the inguinal region, as we have said, because it is extended, then becomes softened and swells the veins and opens.
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before; and at no time is it treated by fire in this manner.
and it is that the patient lies thus on his back between your hands, then cut the vein of the rupture that is inflated to the width of three fingers.
and then extract the abscess that is below the skin which follows, then take the ray and place it on the apparent vein of the abscess.
and press to the bottom of the belly, then cut the two apparent veins of the abscess above the head of the ray, and cut one and the other.
then extract the head of the ray, and do not cut the abscess or extend it to anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of the vine of the intestines.
then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the strings, make sure he is not disturbed and cure the wound, until it is healed.
The abscess is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more effective in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the kidneys
Many times the skin of the kidneys is softened in some men, because the things that are inside are softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, to make the patient lie on his back, and cut the soft skin above the natural skin; then assemble the two lips into a seam, and if you see, cut off the excess of the softened skin at three or four seams; then cut between the seams, and treat it as other wounds, until it is healed, and the cord falls.
of flagellation
I know that flagellation is prescribed in our law, and therefore I would like to say nothing about it in this book; and there is no need for it except for two reasons: one is that the apothecary must respond when asked about a remedy, and provide the cure; and the other is because we often have occasion to flagellate certain beasts to help us, such as goats, sheep, and cattle. I say then that flagellation is done in two ways: or by attraction, or by cutting. In the one where we do it by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the kidneys are softened and relaxed; then we take hold of them with our hand, until they are remitted and we feel them no more. As for flagellation by cutting: you must first grasp the beast, and press the skin of the kidneys onto your left hand; then tie the suspender, and cut on each egg one stroke, when you have well skinned them; and leave some little bit of abscess and subtle abscess that is above the bundles; and this manner of flagellation is more effective than that which is done by attraction, because at attraction something remains of the kidneys, and the beast desires lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is in two ways like men: one way is that between the two kidneys there appears as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes there is no urine. And the other way is in women, and it has on the finger as much as a penis and two kidneys. And the treatment of man and woman is that you cut off all the excess flesh, and treat it like other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the kidneys, there is no cure.
of the Tentigene
Tentigene is a growth attached to the natural part, as much as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment. It is necessary that you grasp the excess of the tentigene with your hand or on nails, and cut it slightly; and do not go too deep, lest excessive bleeding occurs, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed; and there is another growth that arises at the mouth of the uterus, and is filled, and sometimes bursts forth, and is according to the resemblance of a cow, and therefore the ancients called it "cow disease". It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said about the tentigene, and treat it until it is healed.
of Erratic
Erratic is when the natural state of the woman is not perceived, or the uterus is small; and it is caused by birth, or accident due to disease that occurs; or it's because of a growth attached to the uterus, or subtle abscess or thick abscess, and it is done in depth in the womb, or on the sides, or below, or wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and sometimes even having flowers; and knowledge of this is by looking at the belly. If the growth is close to appearing, it will appear on your hands or on the right side. If it's a subtle abscess, and it's close to the two lips, you must hurry, and do this: place your two thumbs together, and have the woman lie on her back, spread her legs; then make the two lips form, so that the subtle abscess is removed, and the growth appears; then take linen, and soak it in oil, and apply it to the wound, and have the woman stay at home each day, so that she cannot unite. And if the abscess is hard and thick, you must cut it at the spatula-like shape of a myrtle leaf. If the growth is of natural flesh, you must suspend it on a nail and cut it; and use medicines to stop bleeding, such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, together with an egg; then apply a wide bandage of cloth, so that the wound cannot unite; and thus it will be for a long time, and then apply a linen tent; and then cure with other treatments until it is healed. And when there is growth in the womb, you must cut it according to this manner, unless it's a cancerous aposteme. For an aposteme that is enchanted in the womb, one should not touch it with fire.
from hemorrhoids
Piles are openings of veins that without cut accustomedness, and when piles are old they become thromboses; and we have said in the division their likenesses, signs, and I will say here those that receive a cure. I say that piles and thrombosis, when they are pushed far into the marrow, and do not appear to feel, then there is no cure by iron. Those who are at the mouth of the marrow, which one can feel, are those that one can cure. It is necessary therefore that you put the woman in a cold house, then place the thrombosis between tongs, and clip its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes from it, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and grape skin and gauls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix with honey and oil, and make a .i. poultice on her back. And if she stops, that's good. If not, make ventouses on the back and around the breasts to hurt; then take flax, and moisten in plantain or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the area. And when the abscess subsides, cure the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to .i. harsh head, so it is necessary to clip it as I have said for thrombosis; and then cure it until it is healed.
Abscesses of the buttocks
Many forms of abscess come to the buttocks, such as chancre and boilous abscess and herpes and swellings and fistulas and piles and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It is necessary therefore that I say about this treatment the hot abscess that comes to the buttocks, which is not of those abscesses that collect pus; and if you wish to know the operation by iron, then look to see if the abscess is angry at its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red so you can see it. Then do not hasten to cut, but let it subside until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a siege, and have two little sieges or he leans, and support on his back and assemble his feet in parts far from the knee; and be his thighs spread, and put his arms under his knees, and bind well with a good bandage; then place the bail opposite to the right side, and apply the instrument by which one works at the mouth of the buttocks, of which this form comes afterwards; it is necessary that when you see the instrument being applied, you strike the first blow in order to know the depth of the buttocks, so that what goes in through the instrument does not come further than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depths of the buttocks with cloths, so that the instrument does not grieve; and it is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one works on it with a gentle hand, then it is necessary to clip at the head, or at the spatula-like part; and when the pus is drained, then it is necessary that you put in the wound moistened tents of rose oil or green oil; and place the tent far from the wound at the bottom of the buttocks, and place by the side of the buttocks and on the elbow linen cloth wetted with water or herbs cooked; then cure afterwards two days' ointment suitable to this, until it is healed; and sometimes lift off the buttocks and the wound by a cleansing of water and honey, and then water or roots of lily and aristolochia longa cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is reopened in the buttocks, then it is necessary that you take care not to cut with iron, but cure as we have said in the division.
childbirth
It is necessary first at the bedside that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see the woman hasten downward, and desire to give birth; then suddenly the child wants to come out; then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is under his head, and the secondine with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her belly, so that the child comes out soon; for when he descends above his head, the secondine is with him, and the buttocks are cleansed of their superfluities by good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes on its feet, or it comes out from the chest or the shoulders, or from the hands, or it comes on her belly, or in a strange way, and is converted by chance on his neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary at the bedside that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should aid.
If the child comes out above its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool or have women hold her; and anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek cooked, and then put the bail between her thighs at the small spatula-like part of which this form is. and split the secondine, and clip at her umbilical cord until the moistors that are inside are purged; and take hold of the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to enema the woman with fenugreek mushy with sesame oil; then make her hold and stretch out with condiments, and keep her mouth and nose shut for an hour: now the child has come out. And if both hands come out too far, then it is necessary that you gently bring them back in, bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a siege, and lift up her feet high; then lower the siege to the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall while getting up; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then clip at the hands with the scissor that was placed before, and extract the child, and bring it back into equal parts.
of the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, it is necessary to pull it up. and then turn it bit by bit, until it is even.
then take one of the feet and stretch it bit by bit.
He must jump just to the crotches, if he has a command to restrain, and make it protrude from the conditions. If he jumps away, may God wish.
And if it is not so as we have said, then make him turn a little and a little, until he is according to the natural figure. For then it will be easier.
And if it does not come so as we have said, take mastic of aloes, and oil of sassafras, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar. and put it on the nature of a woman inside and outside this unguent. then make her sit in warm water down to below the ribs.
and when she is moistened below, make her a collar of myrrh, and put it under, and let her stay for one hour. then make her sit on a stool, then make her protrude and hold her mouth and nose, and slightly press her belly, for the child is jumping now. of the issue of the child on her knees When the child comes in this form, then put the ball of your hands a little and a little.
of the issue of the child who is coming out with one hand holding it is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand. if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk.
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and support her legs well.
then administer the mastic that I have counted.
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study to bring back the hand. and ease the child according to the natural shape, and make it protrude, and instruct her to take hold until the child comes out further.
of the issue of the child on her neck, and have spread out her hands, and her face turned towards the back of her mother. it is necessary that the nurse takes her hand, then turns it a little and a little, and eases it lightly.
and when it is equal, make her sit on the natural mastic of aloes and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move a little and a little.
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and instruct her to take hold; and make it protrude. in the same manner for all the rest of the second stage.
in the same manner for all the rest of the second stage. When it comes out in this way to the end of the second stage, then cut the cord at your finger's length, until the moisture is empty.
and if the child looks up at its face and neck, then cut it from the shoulder, so that it is not retained, and kill the child.
then put the child inside, until you have placed it as is necessary, and instruct the woman to take hold sometimes.
of the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an unusual thing, and it often happens. Two are an unusual thing, and do not live if they are not named.
I know that they are multiplied, and are torn apart by the membrane which divides them, which is attached to the shoulder.
and sometimes they come out naturally like one of us under, as we have said.
And if they come out with difficulty, then follow the cure as we have said, and be subtle in handling them, and do quickly and lightly what she does. and do thus as it is worth for salvation. of multiple children
of multiple children Sometimes they are formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all shaped in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise and glorious God.
and it is necessary that the nurse knows all this, because by chance similar things may happen to her. so do as it is fitting.
of the dead child
When you are treating a woman after the death of her child or in childbirth, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to use force with your hands. it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of healthy virtue, and has no accident or fears death.
it is necessary that the woman be sure on her back, and have her knees inclined down, and her legs lifted.
and the minister holds her with two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated in the descent of the child.
then anoint the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with mastic of aloes and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the nurse's hands with these oils and mastic. then put them into the womb lightly, then take one or two and push out the membranes that are suitable for this.
and take care to see if the child is prepared to descend onto its head. then push the membranes into his ears or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs.
and if the descent is on feet, then push or pinch and adjust to the sides evenly.
and it is necessary that he holds the membrane in his right hand, and puts the cord between his two left hands, and gently pushes it with all his hand, and inserts the membrane into one of those places we have said, until it comes to the empty thing.
then insert another membrane in front of it, or the third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
and then stretch equally on both sides, moving from one side to the other, so that it may come out, and the fingers of teeth are for holding, as is its form:
And if a part remains, then smear the ball with some of its oil and apply it to that part, and draw the other part.
and if there is no more of it, then put this ring or higher up and make it go out completely from there.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring back because of the constriction. so it is necessary that you wrap around once, until it comes out completely.
then wrap the cloth at the joint of the heel or at the calf, and thus it is necessary that you do in the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the head of the child is big and it is thin in its exit, or if it has or chief tight assembled. so it is necessary that you put the spatula-like spine between your fingers and make the head and extract the fluid. or you sharpen it on the instrument which is called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and thus do the same if the child has a great natural head. and then draw out the bones with pincers.
and if the head jumps out and it is strained at the forceps, then they are split, until the moisture that is in the exit comes out.
and if it cannot come out, then wrap it in pieces as much as you can.
and if he is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you make holes until the moisture runs.
And if the child is on its feet, then the attraction is light, and the directing to the mouth of the mother is light.
And if he is thin in the belly or at the breast, then it is necessary that you extract him to one cloth wrapped around your hand. and make the belly or the breast, until the moisture which is there runs.
and if the other members are lost, and the head remains. so put the ball of your hand into the fontanelle of the mother, and draw it just to the mouth of the mother. then put one or two rings on it, and pull it out.
and if the mouth of the mother is constricted because of a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not seem necessary to trouble. instead it is necessary to prepare moist and greasy things. and the anointing with ointments, and sealing in soft and moist substances.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it even, then anoint with what we have said in a living child.
and if one cannot, then pull it out by parts, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
And when you have done this, then anoint with what we have said in hot abscesses that come to the mother.
and if there is hemorrhaging from blood, then it should be stopped with water, and anoint with other remedies.
And I saw a woman whose child in her womb had been dead, then she consulted one doctor on top of the other, and the doctors said the other was dead. After a long time, an abscess came in her mouth and swelled so much that it opened, and began to cause great trouble.
I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I put on ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after a few days another did. I was very surprised, because the belly has no bones.
So I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I cleaned the wound and pulled out many bones, until the woman was in a better state. and the woman lived for a long time like this, and periodically a little bit of pus would come out from there.
and I have not forgotten this chapter except that when the master finds a strange thing, he knows how to put help there.
about bringing the mother back to her place.
Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, according to which we read the books; and in two turnings, to two heads of two links. However, the corners should be more subtle than the restrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood.
and the mouth of the box should be one foot wide, and the edge of the trees one foot, and six palms and a half long. and between the two links should be two joints of this same boxwood, which are fixed in one and the other, six palms long or a little more.
and these two joints are fitted in the mouth of the box to open when one turns the two corners.
Another form, more subtle and light in its resemblance, should be made of boxwood or ebony, according to the likeness of pincers. and have two heads with two joints, just as you see, one palm long and two feet wide.
and when you see the box open with all the instruments, then make the woman sit on one bed, her feet straight and her legs spread out. then put the two joints together in the box, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand with all the instrument, just as you have done with pincers evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the box, until the ball does what it wants.
These instruments are all mounted and their likenesses are multiplied; and when the mirrors have been prepared, then is the work more hasty and higher to men according to their quantity.
So do not despise the instrument that you have prepared, for their needs are not excusable.
When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her urine, and then make her pass water conditionally, and hold your hands at the mouth and the navel. and if she urinates because of this, it is well.
If not, then take a pot and make a hole or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the box, just as camphor, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a rope or a pipe into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the mare.
and let it steam until the vapors come down into the mare; then make it burst forth, as we have said. If the secondine bursts forth hastily. And if it remains after this treatment and is not fully healed, instruct the patient to wet their left hand with sesame oil or muskaleg of hawthorn, and then plunge it into nature.
and find the secondine; and when she has found it, grasp it and pull it out little by little correctly, so that the mare does not hinder the extraction. but it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled out; if it comes and dislodges itself.
And if the mouth of the mare is narrow, we have said the treatment for bursting forth and for fumigating herbs;
and if she does not respond to all that we have said, then beware that you do not pull too hard.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the mare, you tie to the groin of the woman, then catheterize her with oil of four-farmed medicine.
so it will pass and return, and come forth; but nevertheless, when she passes thus, a bad smell comes up to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
It is necessary then to make suitable fumigations for this: none of the ancients have proven that fumigation with watercress and dried figs is effective.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the secondine is this:
And it looks like a rope, and one puts the subtle head into nature, and the wide ends over the fire;
and let the fumigation be over the coals, and let it steam until it is exhausted, and start another one.
of piercing the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by subtle force. so it is necessary for the patient to pierce that subtle force at its due time, and not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and guard the ligature so she does not touch it.
then put on a wet linen cloth in wine and oil, then the treatment with oil until he is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop, put on a rope made of flax, and let it stay for eight days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
And whenever this stoppage comes from a sudden wound or abscess; it is necessary to cover that stoppage: then be cured, as we have said of the flax rope.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from under the foundation are swelling, and grow more than those that come from beside the foundation to go forth, or in the space of two parts.
if there is one fistula or more; and when that swelling is old, it works, and then brings forth moisture, or whitish or subtle pus.
and sometimes these fistulas are pierced; and are known by this that there is either emission or purging or blowing forth when the patient has an emission, and by chance one jumps forward.
And if there are fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the junction of the groin, and just not to the knee.
And thus one knows that the fistula is piercing at the foundation, and not piercing. and it is that you push your two indices or foundation, and push a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, then I push a flax thread or one hair of a horse, until you feel the thread or hair at your due time.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through the pipe or emission or discharge, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; then hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is pierced just to the bladder or just to the passage of urine, then the urine jumps forth, and cannot be cured by medicine.
If it is pierced just to the junction of the groin, then the thread comes forth just to the surface. if there is no twisting and the intention of the pain around, then it is that it comes forth with pus, and no medicine or soothing by oil is worth.
and in these pierced fistulas there is no cure better than surgery, and the vanity of foolish physicians who meddle with them.
In that which is not pierced and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their groins, and have their groins inclined towards their belly. then push a thread of iron or flax if there is twisting, until you know where the thread comes forth.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your two indices there.
then sense that the thread has pierced it; and be discovered where you feel between your due time the subtle force or flesh, then know that it is pierced. if there is no treatment made, then one cannot heal it.
One says however that some can be healed, but this happens rarely.
and the help one makes, is that one cauterizes the subtle area according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before. and push it all hot into the fistula, until it comes to the foundation; and do this two or three times, until you know that these burned scars are like a feather of a bird.
and then treat it with moist threads in butter, until those scars are fully gone; then treat it with oil anointing and soothing.
If it is thus healed, that's good. But if not, it cannot be otherwise healed.
and if the thread goes in and does not pierce just to the due time which is at the foundation, and between your two fingers and the thread there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula where the covering ends in the key. If the head of the fistula begins to open at the beginning, and is pushed forward before the tent, and the cautery can be done afterwards, as far as it comes to the top of the tent.
and the tent will be delivered and will fall; then remove those charred parts that resemble a bird's feather, and nothing remains.
And if the blood gushes out, and cuts between you and the work, then use either fire cautery or medicinal poultice.
For the fire cautery brings together two good things: that is to say, the burning of those charred parts joined together, and the stopping of blood and the drying up of moisture;
then treat damp tents with butter or crushed hazelnuts until the pus drips forth, and let the charred parts burn in the pus.
then treat wounds of boilings that burst open and produce hard scabs, and are the medicines dried up.
For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula comes all the way down to the foundation and is separated from the body, then push your finger or foundation into it and inquire as to what is within.
If you sense the tent, and enter two, there is the skin or flesh or char, where it is about to break through, unless there be only fire that goes by way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it all the way down to the bottom, or if you can, insert tents and treat it as before.
and don't go too deep at the bottom, lest you cut the foundation that holds it together, and the evacuations come out unwillingly. then treat it as we have said;
then treat it as we have said; by chance if it is cleansed, or you remove that covering and then wash it since it has been cut below the foundation, by tent or by another appointed instrument. then remove that charred part which is in the wound, as much as you can.
then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes the fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation below the skin above. if you take a tent that has been pierced at the top according to this form: And I insert one twisted thread into two, and push the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
If she is pierced on the margin of the foundation inside, then draw out the thread from that perforation, thus as you push your finger or foundation.
and pull the top of the thread, and bring together the two ends, and hold one against the other, and let it stay for a day or two.
and restrain it sometimes, until the thread cuts through those charred parts that are between the two, and they fall out.
then treat the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
If the fistula does not perforate, then make it perforate in all the ways you can, if it is not too deep.
For it is not fitting to make a cut so deep that you will then have to treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spine-like thorn that makes the fistula is very rough and sharp in one part and notched. and on the other side it is not, therefore do not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
Ulcers are according to two manners: or they are inside the foundation, just like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in the end there is blood. and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture.
and in the end or a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the flesh.
and the treatment for those who have them inside the foundation is that you instruct the patient to strain by urinating into a chamber, until the foundation is cleared out, and the thread appears. if you hurry, and hold it with pincers, or grasp it with your finger, then cut it at its roots.
and if the threads cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take one of those cloths or a piece of cotton or chamlet. and draw them out with your fingers, then cut them, and powder them with some warm powders that are in place of cauterization. or you cauterize them as it is said or written in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
and if the foundation cannot come out, then administer a purgative and bitter clyster to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly.
when the patient feels relieved, and if the thread is out of the foundation, then it is a lighter treatment. and it is that you grasp them with your finger or pincers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and so that the patient fears no incision by iron.
It is fitting that you make the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and insert it into an awl, and then pull the thread upwards and make the awl pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the awl. and if it is of a good size; and hold the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and pull out the awl, and do so with all the others, and leave one to stop the excess blood.
then put on the foundation a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then leave him until he has purged, and when they have ceased, then treat him with ointment and other remedies, until he is healed.
of the drying up of the fistula or foundation Many times it happens that a fistula dries up in the intestine, and through natural constriction, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
It is fitting that you remove the scab on top of a thorn or with your finger, so that it does not remain moist. then the doctor will attend to them as is proper until they are healthy.
and if it cannot heal, then he will reapply the poultice stronger than before until it is fully healed and scabbed over. then the doctor will attend to them until they are healthy.
from trembling Fomice is a small appearance of abscess just under the body and goes very deep;
and at times it bursts forth, and one senses it just like a dead person's trembling, and it comes throughout the body, more so in the hands than elsewhere.
And the doctor's treatment is that you take a cord made from an ostrich feather or a strong goose quill, and place that cord on the abscess, until the cord circles around it entirely. then turn your hand around the entire cord until you have circled it all around the abscess, and press it deeply, and root out the abscess from its roots.
And if you see fit, then do so with a cord of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and above.
but not puncture, in order to keep it at the two, and press it And if you see fit, then cauterize the abscess, as is before or in the chapter on cauterization.
of the form of a chalice At times one makes a chalice of silver or archaic metal, or melted iron or alloy; and at times one makes these small and large instruments according to the instructions given.
Those then that are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
The form of the chalice, small or great, is as follows: or the belly is bound in this manner:
and if there is a deviation or the belly is bound, as you see, and the head be pierced within; and have on one side two perforations, and on the other one.
and the belly or womb be filled with medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and be pierced all around with small perforations.
and have between each perforation one small space, then put in these perforations one strong thread of twisted linen or wool in ten or eleven turns around, and tie the belly as if it were a goat. and when the medicine is inside, tie it with the instrument in front of a strong thread, then cauterize; and that is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the chalice with oil or hen's egg yolk, or similar thing, then put it in lightly.
then the attendants will press it with their two hands together until it is entirely full, then extract the chalice, and lift the patient's legs to the bed.
and if the medicine wants to come out, then tie it as tightly as possible; and if the patient sleeps a whole night after that, it is greater help.
And if you cauterize in a disease of windiness of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then reapply it until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are on the fundament or abscess, then make the cauterizer as subtle as for a child.
and that is the form of the subtle cauterizer where the skin is stretched.
of wounds
We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will say the treatments of hands and medicines, according to fulfillment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or wounds where they are made, and because of which they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the hitting of stone, and the cutting with sword, knife, or cutlass, or lance, club, or similar things;
or those that are made according to the places of the body, as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with the head wounds simple, for the reminder will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it's from hitting with stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large. and you lightly doubt an abscess hot: if you make it so that it begins to heal from the same side as the wound itself, and there is bleeding from the wound, and be the healing contrary to the damaged part.
and instruct the patient to replenish with wine and thick foods.
And if it does not heal, then reduce their food, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat.
and apply it to the wound, if a hot abscess comes, with a moist cloth in rose oil alone, or in vinegar.
and if there is no hot abscess, then apply it to the wound, if it's fresh with all its blood, and not moved by air or powder, which I will tell you a little later.
and if the pus has moved it, then apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suture, as I will say about belly wounds, in the chapter on suturing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone and is putrid, and only holds together by a little bit, then cut it open; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, such as cooked testicles and wheat, also like pigeons, and similar things.
And if you find or skin rot, and it is not attached to the bone, then cut out all the rotten flesh, and wash away the pus, then treat it.
and if it has an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be stemmed by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put this powder which heals as soon as the pus has moved.
And the manner of the powder is: take a part of incense; blood of dragon two parts; and live earth three parts, and mix the powder subtly and apply the powder to the wound, and strain it well, until it dries completely and joins with all its blood;
and then bind it well, and let it stay without loosening, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And one does this with earth alone when one does not have incense nor blood of dragon, but only if the fire has cleansed the wound.
And if the fire has cleansed the wound, indeed so it is, then one should not put this powder in it either.
but instead puts on some digestive ointments or poultices made from wheat flour, water, and honey, until it discharges pus. then he cures with other remedies until he is healed.
And if a fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then one should extract it with fine tweezers.
and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, and there is no difference between it and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the arteries are cut.
If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and not put anything restraining in it, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be soft, like earth washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and washed again in sweet water. and other mineral stones according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then cut and bind it with bandages, then treat it until he is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, then pierce or cut below the surface.
and if the artery is cut and there comes a flow of blood from it, then stop it, bind it, and cauterize it as necessary.
and if the spine of the throat is cut or the jugular vein, and the conduit is preserved, by which the flesh goes. then cut the jugular vein on the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. and then strain it well, and let it stay for some days, then treat it with dry ointments until he is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then seek. and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all that you can, and leave what you cannot remove until the wound purifies. and let the opening be opened and closed.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have said. And if there is bone in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound of lance or dagger
If it is a wound from a lance or dagger, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are signs of gangrene coming forth from the wound, in which case the patient will languish; know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it yet for the blood that does not yet settle in depth. and return to the heart, and kill the patient. but I put an attractive ointment on it, and bind it twice a day.
and if you do not have ointment, then put clean cotton in the wound to absorb excess moisture.
and make the patient sleep on top of the wound three days, or four, or more. if there comes no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart nor dragging of limbs to languish. and when you see the good dispositions, know that the wound is saved. Then cure him with tenting and other remedies until he is healed.
and if it cannot heal and open, then know that there is a fistula; then treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a cut or thrust of sword or dagger, and it is simple, or on the back, then treat it as one should in front.
if it is large, by stitching; and if it is small, by powder; and if it has pressed into the bone and cut off pieces, then open up the wound and remove all that you can. and if they are not removable, then leave the wound to purify and let it close by itself.
and of other wounds on other members is the judgment as we have said.
of the rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, moderate, and small.
of the great wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, by which the introduction of them.
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes it is worse than a small wound to repair a large one.
therefore one returns the intestines into place more carefully, lest one not put them in bit by bit. because the intestines swell at once when they feel cold, so they are returned more carefully.
and therefore the moderate wound is worth less, because one must put the intestine back into its place which is like that of others two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly.
and the stitch of other wounds of the body and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds.
and yet they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine comes forth, and there is some need to put it back, which is by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said. Because the intestines are inflamed due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm him up in this way: soak a sponge or one sheet of cloth in lukewarm water only, or you boil it in hot water with cinnamon and cypress. and apply the warmed intestines until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes this vinegar retains and is good for deflation.
And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestines with water or boil them with mullets and mallows. for through this it clears the entrance to almost nothing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to lance hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is better than cutting; that no one should cut without great necessity there is not;
and that's the instrument for cutting:
so cut inside the curvature and do not cut too much, and see what shape it is;
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out, and put it back in its natural place. if you are able to, for this is necessary.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back. and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts so adjust your attention so that the injured part is higher than the other.
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in great and minor wounds.
In small wounds, use what appears best to you,
then have in your hands one poor minister who holds all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips; and that is the common method of suturing.
and that is the common method of suturing. and it is that you take a needle or needles, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a good inch and insert a needle where there is a strong good thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two edges of the suture,
then strain with a doubled thread around the needle from both sides, and bring together the two edges of the wound smoothly,
and then leave about an inch and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop until you have used all the needles that you need. until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the needles be of medium size, between fine and thick. for the fine needles cut through all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
lest they cut and open the wound before the suturing;
and then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient while sleeping. and I put tent or cloth strips at the ends of the needles to hold them in place. and leave them so that the wound is sutured;
and this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one needle or two.
The second suturing method is common, and it is that you bring together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the suture together with one needle where there is a strong medium thread; and when you have pierced these edges all three together,
and when you have pierced these edges all three together, then withdraw the needle from the part where you began, in the way one sews cloth.
and leave a space of about an inch between each suture, the thickness of a small finger;
this suturing is suitable for everyone,
and I sewed up a wound that had been in a man's belly.
who was wounded by a sword, and the wound was more than a palm of great size. and the intestines were torn out two palms in length.
and the wound was in the belly. I put the intestines back and it had been 24 hours since they were out,
and the wound was sutured just 15 days later, and he recovered, and was healed.
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where one could not find it, nor any medicine; and I applied a layer of old gauze twice a day on top of the wound, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
take the needle and insert it into the part that is outside just until it goes inside;
when it has pierced the flesh in straight lines, then bring the end of the suture or thread where you inserted the needle;
and make it pierce from another side into the part that is inside just until it goes outside.
and the intention of this suturing is that you sew as tailors do their cloth. and that you leave the suture once on one side and then take it up again on the other, until the suturing is entirely complete.
The second method of suturing, which Galen calls properly,
is as some people do, who bring together the two parts naturally; and apply one end of the suture to the other end, in this way:
insert a needle at the close end of the mirror image and make it pierce only that part; and let the two joints of the sycamore; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part to that inside. and let the two joints of the sycamore;
then make it pierce one and the other from the outer part to that inside, in two other joints of myrrh that are on the other side.
and this is the most common way of suturing.
Galens says this phrase, and some bear witness to it,
one must sew the belly with two needles, or there be thread in each.
and one should push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew harnesses.
and know that when the wound is in the belly, it is the suturing more difficult than of other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as that of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, and the air has changed it, then put back the intestine and the flesh; then place on top powder incanting charm,
then put back the intestine and the flesh; then place on top powder incanting charm, and if the air has changed it, then put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals. and cut the thread, and tie the sycamore and myrrh; then heal the wound as with others, until it is cleansed;
and if you don't have medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to heal, old linen cloth; and change it two times a day until it is cleansed.
For you don't need any other medicine in many cases where wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not cause community with principal members, then it is necessary that you moisten light linen in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil, and place it around the angles and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or torment in the bowels, and it often happens, then use enemas of black wine tempered, and similarly if the torment comes up to the intestine;
and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the weakness of the veins that they are in, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the approach to its nature from the kidneys.
And if the flesh springs forth from the wound, then put it back in place like the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it has become old and turned green or black, then it is necessary that you lay the place that is black, where bleeding does not come forth. for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligament, and let the two joints hang down from the part below the wound until it reaches outside to facilitate extraction when the flesh falls away, and the wound heals.
of the wound of the belly
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some people,
because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly with a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and from there came the evacuation and windiness;
I applied a cure according to what I knew, and did not cease from subtlety until he was healed, and the parts were sewn together.
And when I saw it sutured, I doubted that the patient had not pain in his belly; and there was no more evil, but he remained in better disposition, eating and drinking;
and certain experienced persons said that when one has a small wound in the intestine, he must be bound in this manner: take fresh threads from large intestines, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened up the mouth, then put it on the two lips,
then put another thread after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered;
and sew the wound. That kind of stitching in the intestine causes no harm to the patient,
and one can tie the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast,
in this manner: take the end of this thread of intestine that is well cleaned and free from hairs, and then tie to the end of this thread one thread of fine linen twisted, then push the thread into the needle and sew the intestine, and then reset it in the wound;
and this manner of stitching with threads is not other than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the greater intestines, there is no remedy nor healing, except through subtlety.
of a fistula or whatever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called a "fistula", and similarly when it is broken and begins to heal.
And fistula is according to the true white and hard nodulation that does not cause pain, and it is also broken off like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes it breaks clear and open, and other times thickly; sometimes little, and other times sufficient;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed and there is no flesh, is not other than by one of the eight causes:
namely, by the smallness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that does not allow new flesh to grow; or because there is too much discharge; or because the parts are putrid and the matter is of bad quality; the medicine is not good enough in the treatment; or because corruption is a manner of plague; or because the property in the region is late with digestion, and delays health, and flows by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and remedies of medicine in the section.
or it is necessary for me to let you know the cure for fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all fistulas that are in this way are of difficult healing, and there is only toil and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come just to the place I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you see it understood, take a piece of iron or lead, if the fistula is straight, and cut it;
and if the fistula is crooked, search for a subtle instrument of bronze, for the bronze bends and moves around the curvature;
and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot well search it with instruments, so cleanse it through one of the holes,
for the moisture flows short from one hole to another, and purifies it;
then cut the bleeding as far as you can, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and it will be cut through to the very bottom,
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand upon him, and where it is.
and when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places I have told you, cut according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places I have told you, cut according to what I have told you, and take out the putrid matter and corrupted flesh that are inside; and then treat it until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well opened to the right place, so it is necessary that you cut through to the very bottom, as far as you can; then put wet cloths in medicinal aloe and tie them just above the head of the fistula,
then put wet cloths in medicinal aloe and tie them just above the head of the fistula, until the medicine eats away the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
and then put gentle oils on the healthy flesh, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, cut it. If veins or nerves do not trouble you or the principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, so clean it out until all the corruption is gone, then treat with gentle things on the healthy flesh until it is healed;
and if it is not healed and returns to its former state as before, know that you have not yet reached the end:
so uncover and cut through until you reach the bottom, and take out all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep to reach, and you cannot get there; so there is no other remedy than to leave it to natural healing;
and if there is a little corrupted bone and you can remove it with pincers, then pull it out with an instrument suitable for that,
and if there are many bones, then remove them all, and leave none.
and if moisture makes you contrary, and there is no error nor fear, then cut the moistness, flesh, and bone, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put a poultice on the wound to promote purulence, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
and then they will be looser more easily.
and if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh, so clean out only the corruption until all the blackness is gone. then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of the corrupted bone that comes just to the mold of the bone; so scrape and cut all the way to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
He was a young man of around 30 years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
until the matters came to the leg and became inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no reason not to open it.
but the doctors because of their foolishness opened too high and the abscess did open; and it was full of a great many matters, and became a fistula, and there came out many holes that all flowed with pus and moisture from the body;
and many doctors tried to cure it for two years, but there was no relief in the art of medicine,
until I was called upon, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated. and what flowed from the holes was great in quantity; and the skin of the young man became red and had a yellowish tint.
I inserted a tent into one of those holes, and then searched all the holes,
and I found that some were coming together from all parts of the leg.
I then hastened and cut into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and it was corrupted and perforated, and the corruption came just to the bone within.
I scraped away what appeared on the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except for what I had removed.
and began to heal the wound with medicinal treatments over a long time, and was unable to close it.
and then I began again, and uncovered the bone just as before,
and found the continued corruption in the bone, and cleaned it, and then removed it, and I was careful to close the wound.
but I could not do so until I covered about a palm of the bone with flesh, and the flesh healed completely. then I restored it with medications; and it was healed and closed quickly.
and it did not require further work except for the patient's weakness, which could not endure. and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For often due to blood evacuation, but he was healed entirely.
For often due to blood evacuation, but he was healed entirely. and instead of the bone, a hard flesh grew in its place, and he had good health and there was no harm or opposition from anything at all, neither when lying down nor when getting up.
and stretch the head, so that you draw the corrupted flesh below. and uncover the flesh above the place where you see it will be set, so that the setting does not harm the flesh. and put one or two small pieces of wood or a splint under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh. and it is necessary to set it as far as can be seen and felt the corruption, and then set it again.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, so uncover all the flesh; then put one or two small pieces of wood under.
and then set the bone from one part to another across the corruption, and make the setting equal in length to the corruption about an inch, just as we said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut away the corrupted joint, and set the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other option but to cut away;
and if the corruption is in the elbow of the hand or the knee of the foot, then it is very strong that thing. but anyway it is necessary for you to investigate this corruption, how it opens up; and cleanse it in all ways that you can, but not let the vein or nerve hinder you.
and know that the chiseling and setting for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance. and their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each similar operation.
and know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to your knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so think about the instrument that you need according to what it requires.
of fire The head may be dislocated either due to something within or due to something external.
and when you have used medicine to cure that corruption with the treatment of medicines, and it does not help. so it is necessary to cover that member up to the place where the corruption comes. so that the patient may escape either by death or by bad luck, which is greater, from the defect of the member.
so that the patient may escape either by death or by bad luck, which is greater, from the defect of the member. and the signs are such that the member becomes black, as if it had been burned by fire. and afterwards it rots in blackness, then goes on to corrupt from member to member. and takes hold throughout the body; so hasten to cover.
and if it is by the sting of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar ones.
if the corruption is at the top of the thumb, then cut it off, and do not give it space to reach as far as the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, then cut it off at the wrist, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm.
and if it comes up to the arm, then cut it off at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death. and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its virtue.
and similarly does it fare when the corruption comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cut off after the second joint.
and if it comes to the foot, then cut off the entire foot. and if it mounts up to the leg, then cut off at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except for the patient to die of exhaustion.
and the manner of cutting or setting the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one minister downwards with one thread, and another minister upwards with another thread. and you uncover the flesh that is between the two threads to a width of about an inch, until the bone is exposed.
then cut or set it, and put a linen cloth on each side, so that the setting does not touch the healthy bone. and comes to the patient another wound and abscess cold.
And if bleeding occurs when you work, then cauterize the area quickly. or you put on some restraining powders; then return to your medication until it is completed.
then bind the injured member with a suitable thread and cure it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to a certain man in my village:
he had a blackness that seemed like burning fire.
and that corruption came first to his thumb of the foot, until it consumed the entire foot.
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off his foot and was healed.
and long after that the corruption returned to his thumb of the hand, and he came to me.
and I put on him things repressive after the purification of the body, but the corruption did not cease.
and he orders me to cut off his hand, but I do not consent, as I had hoped to recover the material; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was weak; and he became desperate all over, and returned to his land, and hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed;
and I have never written this story except for the reason that one makes another treatment, if one needs it.
No abscess ever comes in a fatty region and stays so long that it gathers a great collection of pus; and then rots and perforates, and the pus bursts forth, and the fatty region becomes empty, just like a vessel; and the skin above is also as thin as one-eighth of a delicate silk cloth; and they do not reach just to the bone, nor just to the nerve, and such a disease is called " Saint's";
but if it is so long that it comes just to the bone and in front of it, then it is called "fistula";
and the skin is so thin that you cut all around it, and similarly when it is as thin as silk; and it does not heal from its corruption.
And if you think the skin will heal, and the corruption is not in front; and the skin is thickened with fat, so treat it with a poultice like this:
look to see if the abscess is large and the pus that comes out has a foul odor, then apply an Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take aloes, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put the mixture in one vessel over the fire, so that the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take from this according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and apply the medicine as a poultice to the abscess, and stop up the ulcer; and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by stretching;
do this many times, until the abscess is drained and the pus is removed;
and sometimes anointed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water on top,
then let it flow, and apply the poultice, until you know that the abscess is well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then apply a poultice with water and honey, or add a small amount of litharge to it; or apply a poultice with honey and sweet wine, which the honey has the property of cleansing and washing; and the wine makes the flesh sweeten;
and when you have done this, and you are sure that the abscess is well cleansed; then apply a poultice with what makes flesh grow in it,
and this is that you take defined plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or apply a poultice with some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have said or how to treat ointments;
and if the ulcer on the abscess is small, and the finger of the poultice cannot enter into it, so enlarge it slightly with a piece of iron, and put in a tent made from Egyptian ointment, or basilikon ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, so cut and leave just one spot or a small opening where the poultice can enter,
and if the ulcer that emits pus is above, then cut it below or at the same level as it is. For when the pus is in front, do not let flesh linger there; and if you cannot cut the abscess below as you see; then prepare it in such a way that the pus runs to the lowest level that is;
and if you cannot cut the abscess below as you see; so prepare it in this way: that the pus runs gently downward, and does not leave anything of the pus; and take consolidative medicines to put on top of the abscess,
and spread over a linen cloth that covers the entire abscess; then cut in a stronger place, the ulcer of the abscess, one step larger than the first, then apply gentle ointment on another cloth according to the size of the ulcer; and put it on top of the abscess of the skin to relieve the pus, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days once;
and that one which is on the ulcer of the skin, is often removed to take away the pus, and know what comes out of the pus, whether it is venom or a small amount or enough, or digested or undigested;
and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been thus extended and you see the nature that bursts forth on the ulcer of the skin, so know that the abscess is healed, and approaches health;
and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you remove the dressing, so change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the abscess emits undigested pus after several days, know that the abscess is not healed. And if subtle poisons depart slowly after a long time, do not despair of health at all,
for health approaches. For there are people whose flesh lingers in their wounds for a long time, and those who do the opposite;
and if undigested pus bursts forth from the abscess after several days, know that the abscess is not healed;
and if the abscess takes a long time to heal and is distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as defined ointment, for it has a great deal of vitriol, and this is the final medicine;
take defined ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and add the essence of old wine, equal in substance;
then the jelly and grease; and it does better cooked and greased. when definite remedies are not present,
or you take mercury and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is above the fire; and then in a cloth .i. draguel, and stretch it over the chest, and at no time administer one Aristolian remedy for too long, and roots of lily celestial, which is also like fine flour of violets and saffron;
and roots of lily celestial, which is also like fine flour of violets and saffron; and use them as simple or compound medicines: grind them, and make powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the patient's wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment,
and if the patient's wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has penetrated to the bone, and makes an impression on it, or hardens in the members, or stiffens the ligaments; if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
of an aposteme of the lung
Pnarice is a swelling that arises under the lung of the armpit of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance occurs in other parts;
and when it becomes hardened and one does not take care, then it comes to a foul abscess, and runs and discharges pus as long as it runs to the root of the armpit, and by chance may run all the way;
and comes to corroding just up to the bone, until there is a foul-smelling pain, and the joints of the fingers are wide, and the color is fiery red.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help; so it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluity that remains of the armpit, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is very great help if the bone is sound, and the armpit is healthy;
and if the armpit presses on the flesh, and begins to prick, and the wound, so it is necessary that you put a bandage under the armpit that pricks the flesh, and wrap it up tight, and cut away that subtle and gentle flesh, and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it away, and treat further, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the finger corrupting, then cut it off in one piece as is said before; then treat until it is healed;
and if it is festering and boils, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first; then cut away the armpit of the shoulder-blade in a diagonal manner above;
and beware that the cut does not come just to the flesh which is under the armpit, because the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it does happen, then apply something that soothes.
The fingers that grow on some men's hands by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is a toe or bone, and sometimes an armpit,
and none of them are born in the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of the fingers. That which grows on any of the fingers does not move, and that which grows at the joint of the finger, by chance moves;
the cut of that which is fleshy is light, in this way: cut it at its root with a broad shoulder-blade.
That which grows at the root of the joint is hard to cure: so hold back from cutting it.
In that which grows or comes out at the rear joint, it is necessary that you cut away the flesh all around up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread for this case, then treat until it is healed.
The swellings that come together on the fingers come from birth, or from a blow to an injury, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
It is necessary that you cut away the swelling, and then the finger will repair itself according to its natural forms; then put between two cloths or soaked cloths in rose oil, so that it does not swell; or you put between two thin pieces of cloth, until the wound is closed, as is necessary.
If a swelling comes to any of his fingers with the palm, then cut away that swelling as is necessary.
Of wounds
Veins are great swollen vessels full of melancholic superfluities that come to multiple members of the body;
and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk on foot and who work and carry things than in others.
It is necessary then that you administer some time purging with colic, and then heal the wound of the basilica.
The iron treatment is according to two manners: one is when you cut away, and then treat further with the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein, and treat it all through.
The cut is according to this manner: first arise the leg of hot water very strongly, until the thick blood is thinned out, then strain the leg of the patient from above the knee down to the part below the kneecap; then cut the vein in one stroke, or two, or three, with a broad blade,
then lift and draw out the black blood with your hand from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the patient can endure;
and then bind it, and command that he retain viands inducing black colic.
and recommence the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and it is harmful to the patient.
The alleviation of the pain is according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs. then put it in a bath, and let the leg arise in hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you don't have a bath, then heat it by the fire, and then cut away in the area of the vein at the long part of the kneecap, or in the part below at the ankle;
Then treat the skin with liniment, and strip the vein from each side, until it is clear when one feels it;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;
then tie the thread below, until it is lifted off the skin, and then dip it in liniment lightly,
then cut it at another place above three fingers, and then strip the skin on top of the vein until it is clear; then lift it up to the thread, as you did, and dip it in another liniment, just as you did first;
then cut another size, or more if you need them, then lift it up and cut at the toe of the foot;
then pull and lift just to the second size; then pull from size to size, until it comes out entirely, then cut;
and if you cannot pull and lift, then tie an awl to each strong thread double, and pull and lift, and tie below one thread, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out; and guard that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot pull or lift it, and harm comes to the patient;
and when you have pulled it all out, then put a moist cloth of wine and oil rosatum on the wound's site, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the flesh is contracted and twisted and wrapped together all at once, and it is not straight, just as we have said, then you should divide it unevenly, but do not cut it off; and pull it as we have said before.
then you should divide it unevenly, but do not cut it off; and pull it as we have said before. The form of the iron with which one cuts the flesh is curved, and does not cut off, so that it only cuts the vein;
and is of great curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is ensnared in legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or tree, and on earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance it may be elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to the putrefaction that comes from below the skin;
as if a serpent or worm were inside the body, ensnared between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes to the leg; then the swelling changes, and the vein begins to come out, just like the root of a plant.
When the swelling opens up, then it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth, one and a half inches to two and a half inches, and tie it tightly;
and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it seems to be going away from behind, wrap around the cloth and tie it; and if it is too long, then cut off a part, and wrap around the remaining portion, and do not cut it off at its root until it has come out entirely; for if you cut it, it will return to the flesh, and bring forth abscess and putrefaction at the site, and a bad disease;
therefore it is necessary that she be treated little by little until its end, and that nothing remain in the body;
and sometimes this vein is when it is treated to five palms of length, or to ten; and one man came to me, whose it issued from ten palms of length, and when you cut it, tie a thread or peg, and pierce it all the way down to the bottom;
so that all of it comes out; and let the matter inside be empty, and apply to the site medicines that prevent putrefaction some day, then treat it as with abscesses.
And sometimes at this vein many threads are, and even when it opens in the joint of the foot or the foot itself; and then comes a lot of pegs, and from which threads jump out; treat it then as we have said before.
Of worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "beef disease", because it has often befallen oxen;
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes all around the body, rising and descending; and one feels it well as it moves from member to member, until it bursts the skin where it is going and jumps forth;
and is ensnared by putrefaction of certain humors, just like come worms and serpents and lice and ascarids from the belly;
and one doubts of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye; it happens by chance that it returns, and destroys the eye; and this has happened many times.
When you see it cure and pull out, one cannot get rid of it except when it goes out:
then it is necessary that you tie the cloth above and below with a strong thread tightly;
then cut above and pull it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it; then cauterize it with fire above, until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does is that it destroys the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming to the head near the eye, then tie a thread below it tightly, then cut above and pull it out;
and it is necessary to use the patient with purging of the body's medicines, soluble for the bad humors that are putrid;
and beware of foods that ensnare putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen this which I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and after a short while, the swelling rose up also like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything else, just like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder,
And then a little later it spread throughout the body until it came to the other side.
Then he told me that it would turn around the body again, just as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed how she moved from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this disease occur in this manner before. However, I had seen many others who had experienced great pain from one place to another, but I did not see it, just as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body and her veins were uncovered. and therefore appeared the forced sweating;
and did not appear according to this reason in those who are robust, and who have moist bodies and veins that respond.
And when you see the disease cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, so bind above and below quickly, and then cut on top until the forced sweating at that place subsides. and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it to your liking,
then use a remedy for those who stifle the sweating, such as fetid pills and serpent's pill, and similar others.
Arrows
The arrows are various, according to their shapes and according to the places in the body where they fall.
The diversity of theirs is that there are those which have large points, and small, and hairy, and hardened. and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those where there are fragments; and that which falls in any member so falls in two ways: or it falls in the principal member and grows,
such as brain, heart, liver, womb, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: so it is necessary that you beware of extracting this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many conditions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then take it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits it and pierces the bone, and the cerebral fluid which is above the brain jumps out. This is when there is blindness and swooning and confusion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding, and vomiting of gall. and perhaps it is without breath from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it perturbs speech and voice. and jumps out of the moist white wound like pustules, and also as if burned by fire.
and if this sign appears to you, then hold back from the cure, and leave the arrow in if it is not removed.
The sign of the arrow when it hits the heart is that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it has been driven into something hard, not empty. and perhaps the arrow becomes numb like boils, and in cold black blood, and comes with cold sweat and fainting. know then without doubt that death is present.
And the sign of the arrow when it hits the womb is that without foam, it jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns color, and they sigh loudly and seek cold air.
And if the arrow hits the covering of the ribs, it is near the little ribs; and it pours out great gall and great pain and sighs; and all the members of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something from undigested food jumps out of the wound.
And if the arrow hits the belly, and some piece of intestine jumps out through the rectum, then there is no hope for cure nor for extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels very strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other member, such as the face, collarbone, throat, shoulders, and assistant shoulder, and spine of the back, and foreleg, and shin, and similar members, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to one man whose arrow fell on the eyebrow in the root of the nose: I tried to take it out and pulled it from the other side under the ear fat, and he was healed without numbness.
And I extracted an arrow that had fallen into the fatty tissue of the eye, below the paper-thin membrane: and the arrow was stuck, and I could only pull out the point towards the wood. and the arrow was as long as a Turkish bowstring, all of light iron without ears; the joint was healed, and no bad accident came to it.
And I extracted an arrow from the neck of a Christian, and the arrow had ears like those of an Arab:
I loosened the feathers, and pulled it out slowly until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted an arrow from one man whose had fallen in the belly, and I thought he was dying;
and then after he had passed 30 days, his condition did not change at all. I cut above the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.
And I saw one man who had an arrow fall on his back, and the wound was sewn up above.
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural conditions. nor found any harm in any of his natural functions.
And I saw one other man who had an arrow fall on his face, and the wound was sewn up.
and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others were similar.
And I extracted an arrow from one of the prince's men, who was struck near the navel. and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was completely stuck.
I was summoned to the treatment after it had fallen three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I searched for it in every subtle fold and didn't feel it. and he felt pricking and pain below his right ear. I thought it was from the point of an arrow.
I put on the place a plaster that is attractive and digestive, because the flesh did not swell. and I saw the arrow's point.
and I saw the arrow's point. I put on the plaster for many days and the wound was resolved above, and the patient remained thus for a long time.
so that he felt the arrow one day inside his body; and he told me so. I put on the wound a medicinal paste that is corrosive by many days, until it was open.
and I probed it and felt the head of the arrow which had stuck in the place; then I inserted it into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and the arrow's head passed well beyond the boundaries in three months,
and then it broke out of the wound so that I inserted the forceps and pulled it apart from one side and the other, but it could not come out;
then I did not cease to subtlety and ingeniously manipulate the instruments in ways, until I took it one day with well-made forceps, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and restored the wound.
And the doctor judges that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was closed, and the patient was healed entirely.
Now I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for books cannot grasp everything.
but wise masters know well a little bit, and what is present and failing. nine works, and nine instruments, for the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out from members where they are stuck except according to two manners: or by the place where they enter, or on the other side;
and that which jumps out to one side where it enters is an arrow entering fleshy parts and sometimes jumps out.
And if it doesn't jump now, then I leave it until the flesh is pulled apart around it, and the exit is eased.
and also if it's stuck in bone and can't come out, then I leave it like that for some days, and I move it each day.
and then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, I pierce around with one subtle force, until the flesh around is stretched out, and then I pull it.
And if the arrow is lodged in the flesh of the body where one cannot see it, I search for it all over. and if you feel it, then extract it with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot due to the constriction of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, so you cut until the wound is large. and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at which it holds on to.
and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at which it holds on to. so remove the flesh that is stuck between two parts as much as you can. and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can extract it;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can extract it; and subtlety well that you do not break the arrow, but rather pull it out more gently.
And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the flesh around is pulled apart, and then extract it, for the extraction will be eased. And if the hemorrhage of blood makes you contrary, then apply what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and put ingenuity into how you can extract the arrow without danger.
or soon or late, or firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow hit him. for it is the greatest aid that can be, and if you cannot, then put him according to what the signs have shown you.
The arrow that comes from the other side, or it appears to do something with it, or the skin is swollen in the place where one sees or senses it awkwardly:
cut then on top, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out: if it jumps out now.
And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it for a while, and then resume the extraction until it comes out further.
and if the head of the arrow is stuck, then push it all the way in.
and if the head falls off and you see fit to administer a poultice, then apply one instrument that is hairy. so that the point of the arrow enters into the hairy part of the instrument; and then push further.
and if the arrow is stuck, then apply one instrument with a pointed entering end to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then care for the wound as it seems fitting.
And if the arrow strikes the arm, or leg, or belly, or bladder, or ribs, and it is close, and you can reach it, then cover it;
and guard the vein and the nerve, and then draw it out, and then cut the wound, if necessary; and care for it until it is healed.
The shapes of the forceps used to extract arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many shapes: great, small, and little, according to the size of the arrow.
of veins of the body common Of veins through which one is cured, thirty-one, and thus there are sixteen on the head,
that is to say: two jugular veins which are after the ears, which are called the "herbeches"; and two arteries which are in two temples appearing; and two veins that are in two eyelids of two eyes, which are called "aspirets"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and two carotids which are in the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins through which one is cured commonly are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and people commonly call it "vein of the head"; and the median one is called "femoral", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic; and people commonly call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic one is on the right side; and people commonly call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the kidney, and it is the one through which one is cured, which opens manifestly above the navel.
And the saphenous vein is the vein that is between the ulnar and radial, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the crease of the pocket of the left side, and the second saphenous which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called "grosse", which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The cure of the veins that are after the ears also helps against headaches and migraines; and the quality of the healer, as I am saying to you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the healer, as I am saying to you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the skin where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two folds dependent on the head: when you then go to your neck, and where you feel the pulse below your neck, then sign of evacuation begins;
then take the lancet, and push it under the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above all the vein; and cut and scrape off the skin and vein well two fingers thick, and make blood flow until you see;
then strain and bind, so that it is healed;
and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The cure of the two arteries that are in two temples is worth against old headaches; and also for headache, and accustomed eye pain, and in the eyes of tears that flow to the eyes;
and the quality of the healer is as I am saying: and it is that the patient tightens their neck, until the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse below their neck, and then signs of evacuation begin;
then lift the skin above the vein at your neck's indication, and push the lancet underneath; and lift the vein above, and cut it, just as you have done with other veins, and make the blood flow according to your need;
then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put a cloth on it;
and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their cutting and extracting, at the beginning of this book.
The cure of the vein of the forehead is worth just as much as the cure of the cephalic vein for old facial diseases, and against headaches, and against redness;
and it is that the patient tightens their neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fossor", whose shape is this:
And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the amount you see; then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein so that it is healed and not once does a large swelling occur.
However, it is not necessary for the swelling to be too great; and the healing should be crosswise, because the bone is pressed, and by chance, breaks the swelling when it is subtle.
The cure of the two veins that are in the eyelids also helps against eyes, and against tinea, and against redness, and against oriel in the eye, and against facial diseases;
and it is that the patient tightens their neck by twisting in some way, just as before;
then apply the cure, and let it be the healing of the traverse, about a foot long, about a finger's breadth wide, because there is no fat.
And if the swelling is subtle, it may break; then make the blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind with cloth, and bind it well.
The cure of the vein of the nose is worth against ague, and against feverishness, and against facial diseases; As headaches and rashes that come to the face, and similarly when they are old;
and the qualities of the saintly woman are such that the patient strangles their neck, then strains their nose to your left hand; and take a thin flame long, and put it in the space between the two nostrils; for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not go too far in depth, and make the blood flow according to your necessity, then bind it for a night, for it is very quickly restored;
The saintly woman of the two Ganges helps in the constriction of the spleen, and at the beginning of menstruation, and with many diseases, and with impotence, and with corroisons, and with herpes, and sores;
and the qualities of the saintly woman are such that the patient strains their neck above and below, as we have said; and let the master be standing on top of the patient's head, and the patient sits on one stool;
then open the vein of the long one a little bit widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is necessary;
then do another on the other vein, then release the bandage, and stop up the veins moderately; so that the patient does not choke; and let it be until morning, when the wound is healed.
Of the saintly women The saintly woman of the veins above the lips helps in bleeding in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cuts of lips, and around the nose.
And the qualities of the saintly woman are such that she makes the patient sit before you, and strains their neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and you recognize them by their blackness, and because around them are small black veins: so then take one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt;
so then take one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt; so take the largest one from each side, and do likewise with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method;
Of the saintly woman beneath the tongue The saintly woman of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the saintly woman of the cephalic, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and with diseases of the uvula, and with diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the saintly woman are such that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts up their tongue, and looks down each side at a black vein;
so then take one and the other, and do not go too far in depth, for beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled according to two manners:
or with a sudden thrust of a long mirtin flame, or a subtle olive-like thrust as cutters would, and it is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the largeness and constriction of the veins. The form of the long flame is very renowned, and it is large as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and full of thick blood that appears, and which contain thick blood and turmoil; and this is the form of the olive-like flame:
and it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The saintly woman of the Basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are beneath the throat, and the neck, and the chest, and the belly;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed slowly, and to beware of the artery that is beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and a great flow of blood comes forth, then it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and one should not thrust the flame, but cut as with ananesil.
And if the Basilica does not open clearly, then it is necessary to force it, and change to another; or you want a bit of it, or you bleed in lieu of it the vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and cut with the flame anesil, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the saintly woman, then it is necessary also that you strain the arm, so that you touch the place until you feel the pulsation; then mark the place by counting, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with the flame anesil;
and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the place swelling, for it is the artery: push it away then.
And if you see it flow up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: hurry then, and put your finger on top for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens;
then bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be on guard, and do not move them until they are healed.
And if the blood is not stopped, and it pours forth, and you are without medicine, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of it retreats; and stop the blood.
And take a strip of flax, and cut it, and take one half and bind well up to the other day;
if the blood is stopped, it is good; if not, then treat him as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
and the stopping is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the tightness of the bandage on the arm.
The saintly woman of the vein in the middle helps to treat blood that comes from the head above and the body below. because she is composed of the Basilica and the Cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that is beneath, and if he cuts too deep, and finds the nerve. and he swells and his wounds are grieved, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must loosen the sinews with the instrument of anasil; and protect the nerve as well as you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
The wound of the cephalic artery helps, for it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to cauterize the puncture in the olive or meridian flame, for this is the most saving of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries below.
However, it is necessary to seek out the lighter position, and not trouble anything if one does not take hold at first, and then start again; and by chance the places swell in some people when one takes hold at first, but it does not trouble anything. The quality of the wound is according to your opinion.
The first thing you should know about healing is that a wound is not truly healed except by preserving health,
and to prevent diseases from coming. and let the wound be made in one of the three veins that are or cut: namely, cephalic, saphenous, and basilic; and one should heal in the beginning of prayer at dawn, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
and one should heal on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
The wound that is ministered to diseases has no fixed hour or time, but whenever need arises, whether by day or by night, at all hours and in all times;
and it is not necessary to heal children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman who is pregnant more than three-quarters of the way, that is, until the seventh month. And one should not heal those who are old and have passed 60 years.
And when anyone wants to heal, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that he purges the intestines with a light clyster. if they have retained much bad blood, and the veins do not draw off from the intestines the superfluous excesses that are harmful to the main members;
nor does one heal who is too full of meats, or who is drunk, until it has been purged away, nor those who are dropsical;
and one should not heal after a colic passion, and vomiting, and purging of the belly, and frequent intercourse with women, and travail, watching, and sleeping, and all that is against virtue, or by reason of arms or body;
then subtilize the humors, if the blood is thick, by means of foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter a bath, unless something hinders it, to subtilize the blood,
and heal from the wound of the bladder around the third day, as we have said;
and keep that day free from labor, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
and be light-hearted and joyful, and let the healer be higher than he who is being healed, and rub the arm two or three times.
then stretch the skin above gently, for when it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow;
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
then moisten the healer's flame with an old oil, then put his right hand on top of that vein under the area to be healed, a little above where one wants to heal. so that the vein does not flow and fail when it is pierced. For there are veins that flow like strings at the time of healing, and some that are full of windiness. so that when you put the flame on top, it retires and will not open the vein, and thus one is among those;
and if he opens the vein, it is too narrow, for this reason one should be advised in these things.
And if the vein opens at first, that is good; if not, then start again a little below or above, quickly, as long as the area is not swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is frightened, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm: in case an abscess may form; nor enter into a bath, then start again the healing if it pleases him.
and if the opening is small or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not bleed as much as you see, then trust in that same opening for all the flame directly.
and work a little quickly, so that the area is swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the area swollen, then do not start again the healing, and put on a little bit of lard from oil, for it lightens the body's blood, and is moist in this place where the lard meets the oil.
and thus administer the lard from oil in each healing that you heal veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and this same thing makes the eyelids twitch and move when one puts it on the area; then subtlety the blood and separates when it is too thick.
And if a large abscess comes, which happens many times, especially when it is not fully healed except at that one time or the opening of the vein is small. so hurry, and put on the area a moist sponge in water and vinegar for a little while, and press it for an hour.
and it is necessary that you do this after the bleeding from the vein has stopped, and if it remains at the area after some days as black or green, then it does not harm. and if you see, put on some remedy of aloes or myrrh dissolved in balm, mast, or similar thing.
And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the healing of the basilic vein: put then your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad. Therefore, do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance it may cut off the blood flow from the artery; but make one powder that is dry to harden the area, then care for it with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is full and fat, and has need of bloodletting, to make the wound larger, and have the incisions wide.
and to one who is weak, do the opposite, and let him heal little by little, and it is necessary to heal him by cutting across, not piercing.
and this manner of healing is saved from the harm of blood and the damage of nerve, and it is worth more than long or wide healing.
And to one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist bread soaked in apple juice; if he is overheated, treat the blood three times or four.
And if he is of a cold complexion, moisten him before healing with bread soaked in a sweet syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and nutmeg, and a very fragrant syrup.
And if he pines away during the healing process, after much blood has been let out, it is necessary that he drinks a broth of char and a subtle fragrant syrup.
and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to blow on his arm and heal again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuing.
And if he wants to blow on his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he heals in seven hours after the first bleeding, or after nine hours.
And if he wants to heal from another side, he must heal on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body that is already overheated and makes one come down with fever; thus it is necessary to let out a great quantity, and enlarge the opening as long as it can be done without harm. then that you reward all the conditions of healing, and place your hand on his pulse as he heals, lest death come in place of life. and this often happens when the healer is neglectful;
and it does not happen when you see the arm loosened, and letting out blood a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly on it; unless he is curved, then let him stretch his arm quickly, for this would be bad.
but let him heal the second time; or you push to the tip of the incision, until the blood that has congealed at the opening issues forth. and place it on one part of the cloth that has been soaked in water, and press upon it lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it tightly, until the abscess is appeased.
And if there is need to let out blood a second time, then let it be in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein on the arm is healed in its place instead of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the boil becomes red;
then it is tied gently, so that the vein appears well, and then let it heal across, not long or wide.
and let the opening be wide, and let it heal well near the joint of the hand, and if there is no more blood to come out, then put the hand in hot water again, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is in summer, then do not put your hand in hot water again, for you would put it more out of season than in season.
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve.
The healing of the wrist of the right hand is worth to all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, so that one can see it; and if it heals across, and you cut all around it, then nothing will hurt.
and do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath all the flesh that has been removed from bone.
and then put the hand in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have let out blood as much as needed, then place the vein oil and cloth to cauterize quickly, and thus do this with each one.
The healing of the left hand is worth to the disease of mice, and do all the same as I told you for the right.
The healing of the spleen is worth to all diseases that are below the body. such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of urine, and disease of the joints, and hips, and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its healing is that the patient puts their foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it opens. and tie above the ankle of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and goes up the leg with many ulcers.
heal it then by making the wound larger or at the ankle, which is worth more.
And if you heal it on the leg, then be careful of the nerves that are below, and let the healing go across as when cutting; and make the incisions narrow.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the leg in the water, and let it empty the vein well.
And if the healer fails the first time, then starts again a second time above one part, for the skin is salty. nor fear the nerves, as we have said, and do the same with the spleen of the other leg equally.
The skin of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its healing is worth to the pain in the backside when it's due to hot blood.
And the quality of its healing is that the patient enters or takes a bath, and stretches above the ankle 4 fingers by twisting.
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and across. and it's better to move slowly because the joint is sound, and it will be restored to many people.
and it's better to move slowly because the joint is sound, and it will be restored to many people. And if you don't do that, then heal any wound that appears on the leg or back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of nerves.
and do so much to stop the bleeding as you see fit, and then release the ligament, and put a cloth on it and strain it; it is now healed.
Wounds of the poultice
Poultices are made of horns, or earth, or glass; and poulticing is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this poulticing which is done without piercing is done in two ways: either it is all heat, or no heat;
and two others in the two sides of the neck; and the poultice below the chin; and the poultices on the two shoulders; and the poultices above the hips; and the poultices in the two arms; and the poultices of the two legs; and the poultices of the two ankles; and the poulticing does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and therefore it has not weakened anyone, just as one would not weaken someone with a wound of a vein; and it is not necessary that it be administered, neither with all heat nor without heat, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body has been emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to poultice, or for habituations, then we will administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and every time;
for there are some who, when they have need to poultice, also have a heavy head;
and if there are those who suffer from repletion and heat in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who suffer from a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and are bleeding; and if there are those who think, and see through a wound and injured and dead and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we will order him to poultice after three hours of the day.
The wound of the mouth also helps with the swelling of the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary for this to be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this poulticing is in place of the wound of the head,
and it is not necessary for those who have a cold complexion or who have cathartic to use this, for this does them great harm;
and therefore it is not necessary for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who heal from this often become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to put the poultice a little lower down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The poulticing in the neck is in place of the wound of the head and of the throat, and therefore it is worth it for the constriction of the belly. and for rupture of the channel of the womb, and for all, and for repletion;
and it should be applied a little bit, because if it holds too tightly, it will cause forgetfulness or obstruction of the stomach and heart.
The poulticings on the two sides of the neck are worth for the pains of the head, and for inflammation of the eyes, and for migraine, and for strangulation, and for pain in the roots of the teeth.
and it is in place of the wound of the throat; and it is necessary that you command the servant to stretch out his hand when putting it, so that he does not pinch the artery, and nor cause a flow of blood.
The poulticings below the chin are worth for mouth diseases and corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the wounds of the two lips.
The poulticings on the shoulders are worth for the disease that comes from heat and repletion.
The poulticings on the sides are worth as much as the three veins of the arm, because it draws blood from these great veins;
and command the servant not to cut too deep in front, because the joint is bare of flesh, and knows beneath nerves and arteries.
The poultice that is on the buttocks is worth for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases beneath, and it is necessary that the poultice be large, and made of earth, so that it has need to well draw out; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it would make great wounds.
The poultices of the legs are healing openly, because they draw blood from all the body, and are worth for old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and veins, and restore the flowers; and they take the place of the two soles, and the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause faintness in many dispositions.
The way to put the poultice is that you first make it empty, and then apply it with a temperate touch, and place it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not cease from doing this until you see the red and swollen place, and perceive the redness of the blood; then cut, and reapply the poultices, and take heed to the condition of the body, for there are those who have thin flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to cut only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep; and draw out lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to cut twice: the first time to subtlety the way of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to cut a third time; and when we want to draw out some blood little by little, we can only do this once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we repeat the process often; and if the blood is thick, we cut deeply and finish so that the veins are pierced suddenly.
and it is necessary for someone who has thick skin and hard, and who have many pores, that you anoint the places of the poultices with oil that is appetizing and dissolving: if it's in the east, with oil of violet, or with sweet almond oil, or with oil of cucumber seed;
and if it's in the winter, with oil of wormwood, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the superfluities are thick and cold, then take bitter oil, or balms, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
And if the person being treated has tender flesh and large pores, then it is not necessary to put any oil.
but it is necessary to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelaine, or another similar one.
And someone who has much moisture, if they rise easily with water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities rise with old wine, or with water of succory, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or with other similar things.
and it is not necessary to be treated with a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after the application.
and it is necessary that he washes, when he must be poulticed and when he is poulticed. And take care of someone who is being treated and is choleric, and whose skin is too red and inflamed; so it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as green apples and endive and lettuce at ease, and similar things;
and a little bit of mushrooms, and cheese, and moist meats.
And someone who has a cold complexion, if he takes honey syrup and moderately aromatic wine that is between old and new, and a little bit of peas, and a little bit of mushrooms and small game birds and partridges;
and the day he will be poulticed, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men at times treacle or muscat before the poulticing or after, in order to comfort the main members; and let the skin be subtleized, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
The poultices that are applied without causing pain are those that are applied on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the belly and the navel and the reins and the groin, for those members do not tolerate being struck or hit.
and this is done only to draw blood from member to member, as we apply them to the breasts when the milk is flowing; in order to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we apply poultices to the belly and navel to reduce the member.
and it removes the pain when there is inflammation or piercing; and by its attractive virtue, it perhaps attracts the inflammation, or moves the piercing from its place.
and thus it does when it is applied to the liver and spleen when there is retained flatulence,
and these poultices are administered empty to suck up as much as possible; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes plain water cooled.
as in cases of pleurisy; and in such a way that one fills the poultice with hot water or water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been cooked.
The form of the poultice administered with fire is this:
And it has two fingers of width and half a palm in depth, and has a small notch all around the edge, like to place a needle.
and it is made of lead, soft before so that it does not hurt the patient when applied to the member.
and has in the middle a cross-shaped piece of lead or iron to hold a candle pressed,
and they are great and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
for the poultices for children are different from those for old people, and for thin ones than for fat ones.
And one should thus apply this poultice to the member:
take the candle of wax or a linen thread, and place it inside the poultice across the cross-shaped piece that is inside the poultice, so that the light is at the bottom of the poultice so it does not burn the patient.
and then put it on the member, and the edges should be on the notch that we mentioned, so that when one wants to, the steam goes out, and one removes the poultice.
and take the linen thread just as before, and renew it often if you need to.
In the poultice then which is administered in a disease of pleurisy, it has no cross-shaped piece nor notch, and is only applied when it is full of water, and is placed on the member alone.
and this is the form:
Without poultices are only applied when there is no place to put poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar areas. and in denuded areas of skin, such as elbows or nipples, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the user is that when you find poultices that are in sweet waters without any roughness, then take them;
and put them in a nut of sweet water, until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies. and then be treated with wine and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the poultices.
and when they are full and dry, if it is a place where one can put a poultice, then put it there, for this is very good afterwards.
If not, then take the place easily, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it.
and if the place is healed too much after the poultices, then soak one cloth of linen in cold water and put it on, until the poultice is dry.
and if the poultice is multiplied, then put on vitriol crushed or gallnuts and similar things, until it is dry.
or you put half a handful of peeled peas on the place and leave them until they are absorbed into the skin, then it will dry now.
and if you need more assistance, then take other surgeons.
And if the surgeons do not want to take it, then rub the place of fresh blood on it, or thrust a needle into it until the surgeon's finger goes in. and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will heal.
and when you see that they are discharging, then powder on a little bit of aloes and vernish, or ash, so that they will now calm down.
The book of fractures begins here
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a treatment for fracture and dislocation.
Learn, dear son, that the foolish physician gets nothing from this chapter, for they have never seen any of the old books nor read a letter;
and because of this, the art is strange in our land, for I have never found any good.
and I know nothing more than what is written in the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the art and by experience and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained and abridged it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of instruments that are prepared, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book, the summaries of words and chapters where the wise put their understanding, and remain on virtue, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or wounding comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, if nothing else can help, such as weakness of the body, childhood, or old age;
or if the weather is not too cold or too hot; and also to beware of cold humors, that is to say, cold joints, and flesh of hare and goat, and do not drink wine, nor take any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are certain of aposteme warm, or spreading of matter in the member; then revivify the patient under his previous government as he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and tests, and peas, and pork belly, and eel, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with great nourishment the patient recovers more quickly and sooner the fracture.
And know that the broken bones of old and decrepit people cannot be well taken up or united according to their nature due to the drying out of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but there is no care, reset the broken bone with one big tendon that holds and joins the member together, so that it becomes strong again as it was before; and do not leave any of its work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish it with fatty meats, such as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is another than that of the back or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that occur when an arc is broken, and another by splitting, such as the cutting of a quill to write.
For there are fractures that occur when an arc is broken, and another by splitting, such as the cutting of a quill to write. And also with wound, and fracture in a small crack.
And each kind has its own method, and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings it into place;
and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the joint is twisted, and it appears well by departure, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
and when there is no twisting or cracking sound, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no fracture;
but it may well have a twist, or crack, or small fracture. So it is not necessary to move it by hand, but put on medicines that come later, and then hold it now subtly.
And know that the fracture that occurs in an arc, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary to put them now back together evenly, so that warm apostemes may come.
and if warm apostemes come, then leave it alone for a day or two, until the apostemes are calmed down; then put it back together evenly as you can lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those who have pieces; then hold it, if it needs to be held in this way.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, and they need to be stretched by two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or as far as your hand can reach, small members, or by two strings, or by one string and your hand.
and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are dislocated, then reset by all means the additions in their places as far as you can, and beware that through your work the patient does not suffer injury or pain.
and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
And you will know by the touch if it seems to you that it is not well: then shape it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press it as those who bring about warm apostemes and contraction in the member through their work, as we have said many times.
And when the member is in place, then correct well the patient so that he does not move it, nor while awake nor asleep, nor while turning or in any other way; and beware that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet in place, and he must be put in such a condition that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then it is not yet in place, and he must be put in such a condition that he feels no pain; and beware that he is put back together properly, so that twisting does not occur when he is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are as I am telling you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness, and in form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and subtle cloths.
et those who are large, like cuisses and legs: if it is necessary to bandage with a wide and strong strap, because the wide straps encompass all the great member, and bind it equally from all sides, so that there is no weakness;
then wrap it with light cloth, three or four turns depending on the member, and bind your hand firmly to all the strap, then go up above the break and bind less tightly than the break will move a little away from the break;
and soften the strap a little and a little until you grasp a great part of the healthy skin, then take another strap and wrap it around again above the broken place;
then go back to the part below the break and bind it moderately, neither too tight nor too loosely, as we have said in the first lesson above;
then put linen or cloths between the straps until it is all even, then tie everything up with one bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something soothing and hot that takes away the swelling, and let it remain thus for several days;
then bind over the splints, and they should be made of half a well-dried cane, or of willow wood from which one makes clefts, or of palm tree sapwood, and be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint which one puts on the break is a little bigger and wider than the others;
and be as long as it needs to be for the member of small or great size;
then bind over the splints just as you did in the first lesson, then tie above with a thread evenly, just as in the first lesson above the break;
the tighter it is on top, the looser below; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft flax;
for if the thread is thick, like I have seen in the works of fools who make their ligatures with cordage of twisted linen, and that's a great error, for the bandage cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not need to have between each splint less than two fingers' width.
And if the patient is hurt by the edges of the splints after the bandaging in their healthy skin, then put under them cloths of linen or carded wool, so that he does not get wounded.
When the wound is with the break and the skin is torn, I will say the treatment for it hereafter.
And know that it does not need to bind with splints all broken members on the first day. For when the members are large, it does not need to put splints on them except after five days or seven, or more according to your security that a hot abscess may happen.
and see here the manner of ancient poultices to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take fine flour that is kept at the mill's walls, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and put this concoction, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the poultice restoring the breakage to various dispositions, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of poultice restoring breakage, dislocation, and twisting: take 10 parts of aloes, and ladanium, and endive, and asafoetida, and gum arabic; mixure and aloe, each 5 parts; alchemilla, 8 parts; and make powder, and mix with an abundance of egg; if the complexion of man is hot, use this poultice, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth to many men.
Another manner of poultice that is worth for twisting: take mugat and myrrh, each 10 parts; mirrhe and aloes, each 8 parts; acacia, 6 parts; Armenian bolic, 10 parts, and grind well, and mix with water or an abundance of egg, and administer.
Another manner of poultice for joints and bones that are separated from their places, and soothes the pain ensuing, and the use of bone, and breakage: take new linen, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and put it on the place. This poultice does not restore, but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and properly takes away the pains.
Another manner of poultice that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and leaves of terrestrial papyrus, and grind them together, and make a poultice.
Another manner of poultice for the restoration of bone breakage and to ease the remaining abscess. Take root of myrrh, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of vinegar, each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the member is heated, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another manner of poultice stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of myrrh, and seed of flax, balausti, mellilot, and sansue, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part; and grind, and mix with salt water or sweet water or with wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Hipocrates says in his book that you should not put on the broken member to restore it except with a wax made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that you should put on the broken member to restore it, with dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of poultice that is worth for lesion and pain: take mugath and human hair from a depilated head or feathers of birds, and myrrh, and equal parts, and grind them together, and make a poultice and the bandage.
And then the dressing a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, do not remove the dressing for several days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, with no rest or swelling, then hasten, and remove the dressing, and take away the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a wet sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift up the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is soothed. Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened with water or rose oil, and bind it to a nut, until you are certain of warm abscess.
and let the inflammation of the member settle, and be removed the pain, then resume the subtle bandaging, and add a little poultice, and do not strain it so hard as before; and bandage subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is gone, and red, and pain and swelling are completely removed, and you need poultice and bandaging, then resume it, just as you did initially.
And if nothing of what we said comes to the member, then do not remove the bandage except after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the swelling subsides, and approaches the skin's surface.
Then apply more constraint than before, and increase the flesh's nourishment, just as I said before; and if you see that the area is drying out more than necessary, know that decomposition cannot occur. Then wash the area with hot water, every time you remove it, and do so each third day, and loosen the bandage a little.
Through this work, the putrefaction is cut off from the member, and hasten what the foolish surgeon does, who left the member in a twisted state: it's bad, and it's fearful labor, and I see nothing else but to get tired and do things correctly.
(Note: This is not a translation of text, as the provided text is the title "des diverses manires de brisure" which means "of various types of dislocation") There are many types of dislocations and different shapes, and the causes are predetermined.
For there are dislocations that are caused by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone is broken all the way to the sacral bone which is below it, just as does a hammer or fist; and because of this it is called this type of dislocation "haichure".
Where the sword strikes the bone above and does not pierce, and is called this type of dislocation "absolute"; and the wound of these two dislocations is great or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or a splitting or a collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or similar things.
And if there is a persistent dislocation that approaches just to the fabric which is below the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that is reunited in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small fissure, and because of this it is called this dislocation "capillary".
and if the wound is made or caused by piercing with stone, or falling, or similar thing, and causes the piece of bone to go down, and it is like the way blacksmiths work when they heat iron on the forges; so the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often to those who have or had moist bones, like the head of an infant.
and happens to all these types of dislocation in which small pieces are dislodged as they are; and I will speak of it in its place.
And we know all types of dislocations through the stripping above them, and the inquiry made by attempts, and through the corrupt flesh that is on.
The capillary appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, the black dislocation appears.
In the treatment of the dislocation, take care of the accidents of the patient; and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of gall, and loss of understanding, and stretching, and paralysis, and fever ague, and the skin to break out and redden, and other similar things in more or less severe dispositions, then it cannot be healed with any doubt.
And if you see no frightful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the injury comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day from when you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the 7th day, so that the fabric below the bone is not corrupted, and the accidents we have said come.
And if the dislocation of the bone comes just to the fabric that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut the part that has been split thus: and this means that you take the head of the injured patient, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as gently as you can.
and if bleeding of blood comes to uncover the bone, or abscess is warm, then apply the aid of what is needed, and it is that you fill the place with damp cloths soaked in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the warm abscess is calmed down, and be sure of stopping the bleeding; then begin to cut around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you strike at the narrow cutting before, and it is the shape:
And then put another cutting larger than the first one.
And the second way is that you have a variety of cuttings, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron at last; and work lightly, so as not to cut off the head.
And if the bone is hard and firm, then it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you administer cuttings with tarers, not too deep lest they go beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be a margin or a circle above the point so that the point does not go beyond the bone; and you will need several, so that each one comes in its own place from the edge of the bone, so that you have tarers for all tests; and this is the form of the three ways of tarers:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place one tarer on the bone, and turn to your right or left until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the tarer back in another place a little further along, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertuses, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have, such as pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the spine.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is fitting that you reset the aperture that remains in the bone to all other instruments similar to a razor, but it must be more sharp and subtler than the other razors.
And if there remains nothing of the small bones, no scales at all, then gently lift one of the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And the other manner of work is as the one that Galien says, which is more wholesome; and he swears it to be very strong, and this is his word. It is fitting first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, then place beneath the head of this chisel-like instrument, with which it has this form:
And do not cut from one side only, and the part is in two edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently chisel all around the bone, and take good care of the skin that is beneath.
If it is stuck to the bone, then gently lift it, for it is lifted well without harm or fear.
And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the skin, and the bone is chiseled only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is fitting to smooth out that roughness, and remove scales with a fine scraper which you should have various quantities of, so as to make each place the most suitable, according to the work and figure of the break.
And smooth with great scrapers, then with finer ones, and do not cease to do this until it is well.
In each of the other fine and subtle cuttings and breakings, it is fitting that you adjust according to its direction; and this is something that is not yet revealed to one who has put their study into this art.
And if the wound is exposed, then it is fitting that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so that you do not harm the wound, then administer above another layer, and do not stretch it too tight until it only covers the wound.
and leave it so for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed down, then loosen it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, and vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and apply it to the wound, and continue administering medicines without biting.
and take care that the wound is eventually clean, so that you do not leave ointment there, nor let it assemble into a boil, for when a boil forms on the skin of the head, it runs and bursts, and brings great harm to the patient; for when one applies something biting to the wound, it becomes infected above.
Take care then, if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, so that it is doubtful without doubt.
And if nothing worse happens than what comes from the medicine that you have applied to it, having such power, then it is fitting that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one cloth, and apply it to the wound. Then treat the wound by means of treatments that are fitting, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one part alone, because these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only becomes swollen or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is fitting that you set your little probe or perforator to the nose, and put equal pressure on that break inside your index finger, and push gently backward, until the nose returns to its natural shape. and do this gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the part above the nose, and the probe cannot reach the place, then it is fitting that you put it equal to the head of a large rake.
And if the break is in two parts, then do it similarly, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calmed down, then put a tent of linen cloths on the head of the nose, if the break is in one part.
Or you put another one on the other part, if there is a break there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the nostrils of the nose.
And some restorers say that the tents should be soaked in butter and changed each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but rather that they should be moistened with a mixture of egg white and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes one puts goose quill splints instead of tents, and wraps them with a soft cloth around, and holds the break together, and blows gently on it through the nostrils of the patient; then do as you see.
And if an abscess appears on the nose while you are working there, then apply a poultice or moist cotton cloth soaked in rose oil, or in a small amount of diachylon.
And if an abscess does not appear, then apply a poultice from the back, made with sismant flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, and place it on gentle warm compresses, and do not bind the nose.
and if the break in the nose is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for this purpose, then close the wound, and care for things that come from flesh and bone, such as poultices and ointments suitable for this.
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then apply the treatment of tents, and place plugs of horn until it is healed.
(No translation needed, this appears to be a heading or title for a section)
When the jawbone is broken below and there is no wound to the rear, and the break is only so far down and is not split in two, except for a slight curvature inside, one can easily diagnose it.
If the break is in the right part, instruct your two fingers of the thumb to be in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left jawbone, put your two fingers from the right hand, and gently push the break into it, and fasten it with the other hand by force, and make even.
And if the jawbone break is separated by ..i, it is necessary that you administer an extension of ..i parts, until they are even.
And if the tooth movement or jawbone rot happens, strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw a poultice, and on one double cloth; and on the cloth a great knife well made, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and tie it on as tight as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and give him light food.
And if you see that the figure changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then reset to its original shape what has changed; and put a poultice on, of mill powder with an abundance of egg white or fine flour of wheat, after you have removed the poultice; and put on a light linen dressing, and if the poultice dries out, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times he is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess appears, administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, remove no piece of bone that has been removed; but subtlety in removing it with suitable instruments apply.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it by fire as needed.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, then cauterize the wound, if it is wide, and put on one of the poultices suitable for this, to promote flesh, until he is healed.
none The shoulder is broken many times before, near the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: or it is broken and separated into two parts, with pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder-piece that feels the broken shoulder; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then make the break even with your fingers, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or bulge.
And if you need to extend further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth or linen, and make it thick according to your necessity; then stretch and lift the shoulder, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you make even the break, as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out to the front, because it comes too far in, then it is necessary that the patient lies somewhat on his side, and put a medium-sized pillow under the shoulder; and have the assistants push the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then direct the break to your fingers, and if you find it deformed, then it is necessary that you split it open; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstacle, then cut it with one of the instruments you have; but place this instrument under the shoulder to ward off the syphilitic condition.
and resemble a spoon, and is not at all rough, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, just like the rotting of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are certain of a hot abscess, then cauterize the wound, and if the rotting is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, then pack the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, then soak one cloth in rose oil and azolin and wine, and put it on.
The treatment of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a poultice made of mill powder and an abundance of egg white, and put light bandages on top, and place a sphere under the armpit, if you need to. Then take a very broad band of palm width, then put one double cloth on top of the bandages, and the poultice; then take a thin knife with three fingers of length and width, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage is hanging down. and place the knife on the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the armpit of the healthy person, and under the armpit of the patient; and reset each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the break properly, and you clearly see that the knife does not move above the broken bone, then rewrap it each day, and when the bandages loosen, then restrain them.
and make the patient sit on his back, and put a small pillow under the armpit, to lift the shoulder-piece up high; thus the break of the shoulder will be alleviated by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not release it unless bad accidents occur, until twenty days.
then reapply the poultice if you see that it needs to be, and strain and leave it thus, until he is restored; and she is restored within twenty-eight days, and less to some people.
none
There is often a case where the shoulder breaks or becomes wide and does not have a million; and it is only felt by the touch; then arrange according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the leaf powder made with mill flour and an abundance of egg white, and light bandages, and put on one double cloth; then put on a large and thin knife, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there is roughness anywhere on the shoulder, use linen bandages to even out the knife; and then wrap it tightly in a big bandage so that the knife does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day; and each time it becomes loose, rewrap it and put the cloth back in its natural position, and have the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder is restored within 20 days or 25. And when this number is completed, then release it, and be sure, for this is not a bone that gets loose easily.
And if a part of the bone is torn beforehand, and points downward under the key, then do this, and the bone, and do what we said in breaking down the force to soothe an abscess hot.
of the breaking of the breastbone
The breastbone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks later. And when it is broken in the middle, it descends downward, and the patient feels great pain, lacks alinement, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the seams in the broken bone, and one knows well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back with a pillow between their shoulders, then presses their shoulders, and assembles the ribs of both sides to your hands, and subtly puts equal pressure on all the ways you can until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then puts on poultices and bandages above the subtle layer of salt or other light fustigation, and wraps around in one cloth, and ties it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turns the tie back around to the back, and strains gently, and rewards each hour with a gentle touch, and if it relapses, then strains again; and if it needs to be removed due to corrosion or pruritus that comes at the site, or pain or abscess, then hasten and remove it, and scrape off the poultice, and address what has come forth in ways of cures; then reapply the poultice, and strain until they are healed.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs does not come from anywhere except in large men after the back, and at the top inside, and do not bend more than because they are fat; and one knows well through inquiry on the back.
And the restoration is that you put equal pressure on the break, as it should be. And then put a poultice and strain with a gentle touch, if you need to.
And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain and pricking, like from pleurisy, for the bone points to the flesh; and swells to knots, and all and vomits a great deal of blood, and this is from grave sickness, and ancient ones have put great effort into it.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to push the breakage away.
We do not do this unless abscesses hot come from it, if they have not already come. And if it has come, then let it heal.
And some of us say that you put poultices on the site, to suck strongly, and it seems like a reason; however, there is doubt whether the poultice will attract the superfluities to the site due to the weakness.
And some of us say that one should cover the site with moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to put equal pressure around, then be cured by the cure of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the bone which points to the flesh, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut on top of the broken ribcage, and put below an instrument to ward off the pus; and then one must saw the bone, and pull gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound together if they are large, and cure with poultices until they are healed. And if abscesses hot come, then put on moist cloths in rose oil, and put it on the site; and cure for as long as is necessary to abscess, and be patient so that the bone heals where it should, until they are healed.
of the breaking of the neck
Sometimes comes breaking at the neck bone, and rarely does it bend; and also at the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you see that they will be healed or not, if you take notice if you see their hands softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that in many dispositions it is mortal, and if they stiffen and feel well when one stretches and pricks them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one applies a cure to it.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you see that it will be healed or not, if you take notice if the feet are softened, and if the accident is in the hands, and on the back there is ventosity and egestion without voluntary movement; and when one has been soothed on their stomach, there is egestion without voluntary movement. And when it is soothed on its back and it wants to settle, it cannot. Know that it is mortal: if they do not make an effort in their cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, then it is a lighter thing.
And the cure is that you apply if there is hot abscess, put oil roset or oil of mustard egg on the spine, until it is calmed; then put on a comforting and drying poultice, and tie with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until they are healed. And if some bone comes loose, then it is necessary to cover on the key; and take out the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, then cure with ointment anointing flesh, until it is healed; and if the joint of the bone is broken, which is called the "key" of the jaw, then put your pouch in your left hand and balance it against the other hand at your power, then put on the poultice and gentle touch, if you need to; then strain, and if there is loose bone, do this, and take out the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the breaking of the hipbone
Rarely happens that the hipbone is broken, and if it does, it does not happen much more than a little shortening at the top; and it bends down, and descends downward, and comes to the patient with pain and pricking, and swelling where it breaks.
And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, until you are above the breakage; and know what kind of breakage it is and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the top, then put the breakage back in place, so that it becomes natural again.
And if the break is in the long bone, or it declines inwardly, so make the patient lie on his belly, until the restoration of that break appears. And when you have set it even, make him sit on the poultice, then put a wooden or horn splint on top of it, and hold the break still so that it does not move; and place the limb under the ribs, until the swelling is equal.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
And if the abscess is ripe, do not touch it, until the abscess is appeased, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it so as it should be, unless there is some bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder is what lies between the back and the head of the arm, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two manners: of which one is that you take a straight wooden splint of about an inch thickness, in this shape:
And tie the two ends with two straps, and bend it upwards, and make the patient sit on one seat; then throw his broken arm onto the wood, until it comes to the correct position, and has about a quarter of an inch of curvature, then bend it on some heavy thing or have the attendants stretch it down below; then place the fingers so that the break is even with their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his backrest, and holds his hand to his neck, then instructs two attendants that one should hold what is above the break with their hands, and the others should hold below each strap, and stretch each part accordingly.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold one strap below the break and above the break, and have each attendant stretch to their part. And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you place one strap in the middle under the seat, and another towards the back, under the break; and similarly if the break is towards the back, then it is necessary to put one strap lightly, without labor, until the break is even on the arm and on the back; then set the break straight, as it should be, and hold it, unless an abscess arises.
And if an abscess arises, do not hold it at all for seven days, and place a soft cloth in linen and rose oil on the abscess, until the abscess is appeased; then hold it, and the manner of holding is that you put the poultice on the break, then bring the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and put the pad, and hold it on the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is in its place without any obstacle, unless the bone is moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, with two spaces between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the break three finger-widths from each side; then hold onto the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, more strongly and less far apart.
And if you see the seat of the splints and the constriction, just as we said, in the process of restoring the broken limb, and you doubt that the abscess is hot, leave it be to bind until the seventh day, just as we said; then look at each one every three days, that itching or inflammation does not come to the place, or numbness cannot reach the member because it is too tight. If it addresses, just as we said.
And if no such accidents occur, do not remove the binding until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; and place under the shoulder a pillow made of equal-length linen, and look at each hour of the day or night to see that the shape of the broken limb does not move or become loosened; if it addresses through the power of medicine, give it food as we have said before, in such a way that the food is for the first subtleties; and when it begins to recover, it should be thick. And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be rewrapped after 40 days altogether; and then one must remove and administer baths and ointments to direct the limb towards its natural state. And if the constriction is ugly and tight, do not remove it for a day or two months.
of the break of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one of which is small, and it is that which precedes the socket; and the other is large, and it is that which is below, towards the little finger. By chance, break only the large foscile alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small fosciles are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, it is bad for the healing, and more grievous than when both are broken together. If it is the small foscile that is broken alone, then it should be slightly extended and made equal.
And if it is the large foscile, then it should be held more firmly; and extend it on a pillow, and hold the socket of the hand higher than the others, and the little fingers lower than the others, and have the patient crossed over himself, with a pillow in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch the attendants' arm to the part below his hand, or on a strap, and another attendant above. And then put it back in its natural position, according to its best form.
And if the break has pieces, then put each piece in its place, and if there is any detached that can be grasped with a horn, and you cannot restore it to its place, then file on and off, as we said before.
And if the break has a wound, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter; take care.
And if in the beginning of the restoration, hot abscesses arise, apply a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and bind the poultice subtly above, until the hot abscesses are appeased. Then remove the poultice, and put on the plaster with powdered mill dust and a lot of egg, then apply the splints, and let the splint of the break be a little stronger and larger than the others; and know that it should have 7 splints or more: either if the break is in one bone or two; and hold the break above more firmly than other parts, always less apart, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the cloths that are above the break be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and let the threads, from which it is strained, be made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And reward the limb and ligament after some days. And if some bad accidents happen to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member with hot water until those itchings are appeased; and let the member rest not too tightly. And then resume stretching, and if the ligaments are worn out and the bones loosened, and similar things, then address them.
And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you soften it a little and leave it like that for some days until the swelling comes there, and then restrain it.
And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, then do not bind it until at least 20 days or thereabouts, then loosen his arms from his neck, and make sure his shoulders are even, and beware of movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruise is restored in 30 days or 35 days, and possibly in 20 days, according to the combinations and complexions of virtues.
of the breaking of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and in the fingers, many times there occur breakings, and it happens but rarely.
And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient take a cross-legged seat and sit straight in front of him evenly; then he puts his hand on the stretched cloth, and stretches the broken bones, and sets them straight with the mirror, until they are well joined; and applies the plaster and poultices, if abscesses do not come, then he wraps it with a bandage according to the size of the limb; and it is wrapped in one fold of linen.
And if the breaking is around the belly of the finger, make a sphere with cloths, and instruct the patient to wrap it around his broken finger; and then wrap it with a long cloth, and let the bandage be as soft and gentle as the finger of the hand, and wrap it, just as it is necessary.
And if the breaking is at the tip, it is necessary that you put one bandage on top and another underneath in the finger, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the ligament between the fingers.
And if the breaking occurs in one of our fingers, such as the thumb, put it even, just as is necessary; and bind it with the finger, and if you see that you need to put a straight small bandage to lift the breaking, and do not move it; and if the breaking is on other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, put it even, and tie it with the healthy finger that comes next; or bind them all together in one, whichever seems best, or put a bandage on top, just like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot abscesses, and heal what comes forth, just as I have said.
of the broken ankle
The bone of the ankle is often broken, and one can see it clearly when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is done by binding one ligament above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then stretches each of their fingers so that they are equal to their part; and it is when the breaking is in the bone.
And if the breaking is near the root of the ankle, then one of the ligaments should be directed towards the wrist, and the other ligaments below the break. And similarly if it is near the knee, and then put the ligament under the knee, and extend downwards; then place the mirror so that the bone is even to its two hands, as long as it is according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster, and bind it, if hot abscesses do not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, then let it heal first and then return to your work and care; the binding is done in this manner. It is necessary that you wrap the breaking with one bandage of doubled cloth in two or three folds, and leaving off any superfluities; then turn the leg so that the ankle comes to the root of the knee, and put a long thread between the ankle and the leg, below the knee, and let it come up to the top; then turn above the leg and above the ankle the bandage, then place the breaking with stays, and put a stay on the bone of the leg; then apply the binding between the leg and the ankle with soft cloths to equalize the straining; then begin to bind three or four turns around the breaking; and when you go up more on the breaking, and strain less; then take hold of the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and the ankle, and tie three stays that are above, then go down to the bottom at the top of the thread, as far as the foot; and bind it, so that it does not move from its place; then let it be thus, unless an abscess or swelling or any other similar thing comes.
And if there is a problem, then unbind it, and address what comes forth, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that stick out, then it is necessary to cover them, if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to cut the flesh, and draw it further; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And at no time is the ankle broken in such a way that one puts stays on it, as in an arm or shoulder; however, in this restoration made, the patient does not feel pain.
And know that the ankle is restored in 1 day, or a little less or a little more, according to the various complexities.
of the swelling of the knee
Know that in the swelling of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, then it is only a slight crack or one small hole, and has to be all bound up, whether with a wound or without a wound, and this one knows well.
And the restoration is done by putting even what is rough to his fingers, until it is assembled as much as one can; then apply the plaster, and put a round bandage if you need it, and bind it as necessary, then reward all the dispositions that we have said for other breakings, such as hot abscesses and similar things; and give each accident what it needs, until it is healed.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "malleolus" and the other is called "fibula"; and it has all the same kind of breaking as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is done equally like that of the arm, and all the work is thus.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns all around.
And if the subtle bone is broken, then it turns forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, then one feels great pain and it can be seen well; and it turns downwards. Then apply traction, and set it straight, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the break is ugly and there are many pieces, the traction should be less and more gentle; and align according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, then take two wooden splints that encircle the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from the knee down; then envelop them in two layers of bandages above and below, and tie it in the middle in this way, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well. Some people administer one piece of wood as long as the leg, and it is made of wood, and the leg is placed to prevent movement, and properly done is what is done in the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; and cure it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no breakage, but sometimes the bones of the foot do break and at the toes, and there is only one or more conditions.
And if the bones of the foot are broken and you see these bones overlapping one another, then set the patient's foot on the ground, just as if it were going to walk; then place your own foot next to it where the bones are raised, then press down until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and below the foot a small piece of cloth with two full chests, then strain the foot gradually, after you have wrapped drapes around and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are some of the toes broken, then restore them, as we have said about the fingers; then place on each broken toe a splint according to its length, and be one pace more wide, then put beneath the foot that piece of cloth which I said, and strain it gradually; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put above each toe a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen drapery, and strain the cloth beneath the foot; and let it be so that the end of the cloth is outside the foot, so that it holds well.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I said about other breaks, since we have said them; and treat each accident as it requires.
of the breaking of the bone of the thumb
When the natural bone of a woman is broken, then make her sit enlarged, then incline her towards the back part, and let it be held by the rear; then fill the ball with cotton, and put in as much as one stone; then take away the woman, and lift the back a little at a time, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, then remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or thereabouts: the breakage will be restored, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, and tie a cord around the pertus, and blow into the bladder fully, until the bladder is emptied inside: the nature will return to the break; then fill with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of man or woman is broken, then restore it in the way we have said for the hand; and these breakages are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into them, and intends my book. For the breaks indicate the right path to restoration in many conditions: heed this accordingly.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and put it into the penis; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or thereabouts, and it will be healed quickly.
of breakage with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a breakage with a wound, whether it be great, like that of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, so that the wounds we have said give testimony.
And if the wound heals, then retain it with vinegar, or if you have nothing else, then continue to restore the breakage in the same hour, or on the same day, unless an abscess arises.
And if an abscess arises, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess is pacified, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is apparent above the knee, uncovered, then it is necessary that you set it in place lightly with your hands, to a small extension.
And if the extension is not suitable for you to set it in place evenly with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for these reasons, the surgeon must take three or four, according to what he needs in each cure of breakage; and be round and a little big, so that it does not bend at all under compression on the member during your work, and be straight ahead, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which reason the curved chisels must be placed on the visible head of the bone; and plug it once, until it returns, and be even one against the other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the head of the bone, until the instruments have possession of it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, then cut it with an instrument suitable for this purpose, or a saw or chisel, to your ability; and then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small scraps.
And when the bone is restored and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do everything to put it back in its natural place, then soak one cloth in black stiptic wine and apply it properly if it's in an open wound; and don't put any ointment or other substance on the wound unless it has oil, lest you bring about rot and corruption. Then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut off all around the covering, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not strained with the breakage; for many foolish doctors have done this and have brought about death or corrosion on the patient at times. And let the remedies be more gentle and soft than those used in other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or great, and you doubt that bad accidents will not come to it, as we have said, and you find pain at the spot, then it is not necessary to put on bandages; but instead, wrap hard cloths around, and bind them. And when you see after one day or two days a bow shape forming over the wound, then remove what you have placed on top of all wine, and put on healing ointment for wounds, like tetra-pharmaceutical ointment and similar things.
And it is necessary that you loosen the member two times a day, morning and evening, until it is fixed and healed.
And it is necessary that the members be aligned in such a way that the bow shape runs downwards smoothly.
And if it happens that way for several days, and it cannot heal but instead goes back to being bow-shaped, know that there are small pieces of bone, which is why it is necessary that you search the wound with a tent, and remove all these uneven pieces that bring about that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is said in its chapter before this. And when the bone is broken and appears on the member, as the bones of the hip or shoulder, and other similar great members, do not pull it out, for many times death comes from this, but leave it until it can be removed; by chance it will fall off after twenty days or thirty, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then let it be.
of boils that come on the swelling
We often see this after the healing of the incision, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad thing to behold the figure of the member; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural actions.
Take care then if the swelling is fresh: administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcolle, acai, and similar others, so that you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with stiptic wine or with abundance of egg white or with oil; and put it on the night in cauldrons, and bind it well, and do not remove it for several days; and then remove it, and begin another, until the swelling is gone; or you strain it on a piece of well-made cloth; for the properties of cloth are such that they take away all swellings from members; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, so cut it off above, and make the excess apparent; or you give it to any shaver, until it is gone, and care for it until it is healed.
When the breakage of the bone is restored, and after it remains weak and subtle with the member, this happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not come to nourishment in the member; or because of excessive inflammation; or because of too great movements, not at its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and make their body soft, until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths, and give them joy and comfort; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to great nourishment, and reduces swelling with lukewarm water, until nourishment comes to the member; and restore it to its natural figure.
of the twisted member after healing
When the twisted member is after restoration, and the broken bone appears, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the member all over again; many foolish men have done this in our land; and this action is blamed, and great evils come from it, and by chance death comes; but if the swelling and torture are fresh, then it is necessary to raise them with hot water, or to cook mollifying herbs, such as marshmallow leaves, roots, and mallow-like things; and make a soothing plaster, like dyaquilon well made, and take the sap of marshmallow and mix it with goose grease or oil of sesame, and apply the plaster on; or take fatty figs, and grind them with colon thistle, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And at no time is the swelling removed by continuous and prolonged wetting, but rather gentle movements are administered to the member every hour.
And if the twisting is hardened and indurated like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it is necessary to cut just up to the bone with a subtle incision; and put careful attention and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes upon someone, then it is necessary to bring it back into place right away.
For if one delays, the swelling will increase, and by chance, if it is put back into place with pain at the site; therefore, do not move it to the opposite side when it is swollen: many times this brings on shame and other pains.
However, when this happens, make the patient well again, then leave it alone until the swelling has subsided; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and care for each member as the treatment comes into its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the beginning to the end.
of the jawbones
Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: either they are a little pulled out of their place, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off saliva from the mouth so that it cannot be held, nor can one close one's mouth, and envelops one's tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself within a few days.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then it is necessary to reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts the fingers of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if it is on both sides; and the other two hands are far apart, to make them equal; and commands the patient to relax his jawbones and move them all around.
And the doctor sets it equal, so long as it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult to bring back, especially when the two jawbones are together, if they have been loosened by hot water and oil, so long as you gently reset them; do not strain too much in bringing it back, just as we said.
And when they are brought back to their place, and the patient's mouth closes well with gentle softening, then put on moist cloths in a paste made of rose oil and wax, and then bind it lightly with soft ties.
and the patient sleeps on their back, with their jaws being between two cushions, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor do they strain themselves to speak, but take light food, until the pains are gone and the jawbones are loosened.
and then ease what they want lightly, and do not bother themselves to open their mouth to eat or drink, until the jawbone is well loosened and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be brought back to their place within an hour, and are not converted back to their natural position, then fevers and habitual sickness come, and by chance, dissolution of bowels, and by chance, vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a death sentence; and many times the person dies within eight days.
of the shoulder
The shoulder cannot be dislocated from within the continuity of the ribcage and breastbone, and is dislocated sometimes to the rear, and it can be felt well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies down on their back, and stretches out their arms; then presses the dislocation strongly onto your palm, and it will return; then put on the poultice and bandage, and restrain it.
and the head of the shoulder which is towards the back cannot be dislocated; if it does not happen, and if it does dislocate at some time, then reset it to its place, just as we said; then put on the poultice and bandage, and restrain it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
and similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one way is when it dislocates at the bottom part of the armpit; and the second way is at the breastbone; and by chance, it may also dislocate above, and this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little fat, for then it jumps forth hastily; but in those who have enough fat, it jumps forth at paces, and returns at paces.
And by chance, it happens to some men that they receive a blow or breaking, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and thinks it is dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary that you examine it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known when the dislocation is downwards towards the armpit, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them obvious diversity. and you will find on the top of the shoulder a hollow, and under the armpit to the touching point of the top of the shoulder, just like an ox; and the patient cannot bring their hand back to their neck, nor move with any movements.
and also, if it is dislocated above, then it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly at the touching point.
and this type of dislocation is not difficult to bring back when it is new or if the patient is weak.
And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then puts their fists under the armpit, and lifts the joint to its place with force from above; and the minister lifts the hand, stretches it up high, then puts it back down; thus it will come forth hastily.
And if it does not come as we said in two days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the minister applies soothing and calming remedies, such as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and administers it.
then let the patient lie down on their back, and place under the armpit a block of wool that is neither too soft nor too hard, then place the doctor's heel on the block, and lift the top of the shoulder virtuously, and draw the patient's hand.
and another minister holds the patient's head, so that it does not move downwards; then this shoulder returns immediately, and if you see that it is reset in this manner:
and it is that you make someone who is taller than the patient be present, and they stand straight against the side, and push their shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another minister draws the patient's hand down towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, then something heavy can be placed with them, and the dislocation returns now.
And it is also done in another way: and it is that one sets a long iron rod in the ground, which is as long as a pistol, and neither too big nor too small. then it is placed under the patient, but with soft cloths on top, and the patient's arm is stretched down from the other side forcefully, and the joint will return to its place hastily.
and if it does not want to return after all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a rod of two arms and three fingers in width, which has the head rounded so as to fit easily into the hollow under the armpit, according to this shape:
then bind soft cloths on the head of the wood, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; and stretch one's arm over the long rod, and tie the assistance to the rod, and the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm on one shoulder of a narrow cloth of the same width, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, however it may be, you must put under the armpit an equal wool sphere, then apply the plaster around it with flour powder mixed with incense and egg white on all the shoulder and around, then strain it under the armpit properly, and turn the cloth over the plaster, and wrap the hand around one's neck, and let the remaining hands be in this manner.
And it is necessary that he massage little, until the limbs are comforted, for it will heal sooner; and then massage more after five days or seven, and move him; and if it is firm and is not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply cauterizations to three small openings, as described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this and it relapses after seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift his arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation that is next to the breast or shoulders, or behind, is caused by impulse and stretching of hands, and it is necessary to apply another treatment; and cure until it is healed.
And if after the healing comes swelling in the member and tardiness of movement, then the patient should take many baths until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in points, and returns to those points; and it is dislocated from all sides, just as much before and behind, and the dislocation is not restored, for one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocates according to each figure. And when you bring the sick shoulder together with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is distorted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus before apostemes come to it, for if apostemes come to it, then it would be difficult to reset; and in any case cannot be fully reset from top to bottom, especially when it is behind; and it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and in any case death comes.
And the restoration is such that when it can be reset like this, you extend his hand to your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands on either side of the shoulder around, above and below, and bring the jointure together with its tendons or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and fixes the root of the palm to the shoulder that is out of place.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and know that two people should extend the arm, and hold it firmly with two people, so that it does not move in the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth around.
and when the hands join the joint to its place, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, and then bring the joint together firmly, until it returns.
and when it is in place, then put on dry plaster with some egg white, and strain firmly, and wrap the arm around the patient's neck, and let it stay for some days, then release.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the cloth, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not bind well, then reapply the plaster and the cloth, and let it be like this for some days, until it is firmly set; then release.
And if he feels swelling after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe him and rub gently, and press until it is relieved; or you put a fat sheep's wool on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then take it off, and make him enter the bath. and when he bathes, gently rub the joint, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see that it needs to be done, then put on moist heated vetch hay with butter, and strain on it; it will return to its natural state.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates and the return is gentle, more than other joints. Nevertheless, it is necessary to bring it back to its place quickly, in the same manner as it has dislocated, so that the swelling subsides or an abscess does not form hotly.
And the resetting is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the fingers, and have the patient place it evenly, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and brings it together until it returns.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place; then have the patient put the back of his hand on a table at extension and resetting. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient put the back of his hand on the table, and the doctor place their hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it's good.
If not, then apply soothing plaster to calm the hot abscesses, and leave it like that without reapplying.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the bent joint will remain.
and does no harm to the patient except for as long as the hands are softened, and cannot strain anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; there is no other reason for this except to strain by cauterizing the case, and in any case it is not worth anything.
And when the hands are in place, then put on the plaster that we have said, and strain it and leave it for five days, then release and leave it like that.
And if he cannot move it well and there is some swelling, then soak it in hot water, and rub it gently until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At no time are the fingers of the hand dislocated to each side, at no time on the back of the palm or belly.
Then bring the finger and push the dislocation into your pouches until it recedes, then support the head of the finger and guide it towards the part where it is separated.
and let it be for two days, and then put it back in place that day; and next tie it up, as we have said, and loosen it the next day, and make it move, and tie it to the nut again; and do this often until it is straight.
and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do it just as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated on the other side.
from the displacement of the spine of the back.
When the spine of the back or of the neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, and there is no treatment, for the dead hasten the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations spring forth without will, nor can they be held, and many times certain members become soft, or both knees or one arm.
And many times the spine moves to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gibositez".
The treatment is that you restore what has come from childhood; if there is no treatment or healing of the whole.
And that which comes from falling or percussion or similar things, the old ways of cures by great words, where there is not much benefit in all.
but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gibositis that comes at the breast before, there is neither sense nor health;
and also that which comes directly in two sides, and one can cure only the proper one that comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be spread out on his face in one place even, and have a strain underneath him, so he does not get hurt.
then thrust one hot iron into the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a string across the joints of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
and two ministers know the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two irons.
and be well closed, the iron as we have said, and the patient put his palms on the spine firmly, until it recedes.
And if it does not recede by this cure, then take a piece of wood three arm-lengths long and hollowed out underneath the appearance, and have the patient lie on their side, and push the head of the wood under the appearance, then put the middle of the wood on the spine; and put the patient's feet on the other head of the wood and press well until it recedes to its place; and if you see, then do it at the turn that turns towards the hand.
And it is that you thrust two irons at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet two others, and have between each iron, above and below, a palm's length of space.
and have in each iron one perforation, where the turner runs, and let the irons be firmly in the earth, so that they do not move; and between each two irons is one turning iron, on which the string turns, and have in each two turnings two small irons a palm's length long, to turn the turner.
and then tie the string that is between the joints to the turner towards the head, and the other string towards the feet to the other turner, and each of the ministers turns their turner on all the string, and the master puts the spine in place as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on a drying poultice with plenty of egg white, and then apply the poultices, and then wrap in a cloth three fingers long that will straighten out the gibositis and make the part of the spine healthy, and then tie with a string as we have said, and use gentle rubbing on the patient until they are healed.
and if nothing comes in the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines with the cloth that we have said before; and sometimes one must give a piece of parchment.
and sometimes the appearance comes to the back of the spine of the back, and think that it is dislocations; and it is the bone that opens up, therefore one must not have presumption: by chance it would bring death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder do not come forth except dislocations alone, nor does it come so as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to three parts: inward and outward, and before and behind; and more inward than outward, and less before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens up more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double their kneecap on fire. and it is the place that is below inflamed apostemes hot, because the head of the femur comes away.
And the sign of one to whom it happens at the outside is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the signs of one to whom it happens at the front are that they are well set straight with their leg according to completion; yet, do not double the kneecap without pain, and if you want him to walk, he cannot beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells the anger, and when he walks, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of one to whom it happens at the back are that he cannot spread his kneecap, nor double it, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and is the head of the femur in place below the ribs.
The remedies of this kind of dislocation are that you restore if the dislocation is old and remains according to its disposition, since there is no treatment; and it is not necessary for him to have any presumption.
And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the three kinds of dislocations, then hasten to return the joint, inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will come back, and there will be no need for another treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must appear with one strong servant, and have the leg held firm by two hands or one ligature at the hipbone level. and another servant extends his hand above in the same manner that he places his hands under his armpits, then tightens a soft ligature on the hip; and one other takes hold of the head of the ligature.
and they stretch up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at one time, and remains suspended.
This manner of stretching is common to three similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then you must apply a remedy to its similarity. When the dislocation is in the pelvis, then you should support the patient on his side with good health, then place the ligature on the root of the hip, and the lever which is below the angle, then stretch the ligature up towards the angle, and towards the forceps;
then take another servant's arms, and wrap the thick lever of the sick hip, and stretch it outward strongly: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft ligature on the two heels, and on the two shins, and let the sick leg be stretched two fingers more than the others.
then be hung from the head of a beam, and be suspended above the ground two arms long; then command one servant to wrap around the head of the hip, and let another servant hang alongside the patient, who wraps around the hip strongly, for the joint is returning now quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the end, then lie down the patient, as we have said in one who has gilbosity, and stretch one ligature properly on the sick leg, and also on the thigh.
then put two brands, one at the head and one at the foot, then stick one brand between the hips of the patient in the middle form. and have damp cloths wrapped around, so that it does not hurt the patient, then stretch each servant towards him, and the physician sets equal to his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, place on the table and press thus as we have said in gilbosity, and let the patient lie down on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, then it is necessary to stretch the sick leg quickly, and according to what I said; and place the physician's hand on the angle of the sick hip, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the end, then it is not necessary to stretch the patient downward or lift him up onto the earth, but rather that he be thus as if his hip were dislocated at the end, as we have said about lying down on two hips. and be on his face, and the ligature stretched as we have said before, and he must not press on the joint at the table.
and it will be fixed when the patient stretches his legs and they are equal; then adjust the hips, and apply an ointment, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and if he rests for three or four days, then loosen it, and apply the ointment on top; and if you see that they are equal, then strain as before, and leave him. For three days; then loosen it, and let him walk pleasantly, until the limbs are comforted.
of the hip joint dislocation
The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inward and outward, and backward; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not return to its hip, know that he is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet.
then take his knee in your palms and draw it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee strongly; and another servant stretches out his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg slightly to his hip.
and apply an ointment on top, and make the leg return to its hip, and tie it together firmly for three or four days, then loosen it; and do not trouble the patient to walk until the limbs are comforted.
And if the limbs are not in order, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
of the ankle joint dislocation
The ankle is sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inwardly and outwardly.
And the sign is that the ankle is inflamed, and tender before the part where it is dislocated:
the remedy is gentle, and one must stretch it gently with their hands when it is only swollen.
And when it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright, and hold one servant firmly by the leg, above the ankle;
then bring the foot to you and hold it with your right hand, then with your left hand two times, then stretch it up, and bend the foot upwards nicely.
and do this two times, as we have said, by bending and stretching the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then repeat the work, for it will return.
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a pad firmly in the earth between his hips, and wrap cloths around, so that it does not hurt the patient.
then hold the hip with one servant, and another servant stretches out the foot to their hands or to a ligature, which they tie on the ankle of the foot. then stretch each servant equally, and the pads be thus between the patient's hips to hold the patient when one is stretching.
then place the mirrors equally on both sides of the dislocation in your hands, and another servant holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the point, then apply the poultice and bandages above, and bind strongly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves which are on the ankle behind, so that the ligament is not too tight.
Then let it rest for two or three days, and if the ligament has relaxed, then loosen; then release on the fourth day or quarter, and prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if the abscesses burst forth, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healed.
you must
When the joints are dislocated, you should stretch them gently without working hard, and it is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any way of the back or foot of the leg, you should make the patient sit on one plain or six feet tot straight, and put your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press with your foot strongly, until it returns.
and when it is even, and there appears nothing, then put under the sole of the foot a board at two feet, then bind strongly, and let it rest for three days, then release; and make him rest, until he is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often happens that the patient dies:
so don't be presumptuous in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful and slow, not at all hasty;
and take a calming approach to the beginning of things, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you don't see hope for health. and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, so that the abscesses burst forth;
and when the member is at place, then administer calming things to hot abscesses, and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with dried ointments.
and if there is a break with the dislocation, and small bones loosened, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth moving you according to your Creator, and by the knowledge of your arm and body. Amen
