Here is the translation: And it has come to me in vision that I will complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is unknown throughout all, so the science is perished and decayed, and nothing remains except for the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and the science is estranged.
Or it seems to me that I will bring it back to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of instruments for cauterizing and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation, as is necessary.
And because for this reason no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is necessary for the one who undertakes this to ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the proportions of members, and their forms and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and their movement and rest, and the location of their origin.
And therefore Hippocrates says that a name without a name is much, and with work is little; and the same thing is true in the art of hand.
We warn you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not familiar with the things said above, beware lest he fall into error and kill men; thus I have wished many times for those who undertake this science to abandon their ignorance and lack of experience.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut open an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; therefore so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead between his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone from an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he carried off with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the great size of the stone, and knew well that if it was not removed he would die.
And I saw another surgeon who took in charge the leg of a duke from our land, which was broken and had an open wound; and the ignorant surgeon stretched the break over the wound by force, and did not leave the wound any dressing, and left it thus for some time; and commanded that he should not be removed, and so remained until the leg became all inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him and I hastened to come to loosen the leg; and when I had loosened it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But in any case the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was entirely lost.
And I saw another surgeon who opened up an abscess that had become inflamed and then spread through the evil of his authority.
For a chancre, when it is purged of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless one can remove all that which is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that the foolish surgeon cannot speak evil of you.
So take your instruments in hand, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that through the mercy of God you come to salvation and are praised; and leave the frightful diseases of grievous sickness; and put away your doubts from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come to this world to another of glory.
Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not take care of a bad disease unless you are called a foolish surgeon."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterization and medical cauterization, and it is the chapter organized from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauterizing, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized with forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twistings, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, with forms of instruments.
Therefore that we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and the harm of each temperament.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is a longer speech and subtle science, and secret answers; and many wise men have spoken about this and agreed with it; and I am short on their words, for I fear the length.
I say that cauterization helps universally to all temperaments where there is matter, except for two temperaments: namely, hot temperament with matter and dry temperament with matter.
In hot and dry temperament with matter, some divided and said that cauterization is great help; while others said the opposite: that cauterization is of no use in diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured with heat or dryness; and says he who said the opposite that cauterization does great help in hot and dry diseases that come into the bodies of men. For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this saying. For I have found it to be true on many occasions through experience.
And in any case, do not meddle with it except he who has experienced it and knows through long usage the chapter on cauterization, and the diversity of human temperaments, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the remedies and expectations of the time; we have no fear for other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors assembled and agreed on cauterization.
And know, son, that cauterization with fire is part of the secrets of cures, and of greater virtue than cauterization by burning medicines.
For fire is simple, and does not go beyond the member that is burned, and does not harm another member unless it is named.
Burning medicines come from one member to another, and bring harm to the sick person with grievous sanitation; and by chance, they kill the patient.
The fire because of its purity and the goodness of its substance does not cause harm unless there is excessiveness.
And I have found this by experiment and the long experience and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things; and because of this, I excuse myself for the length of my speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is revealed in fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases of the body, as philosophers say in demonstrating; so receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all cases, because the ensuing harm is removed by the aid of cauterization; and similarly, if the cauterizations are for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait for a greater evil to come to the member.
And never think it, dear son, as foolish doctors do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and they say so; but it's not so as they think, because cauterizations are not just medicine that changes complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of pain, and surpasses medicine in its speed and value, and for the virtue of its work and authority.
And it is possible that the disease comes to some extent according to the complexion of the patient and the place where the disease is located and its virtue; and excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of food and similar things, unless it is cauterization administered at the right time or place where there is excess moisture, as with cauterizations for denseness causing pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicine, but their intention is false, and it is cauterization that is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for some disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is effective. Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauterization with gold is more effective than with iron, and they did not say this unless it was due to the quality of the gold and the purity of its substance; and they said that the place of cauterization does not cause corruption, but this is not true for I have tested it, and I have found that it is true in some men; and gold cauterizations are more effective than iron, as they said.
And yet, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down soon; and if you heat it too much, it becomes ruined at the fire; and thus there is enough obstruction.
And therefore we use fire cauterization because we have found it to be suitable for our work.
And I have ordered this chapter from the beginning to the end, so that the view may be more light for you to find.
of the olive cauterization
This cauterization is worth against moisture and cold on the head, and there are two ways in which it is done due to the cause of a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and because of excessive dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and similarly for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cauterization is that the patient be purged by a dissolving medicine, moistening the head three or four times, according to what the virtue and age and habit of the patient can endure; and then restore the patient's head.
And then make him sit crossed in your hands, and put his hands on the weight; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let your two thumbs come together, so it will bleed a little, then cauterize the "olive" cautery which is this form:
And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make it descend and spread your hand little by little in rotating; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see the bone one small step away; and if you don't see it, start the cauterization again until you see the bone as I told you. After that, take a piece of silk, and put it in a soft and moist cotton filling, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days. Then apply a moistened cloth to butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed. Finally, treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmakon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, it purges more thoroughly; and therefore it is more effective.
And some of them said that one should cauterize as much so that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
And the others say that one should cauterize as much above, and push so hard until the bone is worn away as wide as a thimble used by women to let the humors escape; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; after which one should treat and soothe it.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be entirely good in all respects, except perhaps in some people who have a tendency towards fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it alone; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we see in other members; and similarly when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salutary and conducive to health for me, and with this principle I work in all cases.
from ancient pain of the head
When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, the patient should use year's powder and pills called "cochie", and for purging of the head, oils and emplasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have previously said, it does not help.
Take care if the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then apply a cautery below that previous one.
After, apply a cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery at the place called "vasselz"; and there is one place where you put poultices; and hold your hand so that you don't see just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations on the horns be more subtle than those used for cauterizing the middle part of the head, and that's the form:
of the head cautery When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and spreads to the eye, and the patient's head is purged by medicinal medicines, and all other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are tried, and none of this does any good: then make cauterizations according to two ways, that is to say, with medicinal water and fire.
The cauterization with medicinal water is such that you take a dose of almonds, remove the skin and crush it into one part as two heads, and then make the temple where the pain holds in this way so that you can place the almond dose under the skin; and when it is placed, bind and tighten it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; then release it and let the almond juice flow away, and leave the wound thus for 2 or 3 days; then put a cloth soaked in butter on it as long as the pus issues.
After the ointment cure as long as it is healed; and if you see that this does not help, then make use of some burning medicines that I have written about or in the treatise on burning medicines.
The cauterization with fire is such as follows this manner. Heat the cautery according to the form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or a horn with a small curve, and it has a little bit of a rounded appearance; and one puts it on the painful place, and holds your hand and turns the fire slightly, so that the middle part of the core is burned; and lift your hand lest the artery burn, which is outside, and stop the abundance of blood.
After put cotton in oil of silk, and put it on the place for 3 days; then I put moistened cotton in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at all points, and take care not to cut off the artery in this migraine which is not an old one.
of migraine
When you cure migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauterizations previously described from medicine and fire do not benefit, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and afterwards place it on the painful place a line half a digit long, and take your hand once, and strain so that you do not cut off the artery and come just to the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when eating, and the nerve has regard only for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the cessation of blood from the artery when it is cut, or the cutting be great fear and especially for one who does not know, and who is not a student or experienced; and leave the work in my way; but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not benefit the disease, and the patient is suffering, then cauterize the enemy in the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
of ear pain from coldness
When ear pain comes from coldness and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", according to the form:
After, puncture all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and remove a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place to puncture; and make 10 punctures around each ear; then cure the wound until it is healed.
of mouth torture
Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not except those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make a cauterization on similar things that come from scorching and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torture that moves from phlegm and from purging of the head and gargling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, and another a little outside the temple, and the third in the joint of the two lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery near the head of the ear above a small piece of bone, and another on the temple as long as a pea; and leave the cautery until the middle part of the core is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
And this is similar to the "cultellare" that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the knife be a little thicker; afterwards, cure the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cauterization is on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
From lethargy
To this disease it is good to give the patient great pills and powder-like things for the brain; afterwards, he should rub the chief of the patient all over, and put on top of the back of the head a poultice of mustard as written in the treatise on poultices; and this is the manner of cauterization: if he does it just as I have said.
If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, then make three cauterizations around the head, descending just to the neck, and leave a space of one or two fingerbreadths between each cauterization; and cure him as with the others, and if you see any swelling or inflammation, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure until he is healed; and that cauterization which is called "olivare", just as I have said before.
from chill of the head It is necessary that the head be purged with years and what we have said before; afterwards, rub the patient's head, then make a cauterization in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is spreading, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most of the burn is done, and lift your hand; afterwards, cure him until he is healed, and that cauterization which is called "olivare" as we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cauterization unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to purge the brain with years and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is large and suffering from poor medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer it, make him gargarism and mastication to purge the brain often with good meats; afterwards, rub the head in the middle, and make one cauterization as we have said before, and one on the base of the skull, and on each horn; and if the patient is spreading and suffering, make cauterizations just as I have said for someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let it be the "olivier" cauterization according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is an infant, make one subtle cauterization in this manner:
When by the cause of melancholy the superfluities or moistures are corrupted and thick phlegm is formed, then make those cauterizations as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him something to drink that will purge the brain, according to what is said before in the division.
After rubbing the patient's head, after make one bandage of well-made linen, like a circle, and put it on top of the head; and the patient should be crossed, and held tightly from all sides; afterwards, apply the ointment, and anoint with butter of ancient herbs; and heat it over temperate fire, so that the patient can bear to have it poured on them; after, empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this for the patient once a week for good governance, until they are healed.
Or if you see that the cauterization is not taking effect, then make more punctures at once on the entire cauterization. This manner of cauterization moistens the brain sufficiently; and then put on wet cotton cloth smeared with butter and goose fat.
of the eyes' evil When evil comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that purifies the head, and watch out for all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
After that, command the patient to rub their head backwards, and make a cauterization in the head, and make two cauterizations on each temple if the evil descends from one eye to the other together, or if it descends from one to one; and seal all the veins and arteries that are under the scalp, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and watch out for hemorrhage of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and at incision how to stop the bleeding; and never make a cauterization or incision under the two bones behind.
of the tears of the heart
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins or below the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is cold, phlegmatic superfluity, then make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the evil descending to the eyes: one cauterization in the head, two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations or incisions under the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize carefully above the eyebrow for every small cauterization.
of the tears of the heart within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cooked figs to drink; afterwards, rub the head, and make a cauterization in the middle of the "olivary" cauterization; and make two cauterizations of the "clavilis" cauterization on each eyebrow, a little below the hairline; and watch out for the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this "olivare" cauterization. This is its form:
And if you see that it makes two cauterizations on each eyebrow, as long as the eyebrow is; and do not leave your hand there except until one-third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that points the eye Never has it happened that the eyelashes are converted to the inside and point at the eye, and make cauterizations in two ways: namely, by fire or by burning medicine.
Or cauterization by fire: command the patient to leave the eyelashes as long and equal as they are; and if they point at their birth, then bind his eyes so that they do not move until they have been born.
When they are born and are equal, then place the patient in a warm bath; afterwards mark on the paper with eyes an image that is like the leaf of myrtle, and note the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then apply moist cotton to the eye in egg white and persimmon juice, then warm the cautery whose form is this:
After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked bit by bit many times, so that the burns are spread out around; and the signs of the health of the work are when you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the level of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be like this for three days, then apply moist cotton in butter until the blister is removed; afterwards anoint with ointment until they are healed.
And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then start again with the cautery on the same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level and is even, and do not prick the hairs into the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment form of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coal, each one third, and mix them together well; and do this quickly, so it does not cool down, then place it on the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper with eyes; and if the disease stays in one eye only, then work on one, and if in both alike; and apply moist cotton under the eye in egg white; and the patient's head is in a warm bath and place your two fingers showing on the medicine, and press a little bit at a time every time the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, because they feel it like fire. When you have done this for a long time, then take away the medicine from your hand. And when the stinging has passed, then lift up the area of skin, and see if the paper is raised like it was lifted by the constriction of fire or incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then apply more medicine to the area or the medicine will have no effect, until your work is even and your eyes are in place; then put on moist cotton in butter until the burned area cools down, afterwards cure the skin with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
And if you must be careful with your work by great vigilance that the medicine does not harm the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then start again with the medicine on the same place which is softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; after curing until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these you must make your constrains; and do not assume the right path for one who has no study of this art.
(Note: This appears to be a new section header, indicating that the text is about to describe a different medical procedure or treatment.)
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not help, then it is necessary that you make it cauterized according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put their head in your warm bath; and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor will they take their head away; afterwards apply moist cotton in egg white or persimmon juice to the eye; afterwards warm the cautery which is this: and shape it into a curved form like a vulture's beak, together with the cautery; if you see, then mark from one end of the head to the other, and if you see, then make it like a tent; but all the same, what is shaped will move for your work.
Afterwards compress the fistula if it is open, and remove any purulence and dryness; and if it is closed, then open it up and pull out the plug; afterwards apply the hot cautery strongly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the eye above the pupil, so that your hands do not become foolish; and put the cautery into the fatty part of the eye and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just up to the bone, then it would be good. If not, then restart the cautery again once, and if necessary again, and let it be for three days; afterwards apply moist cotton in butter, and the drying ointment treatment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the cure according to what comes into its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that no ancient said. Understand by fistula, and cut the skin; afterwards put into the incision one subtle camel hair of this form: and make it to the quantity of one third of a lump; and hold your hand or camel hair firmly, and do not let the patient move until the lump melts into their eye; and it is necessary that you apply moist cotton in egg whites or in awe: the lump thus cures the fistula, and brings about marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed through the cautery that we have said, it's good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice to the eye, and bring back the fistula to its proper place in the eye according to what is needed in its own natural location.
(Note: This appears to be a new section header, indicating that the text is about to describe a different medical procedure or treatment.) Many times there occur cracks in lips called "fissures", and similarly in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then warm a small surgical cauterizer according to this form:
And apply it quickly into those cracks until it becomes full; afterwards cure the skin with cerote until it is healed.
(Note: This appears to be a new section header, indicating that the text is about to describe a different medical procedure or treatment.)
When aposteme comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate, or at the roots of the teeth; and it festers and rots and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help: then it is necessary that you make a cauterization according to the size of the fistula; afterwards plug or stop the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes hot at the fontanelle and behind the ear; and do so once or twice, after the treatment as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it's good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the skin and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
of movement of teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't work, then put the patient's head in your hand; afterwards sharpen the cautery so that the form will come after in this manner as if you were putting a cord on a tooth; and put hot hastily inside the cautery and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift up your hand and restart the cautery according to your pleasure; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salted water, and let it stay an hour and rich fever.
And in this manner the teeth that were moving are fixed, and the gums softened are restrained, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
of the pain of the teeth
When the pain of teeth comes from coldness, whether there is cold or heat, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize in two ways: cauterizing with butter and cauterizing by fire.
Cauterizing with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end of it in an iron or clay spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and soak it in hot butter, and put it on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and thus do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the painful tooth, and put a hot iron on top until the fire comes to the crown of the tooth.
The cauterizing with fire is such that you take a cord of iron or clay, and it should be thick so that the fire does not come to the patient's mouth; afterwards heat the cautery, for which the form will come after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the excitement of that cautery, and then rich fever; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion through medicines, then sharpen the cautery so that its form will come after, and have two openings for the fumes to escape from one side of the cautery; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice as needed, until it comes to the root of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then cauterize according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put a moist cloth in butter until the inflammation is removed; afterwards care for the joint with ointments and tents until it is healed.
When the moisture prevails on the channels of the peritoneum, and indeed when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with soluble medicines; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the neck, and take care not to come too close to the neck, nor burn the skin but just a little. Afterwards make another cautery at the jointure of the neck above the spine, and this is the cauterizer called "clavicle" for which we have the form before; and care for the joint as we have said before until it is healed.
of the throat When all and every disease of the peritoneum are of cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or heat, and is an old illness, then make two cauterizers on the navel in the usual place; and one other cauterizer inside the chest between the breasts; and this is the cauterizer called "clavicle" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see, make a cauterize in piercing at the whole of the cauterizer which is called "point" where the form is as described before in the disease of the ears; and be the points up to thirty, or around that. Afterwards care for the joint according to what was said before, and be the cauterizers at three days according to this form:
And therefore are the cauterers lighter, because you make them in triplicate.
of the dislocation of the shoulder (unchanged translation from earlier) Afterwards be careful of the patient on their back and on their side; afterwards lift up the skin which is inside the titillate with your left hand; and if the jointure is dislocated inside, then sharpen the cauterizer which has two horns as described before:
and cauterize the skin until it is pierced all the way to the side, and the figure of the cauterization will come with three cauterizers; and for this reason is made the cauterizer with the cauterizer which has three horns, because the figure of cauterization are six cauterizers; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cauterizer which has three horns:
And once is added to that one nerve for which there are eight cauterizers.
Afterwards put on the cauterizer powder mixed with silk; afterwards make the patient rest, and do not move their limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little harm will come, then make a cauterization on the thick part of the clavicle cauterizer or many cauterizers in piercing. For the joint has been reformed, and the moisture has been removed, and the patient is healed.
of the cauterizing for pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make cauterizers for pleurisy using roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm; soak it in oil, and put it on the fire, and cauterize one cauterizer between the navel and the neck, and two small cauterizers a little lower down in the part that is below the beard; and two cauterizers between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little; and one cauterizer inside the chest, and one other on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the ribs outside the cauterizer that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it appear openly just as in smelling.
And they say that some old person uses a fire cauterization similar to a razor, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and suddenly the pain stops, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
Of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse according to what we have said about the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways of cauterization that are all good.
One of these ways is that you make three or four cauterizations in lining up according to the length of the mouse, following the figure of the liver cauterization that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient be aware on his back.
And another way of cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer which has two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the key which is near the mouse, or where the patient's ribs come from the left side, and be the elevations which you lift the key according to the key, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizer be according to the width of the body.
Then put the two handles in flames so that the key is perceived from the other side, and then remove the cauterizer, and thus there will be four. And if you see, then cauterize all the cauterizer with three handles. After curing, when it has given rise to inflammation for a long time, and this is better than the other cures previously said.
of dropsy
Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except for the method which is called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary to make four cauterizations around the mouth, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the mouse, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cauterizations be well-nigh the spear of the key.
Then leave the cauterization open to get rid of inflammation for a long time, and do not cease the cure of the patient after the cauterization; and recovery will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
The form of the cauterizer for the belly is the key that we have shown before; and that one for the back is olive-like, according to what was said before.
of the swelling of the pines When the pines are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are full of yellowish moisture, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular bones; and lift your hand with the cauterizer so as not to turn around. And do not go too deeply into the flesh, lest the yellowish moisture flows forth, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Then make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the calcanean bone; and let the cauterization be long, one under the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterization open for a long time without curing, until the yellowish moisture is gone; after that, cure the patient with the other cures that we have said.
of menstruation
When the flux of the womb comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by any methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great virtue, then make one large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been said before about the stomach cauterization at the cauterization of the belly, and three fine cauterizations around the mouth as delicate as each key is subtle, and two cauterizations on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abounding and the patient suffering, then make one cauterization on the navel, and one cauterization on each rib, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, because the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are at the fundament, or one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely behind the almighty pec and pec in triangulating, and one cauterization under the mouth. Two should be done.
And if you think that the stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then make one great cauterization on the stomach, as said before, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse all around the key; and leave the cauterization open for a long time. After that, cure the patient until they are sound.
of the swelling which is called "Thelul"
When you cope with Thelul, then heat the cauterizer which seems like a razor, and then set it on fire all around that Thelul to be coped; and I leave my hand there as long as the cauterization comes to the edge of the vein, so that the blood does not flow; do this once or twice, and if there is much Thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after that, cure with ointments which are beneficial until they are sound; and if you cauterize with a great cauterizer on Alchatim, it will have greater aid.
of an ill-cured wound
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes this disease which cannot be healed except by cauterization.
When a fistula comes and is inflamed and discharges putridity and corrupted moisture, you must prove to be as subtle as the finest tent and know exactly how deep it has entered. After that, heat the cauterizer which seems like a razor and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the tent has entered, and continue to apply the cauterization until those putrid and corrupted parts are burned away, once, or twice, or three times, depending on the quantity of what is needed; and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the great veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, then beware of these places and do not make a fire anywhere except in a charred place, and think that it is not yet perished; after that, cure the patient until they are sound, and if the lesion is sealed and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the lesion is completely healed; and if the matter is not removed, know that the lesion is torn and corrupted the bone to the fontanelle; and thus as one of those who we will say in its place.
From the disease of the kidneys When the pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and great windiness, and does not take on a woman's shape, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other at the cauterizing nail that we have previously said; and if we were to cauterize in mid-air, there would be .iii. cauterizations in line, and they will do more great help.
Of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the part behind the bladder, where the hairs of the urethral opening begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each should be as long as a thumb's breadth; and make one cauterization behind the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauterizations be nail-like according to the form previously said.
Of the womb When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for that reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are late; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the mouth, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterizations be nail-like, as we have said.
Of the intestines
When the viscous moistures descend to the cecum of the intestines, and because of this they move out of their place, and the sign is that the hip is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the swelling of the departure vein is there, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the cecum of the intestines at one cauterization like a circle, and sign before the swelling around the cecum as it turns, so that the cecum is inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those by which we have cauterized the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three great cauterizations of the olive-like shape, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the keys; and heal until it is sound.
Of the pain in the intestines When pain comes to the cecum of the intestines, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure does not prevail, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or other good-looking pills similar to these.
After that, make a cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization. Fire cauterization is according to many ways, one of which is this: that you cauterize on the cecum of the intestines three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make good depth and great, and have between each cauterization a space the size of a thumb, and let the cauterizations be olive-like; sometimes make a cauterization in mid-air above the head of the intestines, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then cauterize at the cauterization of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the intestines; but make it in this way so that the circles contain all the intestines, and all the keys of the keur are burned.
And this is the manner in which one does it in sciatica, when the pain stays in the intestines and does not reach as far as the hip or leg. And if it reaches as far as the hip and leg, then make two cauterizations there where the patient says that the pain lies to him, and one cauterization above the ankle three thumbs' breadth, a little to the left; and let the cauterizations be cutellate, and let the keur's thickness be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as two inches of the foot or almost there, then cauterize where he feels the pain .iii. points or .iiii. at the cauterization which is called "points".
And if it is necessary to do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the kneecap towards the hip, then make a cauterization at the cutellate or circular cauterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen more than one who made a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was entirely inflamed, and the toes also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the toes. After a purging of the belly which caused his death.
And if the pains are in both parts together, make a cauterization in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Here is the translation:
Albucasim says that we should use this cautery not from fear of its gaze, and if few people are seen who use it; yet this is one of the good cauteries which can be endured, and there where it applies.
from the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from too great evacuation, or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these likenesses is worth a cautery except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary afterwards that the patient be relieved of fetid pills or similar things, and then one makes three lines marked on the back, where the pain lies, with 5 cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be made according to the "poins" cautery; and if you see fit, make 3 or 4 cauteres at the cauterized middle point in this form:
Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow, tight feeling when they wake up, and fear; and you find it in the lower back and also on the appearance that comes over other vertebrae.
When you see this and you wish to cure it, then cauterize at the "celcle" cautery according to this form.
And let the cautery strike each part of the vertebra equally. And if you wish, then cauterize around the vertebra at the "poignant" cautery 2 or 3 lines, and the points should be close to one another. After the cure, leave it alone until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cautery in girbosity which is near a nerve in spasms.
from the pain of joints
When pain of joints is from moisture that is spread out to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which doctors properly call "podagre", and when it is caused by cold matter and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a large number of cauteres around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-like according to this form.
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, make a cautery all along the "point" cautery. And if pains come as far as the knees and to other joints, and this happens many times, then make a cautery on each knee 3 or 4 times, with the whole olive-like cautery; and if you need more, then make more, but do not keep your hand there longer than until the skin of the key is burnt.
And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are to the hands, then make points around the wrist 2 lines; and if there remains any pain to the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come as far as the shoulders or as far as the armpits, then cauterize each part, and do good governance to the patient and administer medicines. For if you do good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed with the help of God.
from the itch of the scalp
When itch comes to the angles, and the boils descend to the groin and it is new, then it is necessary that when you see it cured, it does not get worse that day; and that it uses things that make the belly loose, so that the phlegm descends from its stomach; after which have it sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the boils are healed, and then bring them to your feet, and sign with a line below the itch on the bone of the pointing, and make all one sign like half a circle above the body; then shape the cautery according to this form:
until it is white and he gives out sighs. Then bring the boils back to their place; and have someone hold his hand so that they do not return; and work well on the patient's hips, and put a cushion and a servant under him, and another one on the chest holding his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, start again and continue until you reach the bone; and be careful subtly that the boil does not burst when you make the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that by this the patient does not die or suffer from another evil.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children are subtle according to their measure, and those of adults also great according to their measure; after 3 days, cure the wound of the cautery with butter until the scabbing is removed; after which, treat other wounds until he is healed, and have the patient lie down on his back for 40 days until the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that his nourishments be made to last long, so that the boil does not burst when he needs to go to chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, have a well-made bandage applied to him, and let it be worn for another 40 days; and have good rest, that he not overexert himself and beware of excessive consumption of drink and food, and high boasting; and when he has received this instruction, he is entirely healed. And I will say later on in his chapter the cure of tailoring. from the itch of the belly
When itches come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make one cautery of the same quantity as the others, and let the third part of the key be burned; after which cure according to what we have said; and some of the old ones say that one should cauterize at the cautery at 3 angles according to this form:
but mark the first sign on the line of enche and make one line across the itch above it, and another below it, and bring your hand through all the olive-like cautery. But the first cauteries are more light and fleeting.
from old pain in any member When pain comes to any member, or from falling or hitting, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member, its smallness and feebleness, and its strength and location of twists and pains. If he is healed from the first cautery, well; but if not, start another cautery on top of that one, because such a habit is that it should change in the member that is closest to it, for which reason you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
of surgery
The ulcers are helped sometimes by cautery with great aid, and indeed the disease that comes from the putrefaction of bile and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take heed if the disease is at its beginning, and if it has been treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt whether the corruption will overcome all the patient, then do 5 cauteries on the head: one inside the head to nine inches, and another towards the forehead to the end of the hair; and two on each horn, and one behind on the occipital bone; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of thick humors can issue forth; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before it.
And if the surgery is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly declining, then it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries on the head, and one on the navel, and two on each spine of the neck, and six on each spine of the back, and one large one on the scullion and another below, and two on each shoulder; and two on each flank, and two on each tendon of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and take heed of the nerves that are beneath the last calcination, lest you burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I do of cauterizing, the more it brings aid and increases the benefit; and know that the patients do not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because their body is already entirely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in ways of iron. Afterward, cure with flour mixed with honey and other cures until it is healed.
of inflammation
When inflammation comes to any member and is cured by medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not yet healed, then do cauteries on the member according to its greatness and smallness; and make sure the cautery is a little bit inside the fatty tissue of the muscle; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes one makes a cautery at the hand, foot, or back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the inflammation is removed; and yet none interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the issues of the nerves moving the body.
of abscesses
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the medical skill is of no use, then cauterize it with one cautery slightly deep, according to the quantity of fatty tissue, until the pus is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour mixed with honey and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of cow and blood of almond, each part separately; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healed.
the cure for chancres by cauterization
When chancres come at the beginning, and you see them arrested, then cauterize it with a cautery that appears as a circle, all around the border of the chancres. And yet wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the chancres; and yet this does not seem to me good, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen once or twice; and the more right thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
of inflammation that cannot die
When some one has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays in dying or because of the superfluity it makes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood or due to the weather; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it with many small cauteries piercingly; afterwards let it be thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing all the way through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery with whatever is on hand:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced through to the fat, and be such that the patient feels it outside just like the current of purulence is alleviated. Afterward, cure it until it is perfectly healed.
the cure for fire by iron
Another manner of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a consumption of member, for it consumes the members just like fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can suffer from cautery along with fire, then sharpen many small and large cauterizing irons according to what is necessary for the place where the disease is; afterwards cauterize all around until you remove all the corruption, leaving nothing behind but only what is sound. And then let it be three days, and apply on top of the cauterized places a poultice with oil so that the fire's eschars are removed and all the corruption is gone. Afterward, cure with ointments generating flesh. And if you see after three days that healthy skin does not arise, it is good; and if not, then reapply the cautery to what remains of the corrupted places. And this consumption has sometimes been cured by medicine in place of fire cauterization; but still fire cauterization is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure with medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
of boils that come to the feet
Many times it happens that on the feet outside comes a disease called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large abscess that wounds the foot. And the cautery for this disease is in two ways. It is to say cauterization by fire, and cauterization by hot water. Cauterization by fire is when you sharpen one cauterizing iron just like a vulture's feather, and make it of good iron according to its size so that it can penetrate the abscess from all sides and have subtle edges; after which apply everything hot on the abscess, and turn your hand completely around the abscess until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then make a poultice of wild mallow leaves crushed with oil, and let the poultice stay on all night, and the abscess will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the wound with ointments generating flesh until it is healed.
Et s'il sont convertit par dfors lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d'aigue chaude;
The cure of trembling
When some people tremble due to coldness or nervousness, or quartan fever or another, you should make him have .iiij. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of his back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery in the weight, and one above the stomach at the olive cautery; if he will leave trembling, and the healths of the cold disease will hasten.
of foul-smelling boils
Sometimes boils or foul-smelling boils appear on the bathed body, which come from gross corrupted matter. If it is necessary when they first appear to make a cautery on each head of the boil: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, by which the point will be seized by fire, or of aristologe root long, or of lenticular cautery. And sometimes when one cauterizes at the beginning as this manner, and they cannot grow any further ahead, but are broken off the superfluities from which they come, and are cleansed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Often there is great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the forefront, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is very grievous to stop.
And yet when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold it tight as long as the blood is calmed under your fingers, and no more flows; then set the olive cauteries in fire, many small and large ones until they are all red; then take one, either big or little according to the wound and its place where the artery runs, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cautery there as long as the blood is staunched.
And if it bursts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cautery has cooled, then take quickly one other of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease to do this one after the other as long as the blood is staunched; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm does come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, one cannot well stanch it, especially if the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines applied which have power to staunch blood; and let it be tied and restrained accordingly.
Who will administer the stanching of blood by binding tightly with cloths or putting burning things on, or similar things, unless it is not effective.
And if this happens to anyone and he does not have eye or medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we said, and stretch it well until it is staunched above the wound and the vein; and do not move the patient, but keep him moist with cold water often when it is very cold so that the blood may congeal and thicken and be staunched; and make some progress ahead with what he needs of cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the ointments and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter at the head just as far as the end, and I will go on in this chapter by the same way so that you may find more easily what you wish.
And thus, dear son, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary to be more cautious.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come into cures. Some come who are so beset by their disease that they will die easily because of the fearfulness they find in their disease, and the greatness of their malice; and from these one should have fear. And from these there are some who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the disease is spiteful. It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your avarice, and do not act foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of and can grasp; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will help you to achieve good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Very dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Now I have concluded this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have divided from the head to the end, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
of the head full of water
Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the baby is strained too strongly by the head of the child; and sometimes it comes from a replied cause, which one does not know.
And I never saw this disease except in children, and to all that I have seen death hastened; and therefore it seems to me that I should hasten the work of these cures.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the skull grew thicker each day so that it could no longer be sustained; and the moisture became so abundant that it seemed to be dead, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone above the sphenoid, between the skull and the bone; and the work is such when the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you cut a gap in the head as wide as two inches, so long as the moisture flows; and see here the shape of the spatumile:
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head opened on each part, and the liquid jumps forth when you press with your hand from inside, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you cut three incisions into the head in this manner:
And after the incision, extract all the moisture. After, close the cuts with cloths and powders, and put wine and oil in them, and leave it like that for five days; then disband it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head drain equally, and then allow the patient to eat dry meat without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look at where the abscess is opening, and where the liquid is gathering; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Cut then where the abscess is opening and the liquid is gathering, and do it according to what you can manage; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if there comes a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the decoration of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
Of rheum (or discharge)
When it happens to someone a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last remedy is fire cauterization with which one will sear both arteries.
Then it is necessary that when you see the arteries seared, the patient should bend their head back; after, rub the spot with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then extract the patient's neck all in one piece; then look where the vein bites, and the paths of both are behind the ears, and they will be answered; then mark the paths with an ink, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula into two parts, as far as the incision comes to the bone, and it should be done through the width of the head.
And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting in two like a pair of scissors across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood will spring forth continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the length of the space of three fingers, then mark with ink and cut up to the bone; and what needs to be done with the blood is to let it flow forth so that it is about 6 inches, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains above the bone a piece of flesh, then cut it away lest apostemes come forth, then drain the wound and bind it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
of migraine
When ancient migraine comes, and acute cataract, due to the moisture of tears and heat in temples and old forgotten habits and similar things, and he has been treated by methods of medical cures and all this does not benefit him, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient bends back their temple hairs and feels for the artery that opens in the temple, because it beats well and is somewhat responsive to the touch except in some people who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then extract the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the spot with a rough cloth, and soak the spot in hot water until the artery becomes manifestly apparent; then take the spatula whose shape is the form:
then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then lift it up and carefully separate it from the tissues that are below each part; and if the artery is delicate, then turn it at the tip of the awl, then cut off that part according to the length of two fingers. For if it is not cut, blood will not flow forth at all.
And take the blood from 6 to 3 inches; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two strong silk threads in two places, so that no bleeding occurs before the wound has healed and there comes a flow of blood; then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the area with a cauterizing knife up to the bone until the fingers are cut off; and this is the main work, if the patient does not have fever and is of warm complexion.
For fire cauterization is a help to finish off moisture: that's why it is of greater aid against moisture. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that you fill the spot with old cotton and put on well-made tents; and when you take them off, be careful with dry medicines that bring forth flesh and tents, until they are healed; and if without harm to the artery, as long as you work, you hasten to cauterize by fire, or you apply the place of vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you do not have what is present, put on the spot your debt as much as the blood congeals, and rise the spot with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be strained as needed; and what is main and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire-cutting knife, but the cutting parts should be well spaced to withstand more heat. For when the cuttings are too dense, they retain less heat. And it should have between the two knives one large space, and then when you have marked with ink the two places, and take the hot iron on top so that it reaches up to the bone, and cut off the vein in two places; and be spaced apart between the two fingers because they are not soldered by this cauterization from head to toe; and this is the form of the cauterization:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are flowing down from the veins that are above the forehead bone and it does not benefit from medical treatment that is done there, and you see the patient's face redden, and feel the forehead temperature rising as if with fever; and the oil is thick and moist so that the hairs of paper have fallen, and the papers are scorched by the heat of tears, then it is necessary for this cure.
And the ancients called it "contused cure", and that you do to the patient who has this disease: let him have hair on his forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions should be as two fingers wide all along the forehead, down to the nose, and the others two fingers wide at each corner above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting into the arteries that are at the corners above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the size of three fingers across the joint.
From the incision that is below the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the flesh that is between the two cuts as far as the bony ridge above the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
So insert into the first cut the instrument called "culterelle", and it is very well sharpened on one side, and soft on the other side, not sharp at all, and this is the form: And put the blunt edge towards the fat part of the flesh, and the soft edge towards the bone, and insert it so that it comes to the middle cut. And cut off all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous down to where the skin appears; and then make another cut in the middle cut up to the other side; and then extract blood equally, and express the place for the taken blood; then put a patch of old cotton in each cut, and put moist cloths on top, soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar, and guard that apostemes do not come; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer great quantities of cold water, then apply basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes
When someone comes with a catarrh that is accustomed to be acute, and you see the eyes tense and small, and weakening the sight, and the eyebrows burned; and the hair falls out, and on the head in the forehead great pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and that catarrh do not come from one vein alone, but from many veins, and the mother cure that is there, so it is this.
And that you command the patient to lay his forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead and another one as wide as one finger. And begin from the temple on the left side to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is uncovered, so wipe out all the blood with a sponge, and then apply cotton and linen between the two lips of the incision, and tie it with moist cloths in wine and oil, and beware of hot apostemes; when it is dry, it is necessary to rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with things that excite flesh.
In the same way: take three parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to excite flesh everywhere.
of the stopping of the ears
All that enters the ears is one of three things: or grain, or beast, or stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, such as millet, broad beans, peas; or flowing things, such as water and vinegar and similar things.
When something like stone or another foreign object enters the ear and does not fit with the ear or grow in it, then apply the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then distill a little bit of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer an extraction; and let the patient become drowsy with condiments, and stop up their nostrils when the extraction comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold the ear above. Many times it has come out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then administer an extraction with fine tweezers, as follows:
If it comes out through the tweezers, that's good; if not, then administer an extraction with the fine needle of a small awl; and if it doesn't come out through this, then make a wire coil and insert the head of the coil or the ear canal strongly, and stop up what is around the coil with soft wax so that the blood cannot enter with the coil; then treat it vigorously, for many times it has come out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this way, then take a glue of which birds take their nests, and put some instrument on point to do this, and put a little bit of cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and treat it. And if it doesn't come out through all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear so that apostemes don't form there and cause spasms; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient's head bleed from the cephalic vein, and extract blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends; and let the incision be as a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck out hastilly into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it is grain that is inside and it swells, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then insert a thin, subtle spatula according to this form:
and administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is easy.
In water then that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use condiment-induced vomiting first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it be covered with a cloth on top of that ear where the water is. If it comes out through this, that's good. If not, then take many stones according to the length of your thumb, thin and light, and heat them slightly over the fire; and put one or two of these stones in the patient's ear, and pass another stone on top of the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this with stone upon stone until all the water comes out, and thus it will come out completely. And if you see, then take one reed, and insert one end into the ear, and the other end into the fire until most of the reed is burned; then repeat the same process with other reeds as long as the water comes out, just as we have said in the stone.
En the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, such as a puce and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, then make a extraction with forceps; and it is the thing lighter to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of the warts on the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not profit, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun: if there appears no warts, then treat them with fine forceps; and if there are none, take the cane or that which is the shape:
And make it narrow underneath and wide above. And apply the most subtle part to the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering; then squeeze strongly on the whole cane; do this often until all the warts emerge. And if they do not obey to emerge, then wrap a cotton cloth around the cane as I said in the chapter; and if they still do not come out as we have said, then administer distillations such as those that the ancients have proved effective for warts, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and thus distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, according to the form which you see:
And make it of silver or lead, narrow underneath and small openings, and wide above to distill; and to press within the distillation with a well-made lead instrument for this purpose, and if you see, take a scraper and wrap it around the tip of cotton; then pour your oil or juice into the cane, and all that you have of medicines in the cane, and the cane be in the ear; then put inside the scraper to all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or runs from the ear; and if the patient feels anything within, and the distillation is a pot heated over fire so that it may be distilled in the ear; and beware that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the stopping of ears
No child is born without some perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to men through the stopping of a wound or the growth of something within the ear, and these stoppages sometimes come very far into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there is a small pot overflowing from the perforation, and it can be seen well.
That which comes very far in, if one cannot see it, is of grievous inflammation and many dispositions; and that which can be seen requires that you put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see a visible opacity, then operate with all this spatula-like instrument as follows:
And be gentle and cautious in front and back of the entire ear, so that it does not injure the ear; if the opacity is due to growth or flesh of the ear, then hold it with fine forceps and gently scrape, until all that flesh is completely removed.
And if the opacity is very deep in the ear, then take a subtle and light scraper and heat it slightly over the fire; then put it on the flesh of the ear. If you sense the opacity which the patient senses as grief to hear, gently pierce and beware that you do not injure the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten in Egyptian oil.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on vitriol broth; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another one moistened in cerote made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then cure him until he is healed.
And if there is a discharge of blood, then dip a sponge and wring it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that stop the bleeding which are found in the treatment of distillations.
Of the flesh of paper
This growth that comes from paper of eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch with forceps and fine forceps, and scrape with a spatula-like instrument from its roots; then put on the root vitriol broth.
And if they flake off, then cauterize with a lenticular subtle cautery and the cauterization after the incision is worth movements; and many times they repair, until no thing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burnt and do not return.
Of the Hellebore
Many times there come in the papers of eyes certain things that seem like Hellebore in their shape and hardness, and because of this is this disease called "grandine", and it is an assembly of moisture thickening in the paper above and below; the work is as follows: take care if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the incision on the surface, then peel off each part slightly, then take with forceps, and scrape. If you cannot scrape without piercing a small piece of paper, do not harm the patient; and if the opening is large, assemble with a seam, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do nothing by force, for the ointment will restore it soon and extract flesh.
And if the grandine is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then turn over the paper, and extract the grandine with fine forceps, and scrape and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is displaced by the incision, do not harm anything; and when the grandine is scraped, pour salted water into the ear, and cure the patient's flesh until they are healed.
Of the fat of eyes
Exinach is a fat that is extracted in the form of threads from the papers above, and this happens more to children than to anyone else, and it causes great distress to their eyes; and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep on top, and are their papers below their eyelids moist that the swelling and appearance have covered over the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the skin with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in your bosom; and then takes one linen cloth, and prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity contained by each part, then sets it on him; and presses with both hands from one side and the other, so that the excrement is assembled within the circle; then makes in the midst of moisture at the spatula trenching a cut of length, and not greater than the wound which one makes at the opening of a vein; and makes the leather deep until you come to the excrement; and in various dispositions comes the excrement from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Then draw it out as one piece of cloth covered between your hands to the outside, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread; and make sure that you do not push into the cut, lest you come to all the spatula just up to the eye, lest you harm it.
And if the excrement does not open at the beginning of the cut, then slightly widen the cut a little bit until it opens; then draw it out as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and place them on the wound, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who burn and apply poultices to corrupt the moisture that remains; then treat him until he is healed. And if it comes to a hot abscess, then treat with emplasters soothing until he is healed.
of hairs of paper
When hairs on paper grow, they are added to those that are not natural, and are inflamed, so they harm the eyes, and bring about ways of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papery film and albugine, to the point of destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to three manners: or by fire cautery together, or by aqueous medicine according to what is before in this chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by cauterization, as I will say.
It is necessary that you put the patient's head in your bosom; then turn the paper of oil onto your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then insert a needle into one thread above; and let it be above the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow below these hairs, and pull up one thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the added hairs, up to the great tear as far as the small; then draw out one thread, and place below the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth; then sign on the paper a figure like that of myrtle, and although it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see the paper growing divided in two.
And if there is someone who needs to cut a great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened; then make all the spatula above the two lines that you have signed, and start from the great tear as far as the small; and it should be one of the cuts near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the two angles of the key, then scrape off all; then assemble the two lips with a suture using an agate thread to each filament of fine wool, and stop the bleeding, and make the surplus threads stick to the two sorcerers on some things that adhere, if you see fit to do so; and if not, then don't bother, and leave the suture and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without sutures and constraining things, for the paper will revitalize at the same time as the wound and its assembly, but the suture is murderous (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear.
and if there is another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, in three disengaged needle pricks according to the shape that is here:
then cut what rises above the small forces equally according to the shape that is here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps and the things are not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and put it in the figure; and insert another thread below the great tear, and the second thread below the small, and assemble the threads evenly between your hands; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above what you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suture, and treat him until he is healed; and if an abscess comes to the incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: then it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make a cut within according to what I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula; and cut at the two ends of the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what rises from the paper of oil, and strain the two cauterizations from the two parts in form; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and become numb and hard, until it falls off by itself.
If it takes too long, then cut the strained areas, and cure him until he is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the paper has been lifted, and the hairs will no longer grow; and that is the form of the two cauterizations that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The work is such that you take a fine needle, and insert one thread of soft and subtle silk; then assemble the threads and tie one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then order in the chase another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the chief of the thread; then put the patient's head on your lap; and have it near the sun so that the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and delicate work; then insert the needle throughout the chase in the root of the added hair, and make it pierce through the paper quickly as you pull it up to the natural hair; then draw out the hair until it reaches the top of the chase, and tie that hair into the chase if there is one, two, three, or more; then lift your hand until the hairs grow outside throughout the chase on the paper with the natural hair.
And if the hare is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, you will pull the hare downwards to the entire length of the thread that you have prepared there, until the hare grows forth from the pertus above and you see it by the sight of the eye; then you will pull the hare and the thread, and shut your eyes and let it be for two or three days, until the hairs grow forth in their place and the flesh appears on top; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural hives, and lift it up with that which you leave, as long as it is stretched out and then lift it.
Of the corruption of the oil.
When this disease called "aleacrati" or corruption comes into the oil, there are two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or incision, or burning, and by similar things.
And the manner of the treatment is that you split the wound open, and separate the lips of it, and put linen cloths inside, and bind it until it is healed; and it is not necessary to use in its care things that dry and constrict. For if you do so, the disease will return worse than the first one; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or aloe vera juice cooked together with linseed oil, and wrapped in a cloth, and this is the cure for it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not become stuck in the same form as it was before; and these treatments that we have said are not far from this disease, so that it does not return to its former form.
Of the flesh which comes into the oil.
This disease that is below and is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from a wound and a cut and a burning and similar things; and the way of treatment for it is that you take an awl, in which it has one double thread, and push it into the flesh, and make it pierce all the way to the right shoulder, so that the threads come out in two pieces of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above the entire awl, and cut at one spatula wide.
And if the figure on the paper returns according to what is needed, it's good; if not, take one rasp and put it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or holes inside the paper; and let the pieces of the two holes be at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has no "one Greek"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are worn down below, from what follows the paper; then join the two severed parts, and sew with one thread of linen; then follow the cure of what we have said about softening medicines, and with cloths, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from an incision or a seam or a burning, it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then separate between the two lips of a cloth, as I have said; and one must do the treatment according to the form of the disease, because it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an engine from all their power so that it brings back the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
of the suddenness of the paper.
When this swelling occurs in many people in the same way as the paper above is sealed with white of oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, then it is necessary that you put the point of a rasp under the paper and lift it up; and stretch them to pincers, until you cut what is suitable for the subtle spatula, which is not too worn down nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot endure if the spatula is too worn down or bleeds the oil; and make your incision, from which you will scrape this assembled part, slightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and all this assembly becomes healthy, and sometimes in the oil salty water, and raise sweet water, and vinegar; then put a cloth of linen between the paper and the oil, and put wet wool on top of the oil in abundance of egg whites; and after three days use vinegar and similar things until it is healed.
Of the grime of the oil.
Know that the grime is according to two manners: it is nervous and similar to a hard crust, and another which is not nervous but is similar to white moisture frozen, that when you touch it with iron and cook it between pincers, one cannot do so; and both beginnings grow little by little until it covers all the sight, all the light, and all the movement of the oil.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hands, then you open the eyes; and lift the paper to your hand, then coil the grime between pincers with small double folds, and stretch it up; then take an awl, and put one hair from a horse, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread; and double the point of the awl a little and push it into the grime, and pierce all the way to the awl, and tie the grime with one thread and stretch it up, and scrape off the remaining flesh on the side of the grime that goes from the prune and the silk to the hair just to the head; then cut off the remaining part at the root of the eye all the way to the subtle spatula and small forces, and leave the natural flesh or the eyelid, so that through the incision the body of the tears does not come forth as usual; and sometimes it sets the grime on the edge alone, and on the thread, just as we have said; then scrape off everything all the way to the soft spatula as is its form.
And beware that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision, throw a little bit of silk powder into the oil, and vinegar made from lard, and leave it until the next day; then follow the cure for what is needed until it is healed.
And if the grime is not nervous and you cannot push in the awl, and the pincers cannot enter, many times this semblance of grime is cured with medicines; and it is born as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it grow, then anoint the oil of the patient and take the spatula slightly worn down according to this form:
And treat the ulcer above gently, and if you see it does not decrease and the reason hastens, then distill from your mouth into the oil a collyrium made of lapis lazuli and red copper, and stop the eye until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
If no obstacle is found in the eye, as an abscess forms, then wash it with milk, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts the eye by great harm, then suspend it with an ointment, and cut off a part but not all, so that the flow of tears may not come; then distill into the eye a red collyrium made of lapis lazuli.
from the flesh that grows on the pupil
There are some men who sometimes grow red flesh, and covers the pupil and holds it above the papillae and turns away from the face, and seems like a pomegranate rose; and the work is such that the patient puts his head in your care, then you work on the eyes, and coil all that flesh with suitable bandages, and hold it firmly; then cut off the first layer of flesh, and go cutting all the way to the razor's edge, and take care not to bleed the eye during the operation; and be the incision of the spatula such as we have said in the incision of the ulcer and with small forces one takes out the sebaceous gland, just as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply oil of red copper or distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put a cotton cloth with egg white on top of the eye so that it is secure from hot abscess; and if there is nothing left and the blood flows up to the eyebrow, and you doubt that there will be hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing things for hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do with all flesh that has been removed from the eye by this method.
But it is necessary that you hasten the cure of each weak eye by natural method; and by accidental method with iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that these members are suffering from this work.
of the veins of the eyes
Sebaceous glands are red veins that are covered on the eye, and tolerate the sight's work and weaken the eyes forever. It is necessary then to examine first whether the oil, in which the sebaceous gland is, is sound, and there is no other disease except for the sebaceous gland; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in your care, then suspend those veins with all the ointment according to your wisdom, and let the ointments be subtle double according to this form.
And let the two ointments be by degrees in one mass according to this form:
Then coil with gentle forces those veins, and wipe out the blood hour by hour, until you see removing those veins from the eye; and take care not to bleed the eye at all the points of the spatula, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the sebaceous gland.
And if you are unable to coil all of this in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it some days until the pains are soothed and you are sure of hot abscess, then resume according to this manner which is before, until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The physician calls this "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and by hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is reason in it that you cut into the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take it to all the instruments of which there is this form; and it is called "asperg chief", and be made of iron in one head repeated, and be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this some times, then restore the surface with excitative medicines.
If the surface is hardened, and flesh grows, and the body of the bowl is hardened, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemed, and bad accidents come to it, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other reason than to bring back the fistula to the pit of the nose according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines, and when it is uncovered take one file according to this form, and let the iron point be at three angles, and let the file be worn down to the head as you see here:
Then put it on the bone below the eyelid, and withdraw your hand from the eye a little, then turn to the entire file until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what the blood vessels do if he holds his hand on his nose; and then restore the surface with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the surface, the matter goes to the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the issue of the eye
When the eyes are fully open and do not come from being obstructed by the nose or its reduction, it is necessary to bind the patient. Then heal them, then put on the oil one linen made of aloe, encens, sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and emplaster it with bands and drapery; and the manner of the drapery is that you take soft drapery enough, and double each one three times, and then put one on top of another according to the quantity the eyes have need of. Then strain it above with a sturdy bandage, and resume the poultices to suck without hurting; then remove the poultices and let the eye be strained day and night, and if the linen has melted, it is necessary to bind it tightly. Then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, that's good; if not, then resume the emplastering and drapery and linen and poultices until it is healed.
The bursting forth of a grape-like vein
When disturbances come to the grape-like vein, then it opens up, and comes forth in thin strips like resin drops, and it is a wonder to see; then if you cut it open, the work is such that you insert an awl into the root of the part below as far as the top, then put another awl where there is a double thread from the wound; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to position; then cut off the end of the double thread and bind a part of the vein around, and restrain it well, then pull out the awl and apply oil linen moistened with egg white; and let it be until the boy's blood flows with the vein, then cure the wound with soothing things until it is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vein each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes appear great, then pierce them with a fine awl that comes from the oil, and remove the excess moisture and descend the eyes, and enter inside soon after; then pull out until they are healthy.
from the bottom of the eye
This disease called "alcunnati" is not other than the bottom that is gathered in the eye, resembling water flowing down, and it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your hands from two parts, and move them until you see the bottom come up to your eyes; then stick it in, and do not let it descend and be dislodged, so that light may enter, and the patient may see things as they usually do; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bottom is not prepared as we have said. Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine awl and make a hole on the corneal tissue one point by the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal tissue and the crown, until the bottom comes out; and when it has come out, let it distill into the eye warm honey mixed with water or fenugreek boiled with honey, then be cured of another cure until it is healed.
from the waters of the eye
We have the likenesses of waters in division, and what is needed for piercing; thus work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light by the sun, and bind the healthy eye very tightly; then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; then insert the point of the instrument under the crown by the thickness of a cord in that part of the eye below the minor tear duct, then insert the instrument called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so that it pierces into the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the prunele as far as the end of the nourishment; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see bone in that paper by the clarity of the corneal tissue, and put the instrument just above or below where the water is; if the water now descends, the patient will see before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a little while, and if the water rises again through the second path, place the force with the instrument, and when it is stuck in and does not go up, gently pull out almagda by rotating your hand little by little; then put back into the water a little of this gemstone, and let it be inside the oil. Then place on top of the oil stoupes or linen moistened with rose oil and egg white, and bind with the healthy eye. Now, we and those who are of our time, put on common broth with abundant eggs.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
And then pierce the conjunctive alone, and do not go too far in, but make a subtle gap, then insert almagda, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a gentle sleeper, by which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move your head or to the right or left, and be bound according to their disposition until the third day; then release him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put back the bandage on the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this in the work of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you hasten this, because the water rises quickly.
If apostemes come to pass, then take away the oil before the seventh day, and direct it towards what soothes the aposteme; and when it is appeased, then take away the sight and put on a face mask made of orichalchite for covering some days, and be there in that dark house. Then go out from the house little by little, and return to your case; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us from the land of Irach, who told us that in his country they make almagda pierce, by which they extract water, but I never saw it done in our land, nor did I read about it in the books of the ancients; and by chance this is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see; and they are made of pure silver.
And the ends of these should be of this same subtlety, and the last in three sharp angles.
of the flesh on the skin
Sometimes born or new flesh appears, and some of them seem like scorpions to many people. And if there are such ones that have flesh enchanted with flux color, and if they have soft flesh of good color. In that then of these fleshes which is soft, and not enchanted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work his nostrils, and pour the oil onto those fleshes, and treat them with force; then do what you can to sustain at the tip of the subtle silver awl from one side, as long as you know that that flesh is completely removed.
Et s'il en remaint aucune chose con ne puisse coper, si l'ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu'il n'i demoure rien;
Here is the translation of the text:
And whether it is of silver or of lead, resembling an open lamp like a tube, and the conductor also does so; and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instruments be full to purge the head; and have one finger on the head to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
From the flesh on the nail.
Many times a disease called "telul" appears on the nail of the finger, and grows and becomes large over time, until it is something to behold; and therefore it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and remove all its fur, then put on the cautery or burning medicine; and if one waits too long to cut it until it is large, take heed if it is hard, with a foul color, poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted aposteme; for when you cut it some time, great harm comes to the patient; and if the aposteme is of soft touchment, not at all foul colored, and you see that one can completely cut it away, then empty the patient and the doctor without fear, and cure the wound of things drying and constricting.
When the nail is cut and cleaned.
Know that when solutions of continuation come in one of these joint works, it is little profit, more so for some men. It is therefore necessary that whatever happens to anyone, if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then put the two lips together on a suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated from one part and another, it is necessary that you scrape off all parts of their color until they heal, then assemble the two lips together on a suture, and bind it, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and incense above; and put above the powders a piece of unguent of strength or other ointment suitable, and leave it until it cures by itself, then cure it with oil until it is healed.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have made known.
Of lip abscesses.
To many men abscesses have formed inside the lips, hard and resembling grains of millet, larger and smaller; therefore it is necessary that you turn back the lips, and cut each notch, and take out the contents and cut in each part; then apply a poultice to the wound after the incision has been made with vinegar, until the blood is staunched; and then leave the wound open, and cure the wound of things drying until it is healed.
Of the flesh of the gums.
Many times abscessed flesh appears on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you grasp it with forceps, and cut to its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then put on the wound vinegar or other drying and desiccating powders; and if this flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it again and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
Of abscesses.
Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and greenish, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; therefore it is necessary that you have the patient sit in your hands, and his jaws be in your holy place, and remove the teeth or scabs appearing, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and yellowness, and greenishness and other discolorations, until they are cleaned; and if one removes what is at the first stage, it is good; if not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth need diverse forms of instruments to remove them, according to what the work shows, because the scraper with which one scrapes away teeth has other forms than he who scrapes between teeth; and these forms and others should be equipped with you.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait to extract it as long as you can, for this should not be done; for it is a very high substance, almost to the point where one has no excuse for pulling. Then when the patient is constrained to extract, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth's condition. Many times the pain has misled the patient, and thought it was a good tooth, and had it extracted; and although the pain did not depart because of this, until the bad roots came out, for we have already made a mistake with these saints; and when you are well certain of the tooth's condition, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth in all its surrounding area with a very strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then move it to your hands or to subtle forceps at the first point and point, until it is well extracted, then firmly fix the forceps; and have the patient's jaws in your holy place between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth properly without breaking, and if it does not jump out too far, take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each side, and then move it as you did first. And if the teeth are pierced and mangled, it is necessary that you fill them with cloth, where the perforations are; and if it strains subtly with forceps, so that it does not break when strained; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take good heed that you do not break it, and leave a part, and the root will revive in the patient with even greater pains than the first. And take heed that you do not act like the ignorant saints who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the cartilage, and do not bring about what we have recounted; but they often bring about great diseases through the roots that remain, or through the cartilage that is broken, as we have often seen. When the tooth is extracted, wash the wound with wine or oil and vinegar; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply the wound with vinegar-soaked cloth; and if this does not work, then cauterize it.
The forms of instruments that one uses to extract teeth first are those with long points and large handles, which do not double back when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
And have large handles so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of well-forged iron, and have teeth to keep them from slipping.
of the roots of teeth When the roots of teeth are pulled out, it is necessary that you put a moistened and greased cotton swab on the spot for one or two days until the skin is softened, then insert forceps called "algefri", by which the socket seems to be well cared for; and should be made inside as a file and this is its shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the entire layer of skin around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a scraper, by which this is its shape:
And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out with this, that is good; if not, then use all instruments, by which these shapes come next:
And if you help with this instrument that has two handles, this is its shape:
and other tools that are in front of the roots of teeth, and this instrument which seems like great forceps, this is its shape:
And this is the instrument, that it may not break, and knows many instruments of teeth; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and wise and subtle masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of cases, and if one breaks or any other bone, he seeks out the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and is helped by gestures, this is its shape: And be strong and well-held to hold the bone, so that it does not slip away, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is putridity in the bone, and it is small, then return it to all these instruments:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural place in the body, and the shape is ugly, and especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know if the tooth has grown after the other teeth, and is not in its proper place, and cannot be filed or smoothed: then file it; and if it is uneven with the tooth, take this instrument of which this is its shape, and it resembles a small beak, and be made of iron sharp as a point:
And the edge grows gradually day by day due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that one can file it, then use a similar file as this is its shape:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth gradually day by day, a little at a time, so that it does not move until it reaches the desired shape; then make it smooth in the end, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, it is necessary to file off the roughness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the teeth are loose
When the front teeth are loose, either through percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press down on what they eat without them falling out, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, but it does not help; then it is necessary to restrain them with a thread of gold, for silver threads become green and putrid, but gold ones never do; and be the thread neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are misaligned, take the thread and insert it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the loose teeth between the middle ones, if there is one or more, until you come to a healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover the area up to where you began, and strain your hand subtly and carefully, so that it does not move; and be your hold at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then file the loose teeth with a pair of forceps, and assemble them, and re-plant them between the healthy tooth, and place them so that they do not cut the tongue; then leave them thus tight as long as they can remain, and if they come loose or the thread breaks, strain it with another thread; if it stays and serves thus for its entire time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of aligning the two healthy teeth and the middle ones, just as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, then put it back in its place, gradually and carefully, just as we have said; and do not meddle with it unless you are a skilled and patient person, and at times make the shape of a whalebone tooth, and put it in the place where there is a deficiency, and strain it on, just as we have said, and remain and serve thus for a long time.
to cover the link of the tongue
Sometimes this link comes from under the tongue or nature, which one is born with; or by accident of healed wound; and the work is such that you work on the mouth of the patient, and have their head in a healthy position, and lift up the tongue; then file the nervous link of the wide, until the tongue is freed from its dwelling, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it's due to sudden wound, put an unguent and file down that bond; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, for the artery that is underneath; and when you have done, lift up the rose-colored cloth or gentle water, then place a linen tent under the tongue; and let the patient wear it every night, so that the wound cannot heal. And if bleeding comes, put vinegar on the wound; and if the blood flows, cauterize it with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
and if you see it of fusse color or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to blenchor, and there is moisture, throw on unguent, and make a gentle poultice with a spatula, and deliver from one side and the other; and if the blood flows at your work, put vinegar on it until it is stopped, then return to your work until you have treated all thoroughly; then lift up the linen cloth and cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat
Sometimes there is within the throat a swelling that are called "godath", and they are properly known as two almonds, and when you cure them, just as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then beware: if it is a hard and small aposteme of fusse color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron either, for fear of bleeding; but let it remain until it dies, and then you will part it, or it would break on its own; and if it is of bluish color and the root is subtle, have the instrument ready to file, but first examine whether the aposteme has calmed down and is appeased. Then sit the patient in front of the sun, with their hands in your healthy one, and work the mouth and take the serjeants between your fingers, and press the tongue below all the instrument, just as it should be; and make sure it is of silver or subtle lead, just like a sharp knife:
Press the tongue to all this instrument and you see the abscess, then take the needle and the stick in the almond, and draw it out above as much as you can; and do not touch anything with the cloth, then cut the instrument, by which the form appears, as if it were some force; and though the head is crooked, one side to the other, and are very sharp, and made of iron or bone.
And if you do not have this instrument present, then use pincers, by which the form appears:
And be cutting from one side and the other; and when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and cool and easy, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with warm water, or cooked apple skins, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then apply a cure until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat than the two almonds, so cut them then in the same way as the two almonds similarly.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was born inside her throat, namely one abscess of small sense; and I had already well closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit which was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained like this for one or two days. The abscess was so high up that it had forced its way out through two openings of the birth canal. I hastened then at once, and inserted a needle into one opening, then drew it out above, and drew out a great portion of pus; then refilled the other opening of the birth canal, and had the woman open her mouth and press her tongue; after which I inserted the needle into this abscess, and cut off part of it, and only a small amount of blood flowed out; and thus was unblocked the conduit of the throat for the woman, and she began to drink water then wine, and did not stop cutting at that abscess for a long time; the abscess kept recurring and filling up the space I had emptied, until it became very large; then I stopped it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it grew no more; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened after me.
of the vein
When the swelling comes down to the vein, and it is inflated and long, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below a large and rounded one, then it is called "vein". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscesses are appeased, and she is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut her; and that which is rounded and not long; and if it is sanguine or of a fleshy color or black, then it is necessary to avoid making an incision on it. For there is great danger over the patient. It is therefore necessary, when you see this, according to the manner I have said, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press her tongue with the instrument which we have remembered here before; then insert a needle into the vein, and pull it down below, and cut off as much as one of two instruments which I have said in the incision of the almonds. And it is necessary not to cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, you will grieve the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the almonds, and apply a cure until she is healed. And if the patient has fear of cutting, then it is necessary to use cunning in the cauterization without fear. The manner of the cautery is hot water. And it is that the patient puts her head on your shoulder, and then presses her tongue with the instrument which we have said in the chapter on cautery, and confesses with living water, so that she is not too thick nor too clear; and in this way use the handle of this instrument, by which the form appears:
And let the patient's head be covered with a cloth or a man put the medicine, as the hairs of a comb, and place the instrument on all the medicine above the vein; and have the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, but not down to the throat and wound. Then keep your hand on all the medicine and press it on the vein for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it turn white and the medicine's blistering is appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument in a tube above the cotton on the cane, so that the cotton sits on top of the vein; and do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to start again with the medicine's cautery, start again, and after the cautery, remove the surrounding area around the vein with a cloth wrapped in butter, and purify all that is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured through gargling until it is healed.
This cure is more safe than incision, and cauterization; if it is cured through fumigation according to this manner, take calament, ysope, origanum, rue, camomille, and avronne, and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and put a little water in it, and make it boil; and let the pot be well glazed with hot earth, and have an instrument inside shaped like this: And it should be of silver or iron, and one of the keys inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the vein through the tube until the vein is deadened; after which one starts again often until the vein dries up, and beware not to do this at the beginning of the abscess's heat, for many things happen then; and don't do this more than at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put an eggshell inside the patient's head so that their mouth doesn't get too hot; for the eggshell doesn't allow the vapor to weigh down the mouth, and it's good care together with salvation.
Many times it happens that something is stuck in the throat or spine of a fish, or nothing at all; therefore it is necessary that you do what you can see, and press the patient's tongue to the sun on the entire instrument, so that you see how things go; and what does not open up and remains stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance, if the thing opens up through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a dry crumb; and tie the sponge with a thread, and then have it pass through; and when it comes out, it will be stuck, and then you will pull on it harder; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head in high lift; and take care not to touch the epiglote, lest all go wrong, nor push the bone inside; and move cautiously that the patient pushes the instrument, because it may move or the thing is awkward; then push down, or pull forward to all the instrument evenly, until it is pulled out.
Of the sweat of the throat.
There is no medicine for the sweat, as I said in the division, by curing with medicines; and when it does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, then press the tongue onto the instrument that I told you. And if you see the sweat, pull it out slowly, or use fine pincers that are worth it for this purpose. And if this does not work, take a twisted cord and put it into the throat of the patient, then push the point of the cord hot, and do this often. And if the patient's throat is wet all day, then take a full vial of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it out without swallowing, and move it to their hand frequently; and as soon as the sweat feels the water, it will stop.
And if it does not stop as we said, then suffumigate the patient with asefetide, using the instrument that I described in the fumigation of the uve; do this many times, for it will stop without trouble. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot which has hot coals, and have the pot covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that hole put the key of the instrument; then pour your fumigation into it, and the patient puts the end of the cord into their mouth, and closes their mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes just to the sweat; and the sweat will now stop, and if it does not stop, then repeat the fumigation many times; and allow the patient to be thirsty, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then there is need for it to come out by this governance.
And the form of the instrument with which you treat the sweat is such that when you can see it, it resembles curved pincers for moving into the throat; and has a resemblance to a bee's stinger, and it has a spiky surface like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and behold its form:
The chapters on abscesses.
Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what is remembered hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two manners in which one is similar to the other, and because it holds moisture. And the second manner is for those that are at the bone. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the bony part are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if abscesses are not to be pierced, until the bow is soft according to its completion; and if there are some that must be pierced when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, as with abscesses that are near joints. For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves it alone until it is purulent around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that member. If the abscess is on the main limb, and you delay perforation until it is soft, it will harm the main limb; or if it is on the foundation, then one must pierce it as soon as it is dead; and it is not right to pierce a hard abscess without digestion being complete, except for that which is on the foundation, lest it burst forth and becomes a fistula, and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is subsiding, and the departures of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the quieting and settling of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation dependant on the location of the abscess, and where it appears more; and be the perforation of long duration in the body, and if the abscesses are at the hands or feet, or in joints, and near nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pain.
In those that are painful, according to the one member. And when abscesses are in the bony part, it is best that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion completion, as we said. For if you pierce it before then, there will be a long flow of pus from it, and it will be full of much filth; and by chance, the lips and bottom will become hardened and indurated. And if any abscess needs to be pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the member requires. It is necessary that you make small incisions for small abscesses, and large incisions for large abscesses, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the key, and cover; when it has become as soft as a cloth, and is no longer painful, then do as one does with babies: and if there are those that are split in three angles, and if there are those that need to be covered like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses from anger; and if there are such where one makes a circular cut, and other cuts and similar coverage.
Those who do not have a head, such as abscesses that are soft and superficial, it is necessary that you pierce them thoroughly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large and has accumulated great pus, and you pierce it, so as not to remove all the pus at once, but rather some of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then remove any further matter above; do this by degrees, gradually, until all the pus comes out; similarly if the patient is weak in constitution, or a woman carrying child, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the expectations sometimes quiver at the issue of the pus, which may happen to kill the patient, and you would not be aware of it. Therefore, proceed with great caution through this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, dress the wound, and look if the abscess is small; and if it's a plain incision, apply tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it's a large abscess, and there are many perforations, it is necessary that you place a tent in each one so that they come together; and if you have cut away part of the skin from the abscess and covered it around, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or a rough cloth made of linen without moisture, and tie it tight until the third day; then remove it, and treat it with oil until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor leu decorrant par maintes fois.
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: for I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here the chapter.
of boils
Where small abscesses come from the head, they are boils and ways of ours that are in toils, just like a silkworm's cocoon; there are many similar ones. Some are fatty and those with moisture as well as pustules; and some are hard and stony to cut into, and there is no doubt if the artery does not go against it. The works of cutting are that you test every .i. instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes forth below, whatever thing it contains. For if it contains moisture, it will burst above the long one. And when the moisture is emptied, it will be skinned without leaving any skin containing that moisture, for it returns again when nothing is left; then plunge cotton in Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in water and vinegar, and fill the wound, and let it be until the next day; and what remains at night. And then repeat the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain at night; then cure the wound with ointment as seems best, until it is healed. And if the abscess holds a fat one-night, cut it according to this form from the head; and let it ooze out, and scrape off all around, and put your entire care in pulling away the skin where it lies; and if the artery does not go against you, do what I told you after. And similarly do with the abscess if it is stony, and of cutting and curing as I told you.
And the cutting above the stony abscess and the moist one is easier, because they are full of blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or on the head where there is no moisture, and among them was one abscess that I cut on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if someone had done anything to it, they would have made a wound just like one from a stone. In other abscesses coming from the head, except for those that come from children's heads and the roots of ears, the opening should always be at its most dependent place, so that the bowels can come out; and cure them as is necessary.
of scrofulas
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck and below the shoulders, and sometimes in the arms, and occasionally elsewhere on the body, and are many and intertwined with one another. And each scrofula is properly within its own coat, just like the boil and abscess of the head, as we said; and there are many similarities to these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malignant and will not obey health. Therefore, when you see one with good disposition for cutting, and it resembles the color of the body, and is quiet on each side, and is not averse to the nerves of the neck or the artery or the conduit, and is not too deep; then you should cut above, and scrape off each part, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor make any unnecessary incisions, lest your hand slips, and do not see too far ahead, lest you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not let you finish, put in the wound a vitriol powder, or some powders that remain blood-stained, and bind the wound; and leave it so until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood has been staunched, then return to your work, until you have completed it; then look to your duty index if there are any small scrofulas remaining, and cut them off and scrape them clean. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, it is not necessary for you to cut that scrofula in its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall away harmlessly; then fill the wound with old cotton plunged in Egyptian oil, then cure.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, so that there is no superfluous part remaining due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at its root, and pull away, and sew as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity will burst forth where it appears most moist; and it bursts forth in this way, depending, then applying poultices with ointment and similar things, so that what remains of the corruption is corrupted; and when the wound is well cleaned, then cure it with ointment bringing forth flesh, until it is healed.
of squinancy
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their word.
To those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the opening of the throat, which is called "epiglote", be removed; and one does not provide assistance through these things, because all the veins and the pores of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits. When the disease is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cut the epiglote in order to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglote, we must cut it below three or four circles, or a small incision across, between the two circles, or according to the quantity of the abscess's opening, not in the cartilage.
and those who do it are suitable for the cutting of the epiglote so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long and narrow.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the entire length, then cuts the flesh so that it comes to the channel; and remove the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the abscess, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the flesh of the channel which springs forth through the broken part and by the lack of voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed when one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the flesh, and sew it all up without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until it is healed.
On does not make this just so long as the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to be dying, and death approaches. Then one cuts the epiglottis for this reason that the patient cannot swallow, and it breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and for this reason the ancients command to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it is passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took one knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut off part of the veins of the privy member.
and I was called to heal her, and I found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and I knew that she had not cut her throat nor conducted anything except the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was sound.
and nothing befell the young woman except that she lost her voice, and returned afterwards to her normal state.
therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the greenish color, and it is very common in women.
and it occurs in two ways: natural, and accidental; or the natural one has no cause.
And the accidental is in two ways, as follows: one is like a tumor to us, and the other manner is like an abscess that comes from an artery. and there is fear, and it does not behoove to operate except on that which is small, and prove and search through all the interstices. if you find it just like a small tumor, and cannot be opened by any vein, then cut it, as one cuts the nose, and treat it throughout its entire surface, if there is no abscess. and search thoroughly, and heal it as it should be, until it is perfectly sound.
of the nose
There are many kinds of noses, which I will tell all their likenesses;
and it is necessary that I tell the entire difference that is between nose and exit.
I say that exit is heat and feverish, as long as the ebullition has not passed, and the putrefaction is completed; then the fever and heat subside.
With the nose there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains one pus-filled sac, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins like a greenish hue, and becomes swollen.
and they are in two likenesses, either fatty or moist, and very much in color as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the nose, that you examine and inquire first through all the instrument which is called "interstice", according to what its form will be or the chapter which comes afterwards.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses of the nose is that you take or the most moist part that you find in the abscess, and bend your two fingers and fingers, as long as you know that the instruments have pierced the cure, then according to the greatness of the abscess.
then extract the interstice, and take care in what jumps forth.
If moist discharge flows forth, regardless of its color, then treat it as I have said about other abscesses.
and if after the interstice no moisture comes forth, knows it is fatty, then treat it thus in a cross shape, and take it as pincers, and scrape it lightly from each part and watch the coat where it lies that you lead it to health with the nose.
and if you cannot lead it to health, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the nose will return many times.
and if a small part remains, and the pus grieves you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and hold the wound, and put on soothing things for the hot abscess, and heal it with other remedies until it is sound.
and if the nose is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and heal it with what surrounds the flesh.
and if the vein beats against you or some other thing that is contrary, and you hasten and apply the lead of vitriol dissolved, and let it be so for two days or three, until the wound purifies, and repose the ebullition of blood; then return to cutting what remains of the nose.
Behold the forms of the interstice instruments, and they are in three manners: great, medium, and small; and there are three quadrants which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three manners: great, medium, and small, to search for abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorcerers, and they are made of yellow bronze, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are most proven to be used for searching out the swellings of fistula.
and they are in three manners: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the holes.
The forms of the instruments are in many likenesses, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and there are instruments that have two swellings of three manners also.
and there are instruments that have three swellings, and they are also of three manners; and there are instruments that have two swellings, and single instruments with only one swelling, and they are all in three manners; and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these instruments is cutting, and there are some that do not cut very far except from one side, with which we scrape the nose, because one does not cut the vein or nerve.
and these interstice instruments are answered with little handles, so that the patient does not feel it when opening abscesses.
and there are three kinds: great, small, and middle-sized, as you see
and one should not use more than the usual amount in a normal location, such as legs, arms, and breasts, and similar locations;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument resembling the tips of fingers, according to this form, by which blood is stopped;
and one puts it sometimes in the location where veins and arteries are healed completely, and sometimes according to this great form;
Sometimes women's breasts swell in some men when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, it is necessary to proceed according to this form of line b up to point g. then scrape off the fat, and apply medicine to the wound allowing it to dry, then bring together the two lips of the wound at the edge, and care for it until it is healed.
and if the breast sags downward and is softened by its size like it has in women, then cut it in two creases above with two similar incisions. so that one is joined to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from line b to line g. then scrape off the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not wish to rest or due to the corruption of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive oil. and leave it like this until what remains and the fat are consumed, then care for it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the armpits
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofulae or those with nodules, and some contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture therefore should be cut according to this form from line b to line g. And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care for it with oil suitable to this purpose until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the same kind as scrofulae, then cut it as we have said in incisions for scrofulae, and if the wound yields pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sealed, many times abscesses come, and it also happens to the swollen vein and abscess;
and if one knows this way when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep inside. and when you feel it in your hands, you feel a strangeness; and when it is due to the vein, it is drawn away appearingly;
and it is foolish to cut this abscess, and even more so when it is under the armpits and breasts and in the neck and many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the treatment of iron, and that which is at the head should also be avoided, and in that which is swollen from artery, cut above the skin on the long side.
It is therefore necessary to avoid the treatment of iron, and that which is at the head should also be avoided, and in that which is swollen from artery, cut above the skin on the long side. then work the incision according to the shape, and separate the artery from the flesh so that it is uncovered.
then place a needle under it and make it pierce through to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you about extracting the two arteries that are in the temples.
then tie off the spot between the two threads with an introducer until the blood that is there comes out and the abscess is relieved.
then apply the treatment that allows pus to come out, until the knot breaks. then care for it with oil suitable to this purpose, until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to the swelling of the vein, then it is necessary that you bind with your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin. then place the needle under the spot that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and have one double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side. then tie off the abscess, just as I have told you, or with the knot of one part to the two keys of the thread.
and if you doubt that the thread is not long enough, then rebraid another needle with all the thread under all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in three places.
then cut the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut away the superfluity of the skin and leave what is tied.
then put on a moistened cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and oils until it is healed.
of abscesses of the nails
Also just like abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come on the nails when they are worn out or from excessive work and similar things.
And this happens more often in the joints and fingers and in all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color appears to be the same as that of the flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain.
and when one strains it strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body, but under the skin.
and it is indeed all around, and does not go forward or backward, nor up or down, and the one in the joints should not be cut with iron: perhaps there would be contraction.
and the one who is on the head or forehead, make the skin at the eyebrow line. If the abscess is small, then hold it with forceps and cut off its root.
and if it is large, then suspend it with an introducer, and scrape it, then remove it and bring together the wound at the edge, and care for it until it is healed.
of large boils hanging No times it occurs in bellies and not at all elsewhere than that, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by its resemblance to those, and has subtle roots and a large head; and there are small and very great ones.
and I saw in one home who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and in them flowed moisture.
I copied them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6, and the operations in incision are such that you see if the patient is moist, and the color of the boil is white and moist and has a subtle root;
so cut it with a broad spatula and have the fire cautery in your presence; for when you cut, many times too great quantities of blood come forth, and if the blood flows against you, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient espanting and fearful of the incision with iron, take one piece of well-made linen cloth and bind it to the boil as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to hold the linen cloth tight until it cuts out the boil, and choose by your own work; and if the roots are large, then fear to cut into it for the belly, but you can well cut through half.
then cauterize it so that it does not recur; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut out the boil which is of bad color and poor sense and looks like milk.
For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the cure of chancres later.
when the boil is full
If the appearance of the boil comes from a burn or cut, or a wound from a syphilitic sore, and is on the belly and in some of the boils, as it happens in other wounds, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from windiness;
and if it is from the wound of syphilis and from the discharge of the boil, then the color of the abscess appears similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with various discharges. And if it is due to the discharge of the intestine, then it is much more diverse, and when one presses it at its base it swells up, and then returns, and by chance becomes hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining; and if it is due to blood, then it opens by these signs of the large and hard abscess, and is fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is due to windiness, then it is sensitive to the toucher, and the operations are such that you see if the appearance is from the blood of an artery, or a vein, or windiness. So it is necessary that you leave the cure alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, due to the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the boil, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his intestines tight and be stretched out straight, then sign around the entire boil. then command him to sit so long between your hands, then go around the place where you have signed at all the spatula. then cut off the top half of the abscess to the great unguent;
then operate on the top half of the abscess stretched over the binding, and insert your finger's index and press the intestine. if you find it stuck to the binding, then release it, and push the intestine back into the belly.
and if you find the boil, then take hold of it with the unguent, and cut off the superfluity.
and if the artery or vein is contrary to you, go around it well, then come back to your work and take two needles, and insert two fine threads, and insert the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as if you were piercing.
then bind the abscess in three places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it can be seen, and choose the dead flesh by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and able to be cut, then treat the wound as needed, and heal the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and able to be cut, then treat the wound as needed, and heal the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and close the wound.
of the chancres
We have said in the division the likenesses of chancres, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid iron cures; and we say that chancres are born in the marriage bed, and great caution is needed in the cure, and the ancients say that when chancres are in the groin or in a place where it can be reached like a boil which is in itself, and on the thighs, and in similar places, one should remove it all at once when it begins; and when it is large and old, then it is not necessary for you to approach it, for I never saw anyone healed; nor has any before me.
And the operations, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient with black bile once; then make him sicker if he has manifest repletion; then prepare the patient one good place to do the operation; then throw away your lancets or chancres, and clean off all parts, and remove all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow fully, and inspect well the wound with your hand or something else; and if the hemorrhaging of blood makes the incision contrary to the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding is stopped; then treat the wound with another treatment until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only lit up; and one should not touch iron on these two likenesses: that is to say, tympanites and yposearche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore, when you are treating this likeness of dropsy which is called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then look if the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, such as all stomach troubles and similar things; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see that the patient has great virtue, and they only have dropsy and are neither too young nor too old, then you should operate in this way: Lieve the patient straight onto his hands, and the attendants press the belly out, thrusting water into the lowest part of the back, then take the spathium spinous according to this shape: And be cut off at two parts at a point, and yet not so far in that it can come up to the intestine when one puts it in, and does not damage it.
Then look to see if the hydropsis is directed towards the intestines: if it is, then you must cut upwards of three fingers' breadth from below on the navel; and if the hydropsis is due to liver disease, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly; and if it is due to mumps, then it should be on the right side, and it does not matter that the patient lies over the incision so that superfluities do not flow into this weak part.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and stop it, and lift your hand off the spathium spinous between the skin and the sacral bone just as when cutting to the length of an fingernail or slightly more; then pierce the sacral bone until the spathium spinous comes into its natural place, and this is the seat of water; then treat it further, and stop this instrument which has this shape: And it resembles a subtle silver chain, and is made of iron or lightweight arches, and in the lower part, one small pit; and on one side, three pits; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the bones are cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision which writers use to sharpen their quill.
At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, now pour down on it onto the instrument; then empty half or a third part of it, for if you empty more than is necessary at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the release of their spirit from the sword, or they may faint, or approach death.
But empty it according to the quantity of their virtue, and according to what the indications of the patient's virtue signify, and their pulse; then treat the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now for the purpose which stops the pit that is on the sacral bone, as I have spoken, so that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and treat with a small quantity of water.
Do this for some days, and take care not to use too much water until only a little bit remains. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave them with too much water, it will cure of sepulture or sand heat, and by sweating or bathing in the sun, and drinking plenty; and treat with drying medicines as long as they are healthy, and cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen after the extraction of the water, just as I said before.
Of the stopping of the urethra Never are children born who do not have a pit in the urethra, or the pit is small, or it is not in its place. If this is necessary, then soon pierce each spathium spinous very subtly according to this shape: then put one small plug of linen into the pit, and bind it and keep it thus for three days or four; and when they want to make urine, then remove the plug, let them urinate, and then replace it; and by chance it does not happen, because the urine that comes out will not leave the plug closed. Those who have small pits are treated with linen plugs, as we said, and it will expand. Those who do not have the pit in its place are injured, because no one is born with the pit at the head of the urethra, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot pass stool for this reason that the material cannot come out to the anus, and it is a bad disease.
And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, and then the head of the urethra and the penis are shaped like a quill, so that the pit opens in its place, as it should; and take care to stop the bleeding of blood which often comes forth, and if there is any, use what stops blood from flowing, and cure the wound until they are healthy.
Of the pustules on the penis Many times these pustules come on the penis, and it is a foul appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a subtle onion, and cut and scrape all of them off, then put Egyptian ointment on cotton moist; then treat with divine ointment until they are healthy. And if the pustule is malignant, with a foul color and smell, you must apply fire cautery. When you have cut it off, and the pustule is on the penis, and has part within the skin and part outside, you must remove the pustule that is inside first; and when it is closed, then treat what is outside. For if you treat them together, the member of the penis will not be certain whether it will be perforated or not, and there will be blackness and corruption in its place and on its tip; so it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made of honey and flour from the bark of grafted pomegranates and vetches, and then treat with other remedies until they are healthy.
And if bleeding occurs, you must apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterization is of two dispositions together: namely, at the bleeding and at the corruption; and if the member of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you tie a linen cloth around the penis, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the foreskin has been loosened at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or if it is for a wound or abscess, then it is necessary to cut away with a sharp instrument until the bond is loosed, and the member of the penis be delivered from all sides.
and if this is a grievous thing to do, then it is necessary that you cut away with a spathium spinous a small part from the head of the penis and the skin; then carefully remove between two or three, and place a thin cloth of linen moistened in cold water, so that it will not adhere again.
Of Circumcision
Circumcision is not the removal of continuity as with other wounds; although when we do this work at our own will and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the most gentle for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not speak of the circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and sages who performed circumcision around one half inch, with great force, and all at once; it would seem that the keys are because there are two skins, and by chance if you cut above and leave below.
Or it recovers by cutting, and the pain is double, and the point of the member at the wound is not assured; and at the mundification of the angle by chance escapes the iron, and the work is ruined, and many times thus it happens that there is no need for mundification and I have seen this.
From the mundification which is done with force I have found the goodness of experience, for the forces cut equally well above as below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally well in one smooth motion; but that the thread be well strained around the skin; and the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only making him tie the thread around his penis so long as possible, and then let it go in all the ways you can. Then make it stay between your hands straight, and direct the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is; then mundify well from the filth that is assembled there, then tie the lower sign with a double thread, then tie below one joint to another joint; and hold it with two thumbs by the second binding at the pouch and index finger, and cut between the two joints, then lift the key above quickly and pull the head of the penis.
Then make it stay between your hands straight, and direct the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is; then mundify well from the filth that is assembled there, then tie the lower sign with a double thread, then tie below one joint to another joint; and hold it with two thumbs by the second binding at the pouch and index finger, and cut between the two joints, then lift the key above quickly and pull the head of the penis. Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and top of the powder a small cloth glued with an egg yolk cooked tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh olive oil, and leave it on until the next day, and then cure another cure until it is clean.
The form of the forces for the mundification is this: the two keys should be held and should be cutting, and the keys should be as great as the fingers are equal.
The error of the mundification is when the iron flows out at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the ligaments make an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold it to your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
And if it lasts for three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, then let it be until the abscess has subsided, and scrape it lightly; then cut as you can move, and take care of the part of the penis, so that nothing will harm it.
Then cure the ligament with things that soothe a powder wound, as we have said to treat powders, and if you cut with the iron beyond measure, and it goes up, then it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is clean.
of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to stone formation, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or new flesh, or similar things, which we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to stone formation in the bladder or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and have the patient strain himself as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder will be constrained to express the stone above, so that the urine is released.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", which has this form: and be made of silver, finely woven, like the feathers of a bird; and be about one and a half palms long, and be fine at the head.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the top to a small piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread into the siringue; and cut off the excess of the thread and put it just up to the head of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and lift the bladder and penis with moist olive oil and wet water.
Then put the siringue lightly into the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the belly; then insert the siringue forward up to the bladder, and have the patient feel come just to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless the guide or conductor of it is twisted; then pull the thread all the way through the wool piece by piece, and the urine will follow the wool, then pull out the urine;
and repeat the siringue until the bladder is empty, and have the patient relaxed.
of the diseases of the bladder
When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, or putridity is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, then make all the instrument which is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the threads are woven so that the medicine flows well into the penis without addition, so that we can draw out the moisture, and insert it when necessary.
and when you see your medicines go into the bladder, put the head of the keusteur into the moisture, and draw on the drawing that is there; if you draw the moisture into the keusteur, then pull out the drawing strongly back into it; so the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle catheter with which one catheterizes the bladder: thus:
And it is made of silver or antimony, and the key is higher up; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see catheterizing the bladder into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat one piece of that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the catheter into the penis, then strain your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has gone in, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put one strong thread in these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tile, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, by pressing with your hand until the moisture comes out of the bladder.
of stone
We have said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and we have said the difference between the stone lodged in the reins, and all signs, and where one should work on the stone; and in the bladder, and in the urethra; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder often happens to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and there appears hair, and the patient's urethra swells, and he urinates many times, and then becomes inflamed; and many of these stones fall away; and is lighter the healing of children until they are three years old, and it's very grievous in elderly people, and is in middle-aged men, to those who are between youth and old age; and is the cure more gentle for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the cure, it is first necessary to purify the patient with a purge, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders seeking out the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and lift them up and move them down below, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes falls out from above; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards; then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the bladder, then hurry now to cut on the stone. And if it doesn't fall with just touching, moisten your left index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is an infant, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young adult; and put it into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, then push it up to the neck of the bladder; then press down on your finger, and push it out at the back where you see it cut.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch out the intestines in his right hand above, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the intestines in the part where one makes the incision; then put in the spatula carefully, so that it takes this form:
And make it between what is between the intestines and the foundation, not in the middle but beside the left navel; and be straight above the stone, and your fingers should be at the foundation, and the incision of the traverser so that it is wide behind and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, nor too large.
By chance, the pressure may cause the stone to jump forth with little effort; and know that there are some stones which have angles and margins: if it is grievous to extract; and if there is one that is soft, similar to a flint, and rounded, whose extraction is easy.
Therefore, at the place where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump out, it is necessary that you strain on the forceps which are like a file at the head, to strain the stone so that it does not escape; or you put beneath one of the subtle instruments curved at the head; and if you cannot shape it thus, then enlarge one of the perforations, and if the sinew decomposes, then strain it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, then first take out the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove it forward, and the smaller ones after if there are more. And if it is very large, then you must make it larger and create a bigger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out quickly below where the flesh cannot be closed; but nevertheless strive to extract or break into pieces with forceps, until you have taken it apart piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and bind it tight, and place on top one damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then resupply the patient on his back, and do not untie the band until the third day.
And when you untie it, then rise up very well with oil and water, and then cure him with balsam of diaphaneikon and balsam of basilikeon, until he is healed.
And if hot apostemes come to the wound and corrosion, and congealment of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means so that the urine does not flow with the urination: then put your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and destroy it.
Then lift the wound with water and vinegar and silk, and help him in all ways that you see, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works that you do to cure him, that you bind his two thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the bed.
And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra, and stuck inside, and the urine cannot come out; then cure him as I have said before, by cutting into him many times, or be excused from cutting on this account. I have already proven it thus.
Take one iron fork according to this shape and let it be fixed at three angles in one handle:
Then take one thread and tie it around the urethra below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the fork into the urethra gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the fork in your hand at the stone piece by piece, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then urine will come out soon, and press your hand on what is remaining of the stone that is inside the urethra. And then it is broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then make the urethra meet the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean up the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure him until he is healed.
of the stone of women
There often happens that the stone is lodged in women, and if it ever does, it is a serious affliction, and it is defended against three things: one is that by chance the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who reveals herself to mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way it is that by chance one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of surgery; and the fourth way it is that the stone of the woman is more deeply lodged than the stone of man, for which reason it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear.
And if necessity demands it, then it is necessary that you take a midwife well-informed, and find one who knows how to do so, and if you cannot find one, not at all like one cast aside, subtle; or the present one, an old woman well-versed in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you order regarding the examination of the stone.
and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to place her dowel or foundation and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, then she constrains it beneath her dowel, and commands that she places her dowel or with the patient, and gently presses her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, where it appears to be moving, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her dowel above or beneath the stone, and make the incision small at first.
then press the right in the incision, if you feel the stone so deeply in the wound until the stone can come out freely, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and great and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; thus knows the likenesses to know the outcome.
And if the blood flows forth, then put vitriol powder at the place, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding is stopped; then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of stones from men to help you in your work.
and if the blood flows forth, and it is from the artery that was cut, then put powder on the place and strain of tents and bandages, and do not continue this any more, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient would die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the place has been dressed, then return to your work until the stone is out.
of fleshly hernia
Ramice aquouse is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white syphac, which is under the skin of the scrotum, that contains the egg; and it is called "syphac", and sometimes it is properly in the fabric of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the scrotum between the white syphac that we have said; and this does not happen unless it is not.
And the genesis of this Ramice is from weakness that comes to the scrotum, and spreads that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the scrotum, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining towards yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white, and it happens more often.
and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white syphac that we have said, then it is a swollen abscess, long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the scrotum, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper fabric, then it is a swollen abscess with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white syphac, then it is well-known; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the surrounding quadrants, because the form is as we have said before. According to these things then that come after the introitus, judge what is inside.
According to these things then that come after the introitus, judge what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be made whole according to our power and the replenishment of their body; then bind them on their back, on something a little high, and put many cloths underneath.
then sit on their left side, and command the minister to sit on their right, and extend the rod to one of the two sides of the scrotum;
then take the spatula left, and cut through the skin of the scrotum between the long and short sides until you reach the white syphac, and make a straight incision in cutting the skin of the scrotum to just beyond the white syphac, and scrape it subtly according to our power.
then pierce the white syphac with a sharp instrument to a certain depth, and extract all the water, and then put in your instruments, and stretch the white syphac upwards; and do not touch the scrotum, but only the white syphac; cut it out entirely or in pieces, even the edge of it subtlety, lest if you do not cut it well, the water will return.
and if the egg jumps out of your work, then put it back in its place when you have completed the work on the syphac; then gather the two leaves of the scrotum together with a suture, and cure it just like other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you loose the vessels that are suspended, doubting the disintegration of blood; then cut off the scrotum to all the suspending part, and extract the egg, and cure it just as we have said.
And if water is assembled in two parts together, know that it are two Ramices; then cut the other part just as you did the first one equally, and stop the bleeding, and put a wet linen cloth soaked in rose oil into the wound.
and put another wet linen cloth in wine and oil, and put it on the two scrotums, and put doubled cloths above them, and tie it to all the string that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths and wrap them in woolly cloth according to this shape and sew them together with a suture in the girdle of the breeches, and one of the straps takes up from the foundation to the back, and the other to the part of the scrotum; and the other strap goes over the two groins, and is all assembled in the buckle of the breeches.
et aucune fois is medicinee ceste ramice de cautery en lieu de taille de fer
If you take the fire cautery according to this form, and pierce the abscess with fine needles, and scrape it with this subtle hot cautery:
And cut in all the ways you can, until you have removed everything; and be sure that the fire does not touch the yolk; and know that this work is more safe; and carefully guard against bleeding, and watch closely over the works of surgery.
and if nothing is contrary to you, or abscess or bleeding or another thing, then cure what is contrary to you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this operation because of its unpleasantness, then administer a potion, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs that we have said which ramie is lax.
So sit the patient on a soft seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the spatula as wide as possible, and put the perforation along the length of the body; and let the holes be large so that all the liquid can flow freely.
then place cotton on the wound, and tie it, and let the remaining liquid drain, then care for it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow liquid to exit the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you insert a pin or the instrument used for draining water from hydropics, as mentioned before; and enlarge one pocket in the wound, and know that the liquid will return, and be reabsorbed after six months or so, and when it is reabsorbed as before, thus the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the cutting of this root there are more fears and dispositions, which is why it seems to me that you should not leave it.
and I will tell you the work and the similar things of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed to the testicles; and it is by great chance.
It is to know by excess of bitter and acidic humor that spreads to the testicles, or from a blow;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and does not bring pain, and is a grievous abscess.
and by chance there are grievous abscesses that are painful and piteous, of a foul color, and sometimes come from no artery or from swelling of the vein.
When it is by no artery, then it is known by the disposition of hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and it does not seem right that you touch it.
He who is made from swelling of the vein is known by its disposition to the expression of pressure on the fingers,
and one can well make an incision on this resemblance and on the other parts. and it is that you cut the kernel of the testicles, then lift up the yolk, and scrape away the white scurf, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the yolk.
If the yolk is already softened with these new scars, then it is necessary that you scrape away the yolk and the kernel.
and if it is airy in the scurf or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you remove all that congestion and scrape again.
And if the birth of the scar is at the back, then it is necessary that you cut away all of it and extract the yolk, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then dress the wound with damp linen in rose oil and wine, and then care for it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess surrounded by a wrapping similar to that of a bundle, with the softening of the testicles, and if the patient grievously complains when he walks.
and the cure for this disease is just as frightful as the previous one.
and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a soft seat, then place the suspensory of the testicles downward to your fingers, to all the vessels that are near the penis, and bind them tightly, and stretch them forth.
then cut at the spatula-like instrument as wide as possible across the path of the vessels, until they are uncovered,
and then scrape away from each side, just as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
then insert an awl or needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first point where the vein came out, and tie it again at the other end. then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and scrape away the corrupt moles.
then dress the wound as with others that have been opened up, so that no vessel may bleed which nourishes one of the testicles.
for by this, there is no evil that comes, and if all the vessels come forth, then it is necessary to remove the testicles from all the vessels. so that the organs do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
of the roughness of the scurf. The events of this root are by the section that comes from the scurf, or the extension above the belly in the part of the kidneys, for which the intestines descend from that roughness to one of the testicles.
and this roughness is either of the scurf or of the extension of it, and comes in two ways from many causes: or by blow, or by jump, or by bray, or by lifting a heavy load, and similar things.
and the signs when it is of the extension of the scurf are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly. and the abscesses are equal all the way to the bottom, because the scurf presses on the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the scurf, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse appearing abscesses below the skin near, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body flowing out of the scurf.
And at no time do the loops go down with the intestine, and are retained inside, and cause great suffering to the patient, especially when he is pressed.
And in these iron cures there is fear, why it must be avoided.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to put his hand into the wound, inside the intestine, if he can reach it. Then lean over onto his neck between your hands, and lift up his ribs.
Then stretch the skin upwards, and scrape off all the skin from the long coccyx. Then push the leaves of the leather belt into the wound, according to what you need to open it, and be such that the breath can exit.
Then scrape off the sacrum that is under the skin of the coccyx, until the white sacrum bone is fully exposed from all sides.
Then place your two index fingers in the cleft of the coccyx, between the white sacrum bone that is under the skin of the eggshell, and between the second sacrum.
And pull back what is behind the eggshell, and between the second sacrum; then move your right hand into the skin of the coccyx, and stretch up the white sacrum bone to your left hand, and lift the eggshell up to all the sacrum towards the belt. And instruct the assistant to stretch the eggshell upwards, and release what is behind the tie.
And search with your two hands if the intestine is wrapped around or stuck to the white sacrum bone, and if you find anything, then push it into the belly underneath.
Then take a needle with a thread made of ten threads, and push it into the back part of the sacrum, which is after the skin of the coccyx; after the belt, then cut off the knots that appear from the threads, until there are four threads. Then tie them together one on top of the other in a cross shape, and bind the sacrum, which we said is under the skin of the coccyx, with a strong knot from two parts. Then wrap the knots of the threads and tie them together with two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter in, lest a suppurating abscess does not come. And place the knot above it according to the first long knot of one and a half fingers, and after these two knots leave the sacrum that is under the skin of the coccyx the width of one finger.
And after that all the rest according to the roundness that the eggshell carries; then scrape in the part that is under the skin of the coccyx, until it is smooth and rounded, as we have said before.
Then apply moistened wool in oil to the wounds, and put it on the place, and apply the knot that we said. And any time the white sacrum bone is cauterized as we said, after incision, due to fear of excessive bleeding.
For this often happens, and leave the knot until it is set by itself; and if it delays in setting, then be raised with hot water, and put on what we said, until it sets.
Then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshly hernia
In this case I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment by iron.
And the old men say that it is done in such a way as if the ramie thread is wrapped around the vein, in the same manner that you tie the vessels, after the belt on top lightly under.
Then cut in two and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes comes rupture in the groin, as we have said, and open up the abscess; and none of the intestines go to the coccyx, and if any do, it is rare, and repair all hours.
and anyway, if it stays too long in this point, the wound or sacrum grows, until the intestine protrudes.
and this happens due to the extension of the sacrum that is in the groin, as we have said, because it is stretched, then becomes softened and inflated, and opens up.
and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before; and never is it treated with iron in this manner.
and it is that the patient lies quietly on his back between your hands, then cut off the swelling of the rupture, inflated to three fingers in width, according to its size.
and then extract the sacrum that is under the skin that follows, and take the cord and put it on top of the swelling of the sacrum.
and press it to the depth of the belly, then cut the two swellings appearing on the sacrum above the head of the cord, and cut one and the other.
and then extract the head of the cord, and do not cut the sacrum nor extend the eggshell or anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of the intestine's ramie.
and then treat it with the wound treatment. And when you cut the threads, instruct the patient and treat the wound, until it is healed.
The sacrum is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more effective in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the coccyx
Many times the skin of the coccyx becomes soft in some men, because the contents within are softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, that one makes the patient lie on their back, and cuts off the softened skin above the natural skin. Then tie together the two lips with a seam, and if you see, cut off the excess of the softened skin at three or four seams firmly; then cut between the seams, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healed, and the thread bleeds.
of punishment
Know that chastisement is ordained in our law, and therefore I would not speak of it in this book, except for two reasons: one, to make the physician respond when asked about the disease and its treatment; and the other, because we often need to chastise certain beasts to help us, such as a goat or sheep or cat and other beasts. I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by tearing apart. In the way we do it by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the coccyx are softened and relaxed; then take them in your hand, so they are remitted and you no longer feel them.
Of hermaphrodites
Of hermaphrodites there are two ways as with men: one is when between the two testicles it appears just like the figure of a woman's nature, and it has hair, and sometimes in court it urinates. And the other way is in women, and it has above the finger-like thing just like a rod and two testicles.  And the cure for man and woman is that you cut off the excessive flesh and cure it as with other wounds; in the second way, men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles do not have any cure.
Of tetinegine
Tetinegine is a growth attached to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it just like a hand, and that's the cure. It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tetinegine with your hand or with clippers, and cut it slightly; and do not go too far in, lest bleeding occurs, then treat another wound until it is healed; and at another wound that appears on the mouth of the marris, and fills, and by chance jumps forth, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for that reason they called it in old "cow's disease". It is necessary that you cut it off, as we have said about tetinegine, and cure it until it is healed.
Of erratic
Erratic is when the natural state of the woman is not perceived, or if the uterus is small; and it is caused by birth, accident from disease that has occurred, or by a growth attached to the skin or subtle syphilitic sores, and it forms in the belly, sides, or below, wherever it may be; and prevents conception, childbirth, and sometimes even flowers from growing; and the knowledge of this is by looking at the pulse. If the swelling is nearby appearing, you should go to your doctor or midwife. If it is a subtle syphilitic sore, and it is nearby the two kidneys, you must hasten, and do thus: place your two fingers together, and have the woman sit on her back, spreading her legs; then the two kidneys will be formed, until the subtle syphilitic sore is gone, and the swelling subsides; then take linen, moisten it in oil, and put it on the skin, and keep the woman at home each day, so she cannot swell. And if the syphilitic sore is hard and thick, you must cut it off like a leaf of myrtle. If the swelling is from new flesh, you should suspend it with clippers and cut it; and use medicines that stop bleeding, such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, and together with egg white; then apply a wide leather strap, so that the wound cannot heal; and thus it will be long, and apply a linen tent; then cure other wounds until it is healed. And when flesh grows in the belly, you must cut it off according to this manner, unless it is an enchanted aposteme. For the enchanted aposteme that is in the belly, one should not touch with fire.
Of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without courtly custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed; and we have said in the division the appearances of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive curation. I say that hemorrhoids and thrombus, when they are cut through to the belly, and there is no feeling, then it is not cured by fire. Those that are at the mouth of the belly, where one can feel, are those that can be cured. It is necessary therefore that you put the woman in a cold house, then anoint the thrombus with hot pincers, and cut off its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain bleeding, such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet for one hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and orange peel and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour and mix it with honey and oil, and make a poultice on her back. And if it stops bleeding, that is good. If not, make her wear bandages on her back and breasts to avoid further irritation; then take linen, moisten it in plantain or elder juice with old wine, and apply it to the skin. And when the aposteme subsides, cure the skin with oil until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a rough head, so you must cut it off as I said for thrombus; and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Of apostemes of the belly
Of apostemes of the belly
Of childbirth
It is necessary for the midwife to first know the figure of natural childbirth and its signs. When you see the woman's back arching down, and she desires to push out the afterbirth: then hasten the child to emerge forth; then you will know that this childbirth is according to nature, and it is the issue under her chief, and the secondine with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly, so that the child may emerge soon; for when it descends onto her chief, the secondine follows him, and the navel of the belly is cleansed of its superfluities by good cleansing. And this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes under her feet, or in excess, or in the hands, or on her stomach, or in some other way, and it is converted through chance upon her neck, and by other bad figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and to beware of error and deception. And I will show you all the figures how one should help her.
If the child comes out by natural issue, and the woman is giving birth in pain, and the virtues of her are weak, then make her sit on a stool or have women hold her; and anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek cooked, and then put the bale between her small intestines in the form shown here: And split the second intestine, and cut at her umbilicus as long as the moistors that are in there flow; and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purify the woman with fenugreek and oil of sesame; then make her grasp and strain the condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus the child will now come out. And if both hands come out first, then you must gently pull them back bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a stool, lift up her feet high; then remove the stool from the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall down; and if the hands cannot enter and the child is dead, then cut the hands at the umbilicus that is placed here before, and extract the child, and pull it out evenly.
From the exit of the child from its feet. When the child comes out on its feet, then it is necessary to push it upwards; and then turn it bit by bit until it is even.
Then take one foot and stretch it bit by bit.
Can he jump just to the groin, if she is commanded to grasp, and make her strain with condiments; if it jumps further, as God wills.
And if it is not further than we have said, then turn it bit by bit until it is according to the natural shape. For then it will be easier.
And if it does not come further as we have said, then take musk powder of aloes, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all together in one mortar; and put it on the woman's nature inside and outside with this ointment, then make her sit in warm water up to just below the ribs;
and when she is moistened underneath, then put a clyster of myrrh on her, and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her strain and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child is now jumping. From the exit of the child from its knees When the child comes out in this form, then put the bail on her hands bit by bit;
From the exit of the child that comes out with one hand hanging down It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and walk.
if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and gently lift up her legs.
then administer the musk powder that I have mentioned;
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study how to bring back the hand. and gently pull out the child according to its natural shape, and make her strain, and command that she grasp until the child comes out further.
From the exit of the child from its neck, and having spread out its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that the bail hold its hand, then turn it bit by bit, and gently pull it out.
and when it is even, then put on the natural musk powder of aloes and oil, as we have said, then command that she move bit by bit.
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and command that she grasp; and make her strain. in the same manner for all the intestines
in the same manner for all the intestines When it comes out in this way to all the intestines, then cut the intestine at your finger's length until the moistors are exhausted.
and if the child is hanging from its face and neck, then cut it off at the mouth so that it is not retained, and kill the child.
then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as is necessary, and command the woman to grasp at times:
From the exit of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an uncommon thing, and it often happens. Two are a rare thing, and do not live unless they have a name;
I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the cord that divides them, which is attached to the mouth;
and sometimes they come out naturally as one would under normal circumstances, as we have said.
And if they come out with pain, then do as we have said, and be the bail subtle, and make her do quickly and easily what she does. and do thus as is fitting for her salvation. Of multiple children
Of multiple children Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all shaped like an infant by the measurement of God's glory.
and it is necessary that the bail knows all this, for by chance similar things happen to him; so do as it is fitting.
Of the dead child
When you cure the woman of a dead child or afterbirth, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out further, and you are constrained to perform manual labor; it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fear of death.
It is necessary that the woman be seated on her back, and have her knees bent downwards, and her legs raised.
and the servant should place the midwife's stool in two parts, or if it is near a bed so that she will not be disturbed by the descent of the child.
then grease the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with mugwort and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and mixtures. then put it in the mother's body slightly, then take one layer or two layers that are suitable for this.
and watch to see if the child is formed and descending onto its head; if you place the layers in his eyes or in his throat or in his mouth or on his palate or under the beard or in the navel or near the ribs.
and if the descent is on the feet, then grasp or push it and make the sides equal.
and it is necessary that he holds the layer in his right hand, and puts the belt between the thighs of his left hand, and puts it lightly on all his hand, and places the layer in any of those places that we have said, until it comes to be empty.
then place it against another layer, or the third one you have need of, so that the extractions are even.
and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that the layers are bound together, and be the layers toothed so as to bind them, just as is this form.
And if there remains a part, then anoint some of its thighs with oil, and put it in that part, and pull the other part.
and if there remains none, then put this layer or more high in place, and do this until it comes out entirely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back because of the constriction. so it is necessary that you wrap it on a cloth, until it comes out entirely.
then cut it at the joint of the plant or at the ankle, and thus it is necessary that you do in the other hand, and with two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is strained in the issue, or if there is a gathered forehead. so it is necessary that you put the spatula-shaped spine between your thighs, and form the head and extract the moisture. or you wrap it around the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and thus do the same thing if the child has a large head naturally. and then pull out the bones with tongs,
and if the head jumps forward and it strains at the navel, then be torn, so that the moisture which is in the lower issue comes out.
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces at the joints as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole until the moisture runs.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is gentle, and the direction to the mouth of the mother is gentle.
And if it is strained in the belly or at the navel, then it is necessary that you extract it onto a cloth wrapped around your hand. and make the belly or navel, until the moisture which is there runs.
and if the other limbs are removed, and the head remains, so put the mother's hand in by the fontanelle of the mother, and pull it just to the mouth of the mother. then put one or two layers, and pull it out.
and if the mouth of the mother is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come forth, then there is no need to trouble yourself. instead it is necessary to administer things moist and greasy. and the administrator applies unguents, and pours in warm, softening, and moistening water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it even, then administer what we have said to a living child.
and if one cannot do so, then pull it out by pieces, and leave nothing of the placenta.
And when you have done this, then administer what we have said to hot abscesses that come forth in the mother.
and if hemorrhaging comes from blood, then be put into restraining water, and administer other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose child in her womb had been dead, then she consulted another on top of it, and refused the dead one. After a long time, an abscess came forth in her mouth and swelled so much that it burst open, and caused great turmoil.
I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I applied ointment of strong attraction, and one bone came out, and after a few days another one. I was greatly amazed, because the belly has no bones.
So I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I cleaned the wound, and pulled out many bones, until the woman was in a better state. and the woman stayed thus for a long time, and occasionally a little pus would come out from there.
and I have not forgotten this chapter except that when the master finds a strange thing, he knows how to put it right.
on restoring the mother to her place
Hereafter comes the form of the preserver, with which we write books; and to two returns at the two knees of the two links. However, the combs are more subtle than the restrictive ones, and are made of ebony or boxwood.
and be the mouth of the wood one foot and a half wide, and the margin of the trees one foot, and a palm and a half long. and between the two links be two joinings of this same wood, which are fastened on one side and the other, a half palm long or a little more.
and these two joinings are inserted in the mouth of the mother to open when one turns the two combs.
Another form, made more subtle and lighter, is to be made from boxwood or ebony wood, according to the appearance of pincers. and it should have two heads and four joints, just as you see, one palm long, and two wide.
and when you see it necessary to open the marris with all the instrument, cause the woman to sit on one pallet, her feet pendant and her legs spread out. then insert the two joints together in the marris, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand with all the instrument, just as you have done with pincers evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marris, until the ball makes what it wants.
These instruments are all mounted and have multiple appearances; and when the mirrors have been prepared, then is work more hasty, and higher among men for their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained at childbirth, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then make her exhale slowly, and keep your hands at her mouth and navel. and if she coughs for this, well it is.
If not, then take one pot, and make a perforation or cover, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the marris, such as calmant, rue, anise, camomile, cassialigne, and centaury.
all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put one cord or perforation of the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the marris.
and let it stay until the vapor comes inside the marris; then make her exhale, as we have said. If the secondine starts to move quickly. And if she remains after this cure and is not yet well, instruct the midwife to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or with mastic from altic, and then apply it to the natural place.
and it will seek out the secondine; and when she has found it, then take hold of it and stretch it little by little correctly, so that the marris does not hinder the extraction. but it is necessary to move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes and becomes dislodged.
And if the mouth of the marris is closed tight, we have said the remedy for exhaling and fumigation with herbs.
and if she is not cured by all that we have said, then be careful that you do not force the extraction.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marris, you tie to the woman's crotch, then anoint her with ointment tetrachemon.
and she will pass it and return to normal, and come back whole; but still, when she has passed if it comes in, a bad odor arises in the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Then it is necessary to make suitable fumigations with these: no ancient one has proven the fumigation of cress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and secondine is this:
And it resembles a cord, and one puts the head into place, and the wide ends above the fire;
and let the fumigations be on the coals, and let it stay until it is spent, and then start another one.
of piercing the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it is stopped by a thin membrane. so it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that thin membrane at its edge, and not make it too sharp, and guard the ligament so she does not touch it.
then put on a moist linen cloth in wine and oil, then the remedy of ointment until he is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not close, then put in a perforation a piece of cloth, and leave it for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go to chambers.
And whenever this stoppage comes from the sudden closing of a wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that stoppage: if it is cured, as we have said with the cloth of cloth.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from below the foundation are nodulation, and grow in the space between the two parts.
if there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is ancient, it works, and cuts out more moisture like white wax or subtle butter.
and sometimes these fistulas persist; and are known by this that there is either emission or evacuation or windiness when the patient does emission, and by chance one jumps up.
And if there are fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to half of the penis; and extend just to the junction of the crotch, and just not to the knee.
And thus one knows the fistula persisting at the foundation, and not persisting. and it is that you put your thumb or foundation on the index finger, and put a subtle awl of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuousness.
And if it has tortuousness, then I put a thin cloth tent or one hair of a horse into the fistula until you feel the tent or hair at your finger.
and if you don't feel it, and there is no emission, windiness, or movement, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; then hasten to cure.
And when the fistula persists just to the bladder or just to the urethral conduit of urine, then the urine jumps out and cannot be healed by medicines.
If it is pierced just to the junction of the crotch, then the tent comes up just to the level. if there is no tortuousness and the invention of pain around, then it is that it goes away by itself, and none of medicine or healing by ointment works.
and in these persisting fistulas there is no cure except for surgery, and the vanity of foolish surgeons who interfere with them.
In one who is not yet perfused and is not yet ancient, there is hope of recovery through iron, as I have experienced,
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and lifts their legs up to their hips, and has their hips inclined towards their belly; then place a poultice of earth or of cloth if there is curvature, as long as you know where the poultice should be.
If the patient feels it around the fundament, then it is necessary that you place your two fingers there,
then sense that the poultice has penetrated; and be discovered where you feel between your thumb and the scrotum or flesh, then know that it is purulent. if one does not work on it at all, one cannot heal it.
One says however that one can well heal some, but this happens rarely.
and the aid that is done, is to cauterize the abscess subtly according to the width of the fistula, as was said before. and wrap it all in heat within the fistula, until it comes to the fundament; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred skin fragments are burned, which are similar to a bird's feather.
and then heal it with moist poultices in butter, until that skin is loose, and then heal it with ointment anointing the skin and binding.
If he is healed thus, that's good. If not, in no other way can he be healed;
and if the poultice goes in and does not penetrate all the way to the thumb which is at the fundament, and there is between your two fingers and the poultice a thick covering of skin or scrotum, and you see the fistula above this covering of skin. so cut into the beginning of the fistula and wrap it afterwards before the poultice, and then cauterize after, as long as it comes to the top of the poultice.
and the poultice will be delivered and fall off; then remove those charred skin fragments that resemble a bird's feather, and none of them will remain.
And if the blood swells up and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine again.
For the fire cauterization assembles two good things: that is to say, the burning of those charred skin fragments, and the stopping of blood and the drying out of moisture.
then heal with moist poultices in butter or in crushed hazelnuts, as long as the pus drips down, and the charred skin fragments come out in the pus.
then heal the wound with ointments binding firmly to hard skin, and are the medications dried.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula comes right through to the fundament and is distant from the body, then place your thumb or fundament on it and investigate this.
If you feel the poultice and between two is the thread or scrotum or skin, or it is near to piercing, then there is no other remedy than through faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three manners:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut into it all the way to the bottom, or if you can put poultices and heal it as before.
and do not go too far in depth, lest you cut the tenement which holds the fundament, and come to evacuations without intention. then heal, as we have said;
then heal, as we have said; by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean it when it is cut open at the fundament, or by poultice or other instrument appointed. then remove the charred skin fragment that is in the wound, as long as you can.
then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the fundament: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And there are no fistulas according to this manner: and it is when you put the poultice in the fistula, and it is on the side of the fundament near the skin above. so take a poultice that has pierced at the top according to this shape: And I wrap one thread twisted in two, and wrap the poultice all around the thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
If she is purulent in the margin of the fundament within, then draw out the thread from that perforation, thus as you place your thumb or fundament.
and pull the top of the thread, and bring together the two ends together, and hold one to the other, and leave it one day or two.
and restrain it at no time, until the thread cuts through those skin fragments that are between them, and they fall away.
then heal the wound until it is bound up and healed.
If the fistula does not perforate, then make it perforate in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
For it does not behoove to cut open too deeply in the first instance, and then heal, as we have said, until he is healed.
The form of the spine-like splinter from which one makes the fistula is very sharp in one part and cutting. and on the other part not, therefore one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here.
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: or they are within the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in the end blood flows. and there is one or more, and they are outside the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are outside have little moisture.
and in the end or a little bit of yellowish water or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the body.
and the healing of those that are within the fundament, is that you instruct the patient to strain and go to the privy, until the fundament is cleared, and the thread appears. so hurry, and take hold of it with pincers, or hold it with your finger, then cut into its roots.
and if the strings cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them up by a cloth, or a cotton cloth, or a piece of camlet. and pull them out with your thumbs, then cut them, and powder them with some hot powders that are in lieu of cauterization. You boil them as it is said in the chapter on fire cauterization, then cure with other cures until they are healed.
and if the foundation cannot emerge, then enema the patient with an enema biting and harsh to clean out what is in the foundation, so that it can emerge clearly.
if the patients are not prepared, and if the thread is too far from the foundation, then the treatment is light. and it is that you should take them to your fingernail or with pincers, and clip them, then cure as we have said, until they are healed, and so that he fears the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you bring the suture according to this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then train the thread above and make the needle pierced on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle. and if it is of a width; and hold the thread tightly, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one for correcting the excess of blood.
then put on the foundation one damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then leave him until he has finished, and when they are finished, then anoint and treat with other cures, until he is healed.
of the burning of the skin or foundation Many times happens burning of the skin in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the patient is old and medicine is of no use.
It is necessary that you scrape off with the edge of a spatula or your fingernail the crust above, which does not let it become moist. then cure him until he is sound as is necessary.
and if he cannot heal, then repeat the scraping more strongly than before, until he is well and scabbed. then cure him until he is healed.
of the tremble Fomices is a small appearance of an abscess under the skin, and goes very deep.
and never leaves a scar, and one feels it just like someone who has died of tremble, and comes all over the body, more in the arms than anywhere else.
And the cure is that you take a goose quill or a strong turkey feather, and put it on the abscess, until the circles purple around the entire abscess. then turn your hand all around the quill until you cut all around the abscess, and put it deep inside, and root out the abscess from its roots.
And if you see, then make it of a needle or iron according to this form, and be subtle underneath and drawing above.
nor pierce it, but hold it at the two and press it. And if you see, then cauterize the abscess, as is before or in the chapter on fire cauterization.
of the form of the enema Never has one made an enema of silver or of archaute, or of melted or beaten iron; and never has one made these small and great instruments according to the way they are prepared.
Those then which are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
The form of the enema, whether small or great, is as follows: the belly is tied in this manner:
and it has a deviation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the edges are pierced inside; and has two holes on one side and one on the other.
and the belly is orifice where one puts medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small holes.
and has between each hole one space of breadth, then put into these holes one strong thread of twisted iron wire in ten or eleven turns around, and gather the belly as if it were a she-goat. and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument with a strong thread in front, and enema; and this is the form of the circle.
and the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or hen's egg yolk or something similar, then put it in slightly.
then the minister will press with his two hands together until it is fully seen, then pull out the enema, and lift up the patient's legs to the sky.
and if the medicine wants to come out, then tie it until it can; and if he sleeps all night again, then it is a greater aid.
And if you enema him in the illness of belly decoration, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
And if hemorrhoids are on the fundament or abscess, then the enema should be just as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle enema when the skin is strained.
of wounds
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; and now we will tell you the treatments by hand and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on the places or locations where the wounds are made, and according to how they are made.
The ways in which wounds are made are by throwing stones, and cutting with a sword, knife, or cutlass, or with a spear, club, or similar things.
or those that are made according to the locations of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and begin with the wounds of the head simple, for the reminder will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it's from throwing stones or similar things, and although the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of a hot abscess: if you make it heal quickly with the cephalic remedy itself, even if it comes from the blood of the wound, and the healing is contrary to the damaged part.
and instruct the patient to fill themselves with wine and heavy foods.
And if he does not wish to recover, let his meat be weakened, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any flesh.
and put it on the wound, if abscesses form thereupon, apply a moistened cloth in rose oil alone, or in vinegar.
and if there is no hot abscess, put powder on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding with all its blood, and not disturbed by air or powder that I will mention later.
and if the air has disturbed it, put some unguents on top until he is healed.
And if the wound is great, such as a sword cut and similar ones, and the lips cannot come together by stitches, then bring them together with stitching, just as I will say about belly wounds, by stitching.
If the wound is open to the bone and oozing, and holds together only by a thread, then cut it away; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as cooked brains and wheat, also chickens, and similar things.
And if you find a putrid gallbladder, and it is not touching the bone, then cut out the putridity entirely, and pour away the foulness, then treat it.
and if he has an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be stanched by medicines, then cut the artery, and if you find it loose, tie it with a thread. and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: and that is that you put this powder on it, which closes just as the air has disturbed it.
And the manner of this powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of live coal, and grind it finely, and apply the powder to the wound, and hold it firmly until it is well closed and joins with all its blood.
and then bind it well, and let it remain undisturbed unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with live coal only, when one has neither incense nor dragon's blood, but the air has disturbed the wound.
And if the air has disturbed the wound, even when it was already closed, do not put this powder on it at all.
but put some digestive unguents or poultices made of flour of wheat with water and honey on it, until it flows with pus. then treat it with other treatments until he is healed.
And if the bone break comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers.
and I will tell you later about bone breaks of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there being no difference between that and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and put nothing restraining on it, for it hurts the nerves and makes them retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let it be medicated with a poultice, such as coal washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and the poultice to be washed again in sweet water. and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist unguents.
And if the wound is great, then cut it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until he is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and the flesh is hollowed out and full of pus, then puncture or cut lower down.
and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes forth, then disconnect it, tie it off, and cauterize it as necessary.
and if the spine of the throat is cut or the veins, and the conduit is preserved, by which the meat goes. so cut the vein above the gullet of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape. and then bind it gently, and let it remain for some days, then treat it with drying unguents until he is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then cut it. and if there are fragments of bone, then remove them all as you can, and those that you cannot remove, let them remain until the wound putsrefies. and make the flesh smooth and even the exit.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on top of the powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound of a lance or a sword
If it is a blow of a lance or a sword, and the wound is deep, then consider whether there are signs of inflammation around the wound that the patient's flesh is inflamed: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder on at the first hour nor bind it tightly for the blood that does not flow deeply. and returns to the heart, and kills the patient. but I put on an attractive unguent, and bind it twice a day.
and if you do not have an unguent, then put old cotton in the wound to suck up the moisture.
and make the patient sleep on top of the wound for three days, or four days, or more. if there is no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor convulsive movements. and when you see the good dispositions, know that the wound is saved. Then treat it with stitches and other treatments until he is healed.
and if she cannot heal and becomes inflamed, then know that there is a fistula; then treat it as one should.
And if the wound is a cut from a sword or a knife, and it is simple, or deeper in the flesh or on the back, then treat it with the remedies that come before.
If she is large, of stitching; and if she is small, of powder, and if she is pressed into the bone, and has cut pieces, so will the wound, and the burned flesh will be treated. and if they are not burned, then let the wound rot, so that it will lighten the extractions.
and for other wounds on other members is the judgment as we have said.
rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, middle-sized, and small;
from the great wound sometimes the intestines or the lining of the intestines spring forth, thereby preventing their introduction.
and the stitching is more difficult, and often the small wound is worse than the great one,
therefore one should put the intestines back in bit by bit, rather than all at once. because the intestines swell soon as they feel the cold, and therefore enter more slowly.
and therefore it is better to make the wound middle-sized, because one should reset the intestine to its place which is like that of others two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the two common stitches occur in the stitching of the belly,
and the stitch of other wounds of the body and two other special stitches are common to other wounds;
and notwithstanding they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine protrudes, and a little thing is of putting back, which is by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or one piece of cloth in lukewarm water only, or you heat it in water of wormwood and cypress and spike, and apply the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes it makes a vine restraining, and is moist that only for unswelling.
And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestine with water or ale that is cooked and has been steeped in spices, for by this it relieves the entrance to some extent;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument by which one cuts the hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is moist that the cutting, that no one should cut it without great necessity or need.
and this is the instrument for cutting:
so cut inside the curve and not to go forward, and see how it takes shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes forth, so put it back in place according to its natural form in its own proper location, if you can manage it, because this is a good method.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts so arrange it so that the injured part is higher than the other.
and thus it is fitting to manage what I say about great and middle-sized wounds.
For small wounds put what seems suitable to you,
then have in your hands one pitiful minister who holds all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common manner of stitching,
and this is the common manner of stitching, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave a good space at the head of the wound, and insert a needle where there is a strong good thread; and pierce the two buttons of the skin with the two buttons of the silk,
then strain it with a double thread around the needle from both parts, then bring together the two edges of the wound naturally,
and then leave a good space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to how many needles you need. until all the wound is restrained;
and be the needles middle-sized, between fine and coarse. because fine needles cut through all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well: therefore it is fitting that they be middle-sized.
and it is not fitting to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
lest they cut and open the wound before the suturing;
and then cut off the edges of the needles, so that they do not disturb the patient while sleeping, and I place tents or cloths on the edges of the needles to keep them steady. and leave them so until the wound is sutured;
and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one needle or two.
The second stitching method is common, and it is that you bring together the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the silk together on a needle that has a strong middle-sized thread; and when you have pierced these edges three in one,
and when you have pierced these edges three in one, then reset the needle at the part where you started, in the manner that one sews cloth.
and leave a space of about the thickness of a finger between each stitch.
this stitching is suitable for men,
and I sewed up a wound that a man had in his belly,
who was wounded by a knife, and was the wound more than a palm of great size, and were the intestines well two palms of great size,
and was the wound in the belly. I brought back the intestine and it had been out for twenty-four hours.
and the wound was closed just after fifteen days, and I healed it, and it was sound.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not heal him with ointment, for I was in one place where I could not find any, nor any medicine; and I put clean cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was sound.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
take the needle and thrust it through the part outside just to the inside;
when it has pierced the correct angle in a straight line, then tie the end of the silk or thread where you have inserted the needle,
and make it pierce on the other side of the inside part just to the outside;
and the intention of this stitching is that you should stitch as the furrier does with furs, and that you leave once the silk on one side and take it up again on the other, until the stitching is entirely completed.
The second manner of stitching, which Galen calls properly,
is like what some people do who bring together the two parts naturally together, and apply one end of the silk to the other end, in such a way:
insert a needle or chief of the mirach nearby, and make it pierce only that one place, and leave the two ends of the silk; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside part just to the inside, and bring together the two ends of the silk;
then make it pierce one and the other from the outside part just to the inside, in two other needles of mirach that are on the other side;
and this is the mother manner of stitching and the most common.
Galen says that this saying is true, and some bear witness to it,
one should stitch the belly with two needles, or if there is thread in each;
and one should insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew hides;
and knows that when the rupture is in the belly, it is the stitching more difficult than for other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if the air has changed it, then replace the intestine and the gut; then put on powder releasing charcoal,
then replace the intestine and the gut; then put on powder releasing charcoal, and if the air has changed it, then apply some ointment that is present, until the wound heals. and cut the thread, and let the silk and the mirach be sewn together; then heal the wound as with others, until it is sound.
and if you don't have medicine, then apply some, as soon as it begins to heal, clean cotton, and wash it two times a day until he is sound.
For you don't need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound may cause community with principal members, then it is good to moisten linen lightly with oil of temperate heat or rose oil, and put it around the arms and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or purulence in the bowels, and many times this happens, then use a enema of red wine, and similarly if the purulence comes just to the intestine;
and pierce it from inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the poverty of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity of its nature to that of hares.
And if the intestine leaps from the wound, then put it back in place as with the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and has become green or black, then it is good that you stop the bleeding from which blood does not come. for there are veins and arteries;
then tie off what is between the ligament, and leave the two ends hanging from the part below the wound until it goes outside to ease the extraction when the intestines drop, and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men,
because I have seen a man wounded in the belly by a lance;
and was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and was enveloped and became a fistula, and from it there was evacuation and flatulence;
I applied care according to what I could, and did not cease to subtlety until he was sound, and the wound closed.
And when I saw him close, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and eating and drinking.
and some experienced people said that when one has a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this way: take fresh thread from large intestines, then gather together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened up the mouth, then place it on the two lips,
then place another thread afterwards in this manner as before, until the wound is completely covered;
and bandage the wound. That head stays in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient,
and if one can tie the intestine with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide quil laisse les poilz tant quil soient lons et igals; et sil le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz quil ne se muevent tant quil naissent. Take the head of this intestine thread that is quite frayed, and then tie to the head of this thread, i.e., a fine linen thread twisted then pass the thread through the needle and sew the intestine, and reset it in its natural state;
and this manner of stitching is not other than according to the path of hope and expectation;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal grooves, there is no remedy or health, except for subtlety.
of a fistula or whatever Know that all wound or abscess, when it boils over, is universally called "fistula", and especially when it is hollowed out and drained down.
And a fistula is according to the greenish-white nodulation that is hard and bright, or where one does not feel pain, and it is also hollowed out like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes it flows clear down below, and at other times thickly. sometimes little, and at other times enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed and has no scar, is not other than through one of the eight causes:
namely, by the smallness of blood or body; or because of its bad quality; or because there is hard scar tissue inside and above the lips, which does not allow new skin to form; or because there is too much discharge; or the flesh is rotten and the material is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because the property in the region is late in digestion and late in health, and by its nature it inflames; or because there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicine in the division.
or it is necessary that I make you aware of the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the siphac, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all fistulas that are in this manner are of great difficulty in healing, and there is no other remedy except labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come just to the point I have said, and you have faith in the treatment, and if you know it well, take a tin or iron tube, if the fistula is straight, and cut it;
and if the fistula is twisted, search for a fine tube of lead; for lead bends itself around the twistiness;
and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot well search it by tubes, so clean it out through one of the perforations;
for the moisture flows from one perforation to another and cleans it;
then cut off the bleeding to your power, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and it is hollowed out in depth;
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand on him, and the place where he feels it;
and when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places I have told you, cut according to what I have told you;
or in any of the places I have told you, cut according to what I have told you; and remove the rotten flesh and corrupted scars that are inside; and then continue the treatment until it is healed,
and if the fistula is well hollowed out from the right place, then it is necessary that you cut in depth as far as you can, then put moistened tubes of medicinal aloe into the treatment, and tie them just above the head of the fistula,
then put moistened tubes of medicinal aloe into the treatment, and tie them just above the head of the fistula, until the medicine has dissolved the excess that remains at the bottom;
and then put unguents in generous amounts of healthy skin, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, cut it. If veins or nerves are not torn or principal members are as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then clean it out until all the corruption is removed. then treat with unguents in generous amounts of healthy skin until it is healed.
and if it is not healed and discharges as before, know that you are not yet far enough along:
so uncover and cut until you reach the bottom. and remove all the corruption, then repair the place;
and if it is thus healed, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; so there is no other remedy than to rely on natural healing;
and if there is a small corrupt bone and you can extract it with forceps, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose;
and if there are many bones, then extract them all, without leaving any one.
and if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear; then cut, moisten, and clean the bone, and deliver it.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound a poultice of purifying things; and leave it so that the flesh is corrupted around the bone,
and then the bones will be easier to remove;
and if it is a large bone, such as one from the leg or thigh, so clean out only the corruption until all the blackness is removed. then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of the corrupted bone that comes just to the surface of the skin; If it is necessary to sow and cover all the way up to the corruption, and then care for it until it is bound.
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
He was a young man of about thirty years old who had a pain in his leg caused by something that came from within the body,
until the matters came to the leg and swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to fail in opening;
but the doctor by his foolishness operated so much that the abscess opened up; and a lot of matter was flowing out, and it became a fistula, and there came a great many pus-filled sores that all poured forth with foul-smelling fluid from the body;
and many doctors applied treatment for about two years, and there was no success in the art of healing;
so that I was called to it, and I saw his leg and the medicines by which he was being treated; and what flowed out through the sores with great stench; and the flesh of the young man was becoming red and had a yellowish color.
I applied a poultice to one of those sores, and then searched all the sores;
and I found that some were coming together from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and cut into one of the sores until I uncovered a part of the bone; and I found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption was coming right up to the bone inside.
I saw what appeared on the corrupted bone and thought that there was no other corruption except for what I removed;
and I began to restore the wound with medicinal treatments over a long time, but it could not be bound.
and then I re-commenced, and uncovered the bone just as before,
and I found the corruption continued on the bone, and I saw it, and then removed it, and took care to bind the place;
but I could not do so until I cut around about the palm of the bone, and then pulled it away to its entire extent; then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and bound quickly,
and there was no need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and because of the fear of death that I had from him. For often due to the evacuation bleeding occurred, but he was entirely healed,
For often due to the evacuation bleeding occurred, but he was entirely healed, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and he was of good disposition and had no harm or obstacle from anything at all, neither at his departure nor at his return.
and stretch the top, so that you bring the corrupted flesh to the bottom; and uncover the flesh on the place where you see it is necessary to bind, lest the binding wound the flesh; and put a splint or a board under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh; and it is necessary to bind as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and bind again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part; so uncover all the flesh; then put a splint under,
and then bind from one part to the other the corruption, and make the binding as long as the corruption is wide, just as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy except to cut it out;
and if the corruption is in a finger of the hand or a toe of the foot, then it is very strong that thing, but still it is necessary that you inquire into this corruption, how it opens up; and cleanse it in all the ways you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not interfere with you;
and know that the instruments and bandages for binding these bones are many, according to the placement of the bones and their appearance; and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each appearance of work;
and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art; and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so think about the instrument which you need, according to what it requires.
of fire The head may be dislocated either due to an internal cause or due to a failure;
and when you have tried medicinal treatment on the corruption, and it does not benefit; so it is necessary to bind that member up to the place where the corruption comes; so that the patient may escape either by death or by the evil, which is greater, of the failure of the member;
so that the patient may escape either by death or by the evil, which is greater, of the failure of the member; and the sign is that the member becomes black, as if it had been burned by fire; and after the blackness appears, then this corruption of the member spreads from member to member; and takes all over the body; if you hasten to bind;
and if this is due to the bite of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar;
if the corruption is at the head of the tendon, then cut it off, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, then cut it off at the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cut it off at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death. and there is no remedy except by the quantity of its virtue;
and so it is with the toe: if the corruption comes to the first joint, then cut it off after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, so cut off the entire foot; and if it goes up to the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy but to let the patient die from exhaustion;
and the manner of cutting or sawing the limb is that you tie it above and below; and stretch one minister down to the lower tie, and another minister up to the upper tie; and you release the flesh between the two ties with one spatula wide, until the bone is uncovered;
then cut or saw, and place one linen cloth on each side, so that the saw does not touch the healthy flesh; and come to the patient another wound and abscess.
And if bleeding occurs when you work, then cauterize the flesh hastily; or you put on some restraining powders; then come back to your medicine until it is completed.
then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed;
and I will tell you how it happened to one man in this foot:
he had a burn that seemed like a burning fire,
and that corruption came first to his toe of the foot, until it consumed all the foot;
and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cut off the foot, and was healed;
and long afterwards, the corruption returned to the toe of his hand, and he came to me,
and I put on him things reperfusive after the purification of the body, but the corrosion could not cease;
and he begged that I cut off his hand, and I would not, for I had hope of reperfusing the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die; for the virtues of the man were weak; and he became despairing altogether, and returned to his land, and he hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed;
and I have not told this story except because it is made thus, in order that one may do the same thing when necessary.
No abscess ever comes to a fatty place, and stays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then bursts and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and the flesh remains vacant, just like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as subtle as a delicate silk cloth; and they do not reach just to the bone, nor just to the nerve, and such diseases are called "Saint's";
but if it is so long that it comes just to the bone and in front, then it is called a "fistula";
and the cure is that you cut away all around that skin, and similarly when it is subtle, like a silk cloth; and is not cured by its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not in front; and the skin is thick with flesh, so cure it with a cathartic like this:
look to see if the breast is large, and the pus that comes from it has a foul odor, then use Egyptian medicine like this: take assafoetida, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put the mixture in one vessel over the fire; until the medicine is red, and thickens as honey;
and then take from this mixture according to your need, and mix it with water and honey; and use the mixture as a cathartic for the breast, and stop up the fistula; and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then draw it out by sweating;
do this many times, until the breast is cleansed, and the pus is removed;
and sometimes use a cathartic made from ash water, when this medicine is not present, and take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them;
then let it flow, and use it as a cathartic, until you know that the breast is well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine, nor the ash water; then use a cathartic made from water and honey, or mix in a little litharge; or you use a cathartic made from honey and mead, which has the property to purify and cleanse; and the wine makes the blood flow freely;
and when you have done this, and you have faith that the breast is well purified; then use a cathartic to bring forth flesh in it,
and take definitive plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or you use a cathartic made from certain medicines and unguents, whose properties I have mentioned or treated in the matter of unguents;
and if the fistula of the breast is small, and the catheter cannot enter it; so enlarge it slightly with a pin, and insert a tent of Egyptian ointment into it; or basilikon ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too large, so that you can only leave one place or a small opening for the catheter to enter;
and if the fistula that discharges pus is above, then cut it or make it lower than where it is. For when the pus is in front, it does not allow flesh to remain; and if you cannot cut away the breast below as you see fit; so arrange it in such a way that the pus runs to the lowest point of where it is;
and if you cannot cut away the breast below as you see fit; so arrange it in such a way that the pus runs gently downwards, and leave nothing of the pus behind; and take consolidative medicines to apply on the breast,
and place it on one cloth of linen that covers the entire breast; then cut at a strong point in the fistula of the breast, a little bit larger than the first; then apply a soothing ointment on another cloth according to the size of the fistula; and puts it on top of the breast abscess to lighten the breast, and does not remove the large cloth dressing that is applied after many days once.
and whoever is on top of the breast abscess takes it away often to take out the breast. and knows what comes from the breast, whether it is venom or pus or enough or digested or undigested.
and takes heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not.
and when your medicine has been applied in this same manner and you see the nature that arises above the breast abscess, so you know that the breasts are hardened already, and approach the wounds.
and then loosen it in the morning or on the third day, and when you loosen the wound, so change into another dressing, and renew the ointment.
And if the breasts discharge undigested breast after many days, know that the breasts are not hardened. And if subtle poisons emerge quickly after a long time, do not despair of health at all.
for the wounds are approaching. For there are men whose flesh is delayed in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
and if undigested breast discharges from the breast after many days, know that the breasts are not hardened.
and if the breasts tarry in healing and are far away, then add medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue. as defined ointment, for there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine;
take defined ointment and mix it with rose oil, and add equal parts of old wine in quantity.
then cook and use it; and this same thing makes cooked honey increased. when defined ointment is not present,
or you take mercury and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is above the fire. and then make into a cloth one layer, and stretch it over the breast, and do not administer once an aristologist for a long time. and roots of lily of heaven, which is also like wheat flour and centaurium;
and roots of lily of heaven, which is also like wheat flour and centaurium; and use them as simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put it on the honey that I said, and use. and if the wound is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption has penetrated deep, and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in ligaments. so take care of the wound of fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the thumb.
Pannicula is an abscess that arises beneath the thumb of the palm of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance arises in other toes;
and when it is neglected and not taken care of, then a foul abscess comes. and flows and discharges pus as long as it runs the root of the thumb, and by chance may run through all.
and comes to corrode just up to the bone, so that there is stinking pain, and the joints of the toe are wide, and the color is foul.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not benefit at all, so it is necessary that you cut off all the superfluous parts remaining from the thumb, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is very great help if the bone is sound and the thumb is healthy;
and if the thumb afterwards becomes inflamed, and begins to prick and bleed. so it is necessary that you put a hot iron under the thumb where the flesh prickles. and press it upwards, and cut off that subtle and delicate flesh. and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it off, and treat with fire, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
and if you see the toe corrupting, then cut it off in one piece just as is said above. then treat until it is healed.
and if it is inflamed, and boils, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first. then cut off the thumb of the spatula-like finger by cutting across above.
and be careful that the incision does not come to the flesh which is beneath the thumb, because the patient would feel too great pain.
and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
The toes that arise in some people's hands by chance are entirely fleshless, and by chance there may be one or two bones, and never a thumb.
and none of them are born in the root of the joint, or in some toes of the feet. He who is born in any part of the toe does not move. and he who is born at the joint of the toe, by chance moves;
the fleshiness of him who is fleshless is light, in this way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula-like instrument.
He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to cure, so you should hesitate to cut.
In he who is born or has a part at the back of the toe, it is necessary that you cut off the flesh all the way to the bone first. then cut off the bone with a suitable thread for that, then treat until it is healed.
The sores that come to the toes together come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
It is necessary that you cut off the sore, and then repair the toe according to its natural shape. then put between two tents or moist cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together; or you put between two thin pieces of cloth, until the wound is closed, as it is necessary.
If sores come to any of his toes with the palm, then cut off that sore as is necessary.
Of wounds
Warts are great and swollen abscesses full of melancholy humors that come to many members of the body.
and it happens more often in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than to others.
It is necessary then that you administer to them sometimes purging with oil of cole, and then the remedy of the basil.
The wound of iron is thus according to two manners: one is when they are cut, and then the black blood is washed away; and the other manner is that you open the vein, and wash it all clean.
The incision is thus according to this manner: first arise the leg of hot water very strongly, until the thick blood be thinned out, then hold the leg of the patient from above the hip joint down to the part below the knee. then cut the vein in one place, or in two places, or in three, with a broad incision,
then lift it up and wash away the black blood with your hand from one end to the other, as much as the patient's virtue can endure.
and then bind it, and instruct him that he should abstain from meat and drink black oil.
and begin the evacuation and remedy again when the veins are full, and it is harmful to the patient.
The cauterization of fire is thus according to this manner: rise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs. then put it in a bath, and let the leg be raised with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins inflate;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it with fire, and then cut into the vein in the long place at the head of the knee, or in the part below to the ankle.
then apply the skin to the wound, and scrape off the vein from each part, until it appears when you feel it.
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord.
then bind the string below, until it is raised from the skin, and then pour it onto the wound lightly.
then cut into another place above three fingers; then scrape off the skin above the vein until it appears. then lift it up on the string, just as you did, and pour it onto another wound, just as you did first.
then cut another incision, or more if you need it, then lift it, and cut into the toe of the foot.
then wash and lift up to the second incision; then pull it out from incision to incision, until all the blood is washed away, then cut.
and if you cannot wash and lift it, then tie an awl to each strong thread doubled. and tie and wash it, and put below one string, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out. and take care that it does not cut, for if it cuts, one cannot wash or lift it, and it will cause harm to the patient.
and when you have washed it all out, then put a moist cloth soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound bed of the sore, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the flesh is contracted and twisted and tangled together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it unevenly, but do not cut it; and wash it as we have said before.
then you must split it unevenly, but do not cut it; and wash it as we have said before. The form of iron that one uses to split the flesh is curved, and does not cut off, so it only cuts into the vein;
and is of thick curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but be thick as we have said, and this is the form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is located in legs, in hot places where there are no herbs or trees, and on land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it occurs in another place except in legs, and this happens due to the putridity that comes from below the skin.
as if a snake or worm were inside the body, and is injected between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the places change, and the vein begins to come out, like a root of a plant.
When the wound opens, then it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two inches, and tie.
and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it becomes loose at the back, wrap it around the cloth again, and tie. and if it is too long, then cut off a part, and wrap the remaining portion, and do not cut it at its root, until it is completely gone. for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh, and brings abscess and putridity to the place, and a bad disease.
therefore it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the head, and none remains in the body.
and sometimes this vein is when it is treated with five or ten inches of length. and one man came to me whose it was ten inches long, and when you cut it, he put a string or a plug, and pierced it down to the bottom.
and then everything comes out; and the material inside is emptied, and brings to the place medications that prevent putridity some day, and then cures it as with abscesses.
And sometimes this vein is many times cut off, and indeed when it opens in the joint of the foot or at the foot. and there comes out a great deal of pus, and it jumps out in rains; therefore treat it then as we have said before.
Of the worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "disease of the ox", because it often affects oxen.
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body mounting and descending. and one feels it very well as it moves from member to member, until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and jumps out.
and is caused by putridity of some humors, such as those that come from worms and serpents and lice and ascarids in the belly.
and one doubts its wickedness, for when it goes through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, By chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and pulled, one cannot avoid but when he walks:
so then it is necessary that you bind the part above and below with a strong cord tightly.
then tie on top and pull him forward, and if the arrow is stuck deep in the flesh, and you do not find it. so cauterize with fire above until he dies;
and the greatest harm that it does is that it blinds the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, then bind below him a strong band tightly, then tie on top and pull him forward;
and it is necessary to use the patient of purging with the bodies of soluble medicines for the foul humors present.
and beware of corrupting foods that are spoiled.
Of the pain that comes from windy distension This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and about an hour later, I saw it rising also like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, like bright silver when it flows from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder,
and then a little later it ran through all the body until it came to the other arm;
then she told me that it was twisting around the body, as I saw it.
I was very surprised how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this way before. However, I had heard of many who had experienced their pain moving from place to place, but I had never seen it, as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and her veins were uncovered, and therefore appeared that constrained windy distension;
and do not appear according to this reason in those who are temperate, and who have moist bodies and veins that respond.
And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then bind above and below hastily, and then tie on top until the constrained windy distension issues forth; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it at your hands,
then use the remedy of those who resist windy distension, such as fetid pills and serpent's pill, and similar others.
Of arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they fall.
The diversity of theirs is that there are those which have great points, and small, and pointed, and blunted; and of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those in which there are fragments; and that which falls into some member falls in two ways: or in the principal member it falls with an arrowhead,
like brain, heart, liver, stomach, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you hereafter appears: so it is necessary that you beware of extracting this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply stuck, then pull it out and treat the wound.
And the sign of the brain is when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the sac which is above the brain bursts forth. which is when there is blindness and swelling and inflammation in the head, and burning sensations in the eyes, and inflammation and burning of the tongue, and convulsions and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without breath from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice; and bursts forth with a white moist discharge like pustules, and bursts forth also like a boil in the flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then hold back from the treatment, and leave the arrow if it is not extracted.
The signs of the spleen when it is hit by an arrow are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. and perhaps the spleen becomes inflamed like boils, and there is black blood flow, and comes with coldness and cold sweat, and fainting; so then you should know without doubt that death draws near.
And the sign of the arrow that strikes the liver is that without foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns color, and he sighs high and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow hits the covering of the ribs, it is beneath the small bones; and pours out great pain and great suffering, and sighs; and all the muscles of the shoulders tremble.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something from undigested food bursts forth from the wound.
And if the arrow hits the belly, and bursts forth a small amount of pus through the intestine route, there is no hope for the cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and the urine bursts forth and comes out, and the patient feels very painful: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulders and the shoulder blade and the spine of the back and the nape and the hips and the knees and the feet, and similar members, are safe according to many dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to one man whose arrow struck the eye in the root of the nose: I tried to pull it out and pulled it from the other side under the fatty part of the ear, and he was healed without numbness.
And throw away one arrow that fell into the fat of the oil beneath the paper beneath. and the arrow was rebound, and could not be retrieved except for the point towards the wood. and the arrow was great of one Turkish bow, all of one light iron without ears; the game was settled, and no bad accident came to it.
And throw away an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
I drew the bowstrings, and made it subtle until I threw it, and the Christian was healed.
And throw away an arrow at one man who had been struck in the belly, and thought he was dying;
and then after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut on the arrow, and fixed it, and threw it away, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see one man to whom an arrow struck on the back, and the wound is sewn up above;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural disposition, nor found any harm in any of his natural works.
And if you see one other man to whom an arrow struck on his face, and the wound is sewn up;
and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many similar ones.
And throw away an arrow at one of the king's princes, who had been struck in his thigh, and was slightly declining to the right side; and the arrow was entirely rebounded.
I was summoned for the cure after it had been struck three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I searched all over with a subtle touch, and did not feel it; and he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow
I put on the place a plaster attractive and digestive, because the swelling did not increase; and the swelling of the arrow appeared.
and the swelling of the arrow appeared. I put on the plaster for many days, and the wound was resolved above, and the patient remained thus for a long time.
so that he felt the arrow one day inside his thigh; and he told me this. I put on the wound a medicinal liquid with corroding properties for many days, until it was open.
and I tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which had been stuck in the place; then I poured into the opening of the wound with that medicinal liquid, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and passed well beyond three months,
and then it sloughed off so that I applied the forceps to it, and pulled it from one side and the other, and it could not come out;
and then I did not stop subtlety and fixing with various instruments, until I grasped it one day with well-made forceps; according to the form that its end will come at the end of this chapter, until I threw it away and restored the wound.
And the doctor judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for books cannot take in everything;
but wise masters know well a little something, and about what is present and lacking; and true nine works, and nine instruments, for the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out of limbs or where they are stuck except by two manners: or through the place where they enter, or from another side;
and that which jumps out by the side where it enters is an arrow entering fatty flesh, and sometimes jumps out now.
And if it doesn't jump out now, then leave it until the fat is melted around it, and the way out is cleared;
and also if it's stuck in the bone and can't come out, then leave it like that for some days, and move it each day;
and then it will jump out, and if it doesn't, I will pierce all around with a subtle file, until the place around is enlarged, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is rebound in the flesh of the body and cannot be seen, I will search all over for it; and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, so I will cut as much as the wound grows. and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it holds;
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it holds; so take away the flesh that is stuck in two parts to the extent that you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out; and subtlety well so that you don't break the arrow, and you will pull it out more easily.
And if you can't all at once, then leave it until the flesh around is melted, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be eased. And if the hemorrhage of blood makes you contrary, then apply what we have said about treatment in its chapter;
and take care with the incision of the nerve and vein, and think how you can pull out the arrow without danger.
now or later, now firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the shape he was when the arrow struck him. for it is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot, so put him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another side, if it pierces anything inside or the skin is swollen in front where you see or feel something abnormal.
cut then above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out; if it jumps forth now.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it for a while, and then continue to pull until it comes out forth.
and if the head of the arrow is still inside, push all of it in.
and if the point breaks off and you must administer binding, then use a wooden instrument. so that the point of the arrow enters the hollow of the instrument; and then push forth.
and if the arrow is broken, then insert it into an instrument with a pointed end, to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, then it is necessary that you cut off all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then treat the wound as it is fitting.
And if the arrow hits or pierces the neck or belly or bladder or side, and it is nearby, and you can cut above, then cut.
and take care not to cut the vein or nerve, and then pull it out, and then cut the wound, if necessary. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps with which one treats arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many kinds: great, small, and little ones, according to the size of the arrow.
of common veins of the body Of veins that one purges are 31, of which there are 16 at the head.
to wit: two jugular veins that are behind the ears, which are called the "herbech". and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing. and the two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "aspirations". and the vein that is inside the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose. and the two veins that are in the neck. and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich". and the two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins that one purges commonly are 5 in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the head". and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic. and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side. and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the scapula. and it is that one which is purged, which appears obviously above the pocket.
And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the wrist and the finger, and it has two branches.
and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the fold of the pocket on the left side, and the second one is the saphenous that is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "nese", which is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg are three veins below those.
The purging of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old-fashioned catarrhs and migraines. and the quality of the purging, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the purging, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and wipe the skin where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two pouches depending from the head: which then ascend to your throat, and where you feel the pulse below your throat, then sign off with an incision.
then take the lancet and push it under the vein all the way to the bone, then lift your hand up to the entire vein above. and cut and remove the skin and the vein well two fingers' breadth from each other, and make the blood flow until you see.
then tie it off and bind it, so that it is healed.
and I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The purging of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for old-fashioned migraine. and also for habitual obtalmia and watery eyes in the pupils of the eyes.
and the quality of the purging is as I say: and it is that the patient tightens their neck, until the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse below their throat, and then signs off with an incision.
then lift the knife above the vein at the level of your thumb's height, and push the lancet underneath. and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you have done with the other two veins, and make a flow of blood according to your need.
then release the patient, and place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton.
and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
The vein of the forehead so values as much as the cephalic vein in old diseases of the face and in migraine, and in headache.
and the quality is that the patient stretches his neck twisting, so much as the vein appears. then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose form is:
And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see. then loosen the patient's neck and tie the vein so that it is bloodless and no longer flows with a wide gash.
However, it is not necessary that the gashes be too deep; and let the blood flow across, for the bone is pressed, and by chance break the gash when it is fine.
The vein of the two veins that are in the two temples helps those with fever, and with tetanus, and with headache, and with redness in the eye, and with diseases of the face.
and the quality of their vein is that the patient stretches his neck twisting with some bond, just as before.
then let it flow, and let the vein of the traverse be a little long on one side of the gash, a little wide, for there is no flesh.
And if the gashes are fine, by chance it breaks; then make sure to stop the bleeding as much as you need to, and then tie on a cloth, and tie it well.
The vein of the navel so values as much in ague, and in sudden fever, and in diseases of the face. just as migraine and headache that come to the face, and especially when it is old;
and the quality of the vein is that the patient stretches his neck, then strains his navel to your left hand, and take a fine long gash, and insert it into the space between the two nostrils. for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now.
and do not go too far in, and make the blood flow according to your necessity, then tie it up for a night, for it is very quickly restored.
The vein of the two groins so helps in the constriction of the kidneys, and at the beginning of menstruation, and with many diseases, and with impetigo, and with corrosive ulcers, and with eczema.
and the quality of the vein is that the patient stretches his neck below one and the other, just as we have said; and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one seat,
then bleed the long vein a little widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as is needed;
then do another part on the other vein, then loosen the bond, and strain out the veins moderately. so that the patient does not choke; and let him be left until morning, when the wound is healed.
The bleeding of the liver The vein of the veins above the lips so helps in bleeding in the mouth, and in corruption of gums, and splits in lips, and around.
And the quality of the vein is to make the patient sit before you, and strain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left; and you can recognize them by the fact that they are black, and because around them there are small black veins: then take one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
then take one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then take the largest one from each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
The bleeding under the tongue The vein of the veins that are under the tongue so helps after the bleeding of the cephalic, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and with diseases of the uvula, and with diseases of the mouth;
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts up his tongue, and looks under each side for a black vein:
then bleed one and the other, and do not go too far in, because below are the arteries.
The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled according to two methods:
or in piercing a single fine gash, or olive-like subtle, just as neck-cutting, and is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins. The form of the fine gash is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are full of gross blood in appearance and that contain gross blood and turmoil; and that's the form of the olive-like gash:
and it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The bleeding of the Basilic, which is one of these veins, so helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the breast, and in the belly.
and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed slowly, and to beware of the artery that is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a great flow of blood comes, then it is necessary to stanch it, as I have said; and one should not pierce the gash, but cut it like anesil.
And if the Basilic does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you strain it, and change another; or you want some part of it, or you bleed in its place the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly; and cut to the gash anesil, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the bleeding, then it is necessary that you strain out the arm, so that you touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place by consent, and then tie up the arm, and cut to the vein of the gash anesil;
et beware that you do not strike at the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is from the artery then flee.
And if you see it protruding upwards just like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: Hurry then, and place your bandage on length, then remove your bandage if the bleeding stops, which often happens;
If the arm is broken and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be on guard, and do not move until they are healed.
And if the bleeding is not stopped, and it gapes open, and medicine is not present to you, then cut the artery if it opens up, for the head of it will retract; and stop the bleeding.
And take a membrane from the fig tree, and rend it, and take one of the halves and bind it on well until the next day;
If the bleeding stops, that's good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
and the stopping of the bleeding is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound and the power of the ligament of the arm.
The vein of the wound in a mixture so helps as it takes blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
and it is fitting for the surgeon to beware of the nerve which is below, and if he pushes too deep and finds the nerve, and it swells and the wound is grievous, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people because of its subtlety, then it is fitting that you wash the wound with aniseed oil; and cut off the nerve as far as you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
The vein of the cephalic so helps that it takes blood from the head and helps the eyes;
and it is fitting to cauterize in the fatty part of the olive or myrtle oil, for it is the most safe of all the veins, because there is no nerve nor artery below.
Nevertheless, it is fitting to look for the lighter place, and do not trouble anything if one must try again, and then continue; and by chance the places swell in some people when one tries for the first time, but it does not trouble anything. The quality of the vein is according to your thought.
The first thing that you should know about cauterizing, is that cauterizing is not done except to preserve health,
and to prevent diseases from coming; and let the cauterizing be done in one of the three veins that are found here: namely, the cephalic, facial, and basilic; and it is fitting to cauterize at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
and it is fitting to cauterize on the first day or the third day after two hours or three days.
The cauterizing that is done for diseases has no fixed hour or time, but whenever need arises, day or night, in all hours and at all times;
and it is not fitting to cauterize children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman bearing more than four months and up to seven; Nor should the elderly who have passed 60 years not be cauterized.
And when anyone wishes to be cauterized, in whatever way it may be, it is fitting that he first cleanse his bowels with a light enema. if they have many impurities retained, so that the veins do not draw out the superfluous excesses which are harmful to the principal members;
nor should one who is too full of meat, or drunk, as long as it lasts, nor dropsical;
and beware of cauterizing after a bout of colic passion, and vomiting, and purging the belly, and multiple times of bearing a child, and travailing, watching, and fasting, and all that concerns the whole virtue, or by something of the arm or body;
then subtly adjust the humors, if the blood is thick, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter or take a bath, if no impediment occurs, to subtletly purify the blood,
and cauterize the vein of the belly around the third [hour], as we have said;
and guard yourself that day from labor, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
and be at ease and joyful, and let the cauterizer be higher than he who is being cauterized, and rub the arm two or three times;
then stretch out the ligament slightly, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow properly;
and then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
then moisten the cauterizer's tool with a little old oil, then place his right hand's thumb on that vein below the place where he wants to cauterize. so that the vein does not flee and fail from being struck. For there are veins that flee like strings at the cauterizer's touch, and some that are filled with windiness. so when you put the oil on top, it retreats inwards and cannot open up the vein, and thus one becomes of such a kind.
and if he opens up the vein, it is too narrow an opening, for this reason it is fitting that the cauterizer be aware of these things.
And if the vein opens up at first, that's good; if not, then try again a little below or above the same place in haste, unless the swelling does not appear.
And if the swelling appears and the patient is frightened, then leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm: by chance an abscess will form; nor should you enter the bath, then start cauterizing again if it pleases him.
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not flow as much as you see, then trust in that same opening to receive all the oil right away;
and do the work with some haste, as long as the limbs are swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swollen, do not start stitching it yet, and put a little bit of oil on top; for it lightens the body from blood, and is good in this place the ointment that oil brings.
and thus administer the oil ointment to each wound that you clean the veins for stopping the flow of blood.
and do the same with a triangle and a bow made of eyes, when you put it on the limb; so subtlety drains the blood and parts it when it is too thick.
And if a big abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not fully opened except this time or the opening of the vein is small, so hurry, and put on the limb a moist sponge in water and a little hot oil, and strain it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the bleeding from the vein has stopped, and if some blackness or greenness remains on the limb after several days, then it will not harm him. and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with calamine, poultice, or similar.
And many times it happens that an abscess and swelling appear on the wound of the basilica: then put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the pressure of the hand, then that swelling is bad. Therefore do not put on any of what we have said, for by chance in short time the artery will burst; but make one dry plaster to harden the limb, then apply another dressing until it is healed.
And treat each blood according to its quantity and virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and be the incisions wide.
and to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and let him heal little by little, and it is necessary to make him heal by cutting across, not by piercing.
and this manner of healing is saved from hemorrhage and numbness of nerves, and is worth more than the healing of a long or wide wound.
And to the one whose body is weak from the wound, it is necessary to give him moist bread in juice of green apples; if he is heated, then treat the blood three or four times.
And if he has a cold complexion, then moisten his bread before the wound with a sweet syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he pales at the wound, after the flow of much blood, it is necessary that he drinks broth of beef, and a subtle scented syrup.
and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to blow on his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
And whoever wants to blow on his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then heals in 7 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to heal on another side, then should heal on the second day or the third.
For there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and causes fever; so it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the wound until it reaches the shoulder. then you should reward all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on the pulse when it is healing, so that death does not come instead of the shoulder. and this often happens when the healers are negligent;
and it is not necessary when you see that the arm should be released, and blood should issue a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly on. unless it is crooked, then he should straighten his arm quickly, for this would be bad;
but let him heal the second time; or you should prick at the tip of the incision, until the blood that is congealed in the wound flows forth. and put on a little bit of oil mixed with water, and press down gently.
And if the vein is swollen, then let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity demands drawing out blood a second time, then let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein on the arm is healed at the site of the wound because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the abscess becomes red.
then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal across, not lengthwise or widthwise.
and the wound should be wide, and should be healed well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is in summer, then do not put the hand back in hot water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer.
and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve.
The healing of the salivatele of the right hand is worth more than all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
strain the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one can see it; and if it heals across, and you cut it all around, then nothing will hurt.
and do not go too deep in the flesh, for the nerves are beneath two layers of skin.
and then put the hand back in hot water if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have bled the blood as much as is needed, then put oil and seal on the vein to close it quickly, and do the same with each section.
The wound on the left hand side is worth as much to the disease of mice as it is to the illness of the right side; and does just as I told you there.
The wound on the shoulder is worth as much to all the diseases that are under the body, as much as the diseases of the thighs, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and hips, and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his wound is that the patient bathes his foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it bleeds. and above the ankle joint; and the vein is at the calf, and from above the foot many veins go.
then let it be cut on the larger vein, or at the ankle, which is worth more.
And if you cut it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below, and let the incision traverse as when cutting; and let the flames be in a straight line.
And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
And if the incision fails the first time, then start again the second at a little distance above, because the flesh is salty; nor doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and do the same to the shoulder of the other foot equally.
The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its incision is worth to the pain of the haunch when it's for hot blood.
And the quality of his incision is that the patient enters or bathes and stretches above the ankle four fingers in twisting.
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then cut it in all ways that you can, and crosswise. and is worth more than you cut it, for the flesh is sound, and it is very easy to reopen in many hands.
and is worth more than you cut it, for the flesh is sound, and it is very easy to reopen in many hands. And if you do not find it, then cut any vein that opens at the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves.
and make so much flow of blood that you see, and then untie the ligament, and put on cotton and bind it; it is now healed.
Of venesections
Venesections are made of horns, or iron, or glass; and venesection is done in two ways: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
And this venesection which is without cutting is done in two ways: either it is done all at once, or without stopping.
and two others on the two sides of the neck; and the venesection below the chin. and the venesection of the two shoulders; and the venesection above the hips. and the venesections in both arms; and the venesections of both legs. and the venesections at the two ankles; and the venesection does not treat blood, unless it is from small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
and therefore no one has failed at it, as one does with an incision of a vein; and it is not necessary that it be administered, whether all at once or not, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or for habituation, then we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at each time.
for there are those who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and there are those who turn yellow and black on their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and dark blue around the eyes.
and there are those who turn a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and drink blood. and there are those who dream, and see by night's blood and wounded and dead and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it's during the month, we order them to bleed after three hours of the day.
The incision of the nose helps with the headache that comes from above and does not need to be done after the evacuation of the whole body.
and this venesection is in place of the incision of the cervical.
and it's not necessary for someone with a cold complexion to use it, or who has catarrh, because this does them great harm.
and therefore it's not necessary for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who often bleed themselves become forgetful, and because of this it's necessary to put the venesection a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
The venesection in the neck is in place of the incision of the head and of the cervical, and because of this it's worth for the constriction of the stomach. and to the opening of the channel of the womb, and to all, and to repletion;
and it's necessary to push a little bit, because if it holds too tightly, it will cause forgetfulness or constriction of the stomach and heart.
The venesections at the two sides of the neck are worth for the headaches, and obtalmia, and migraine, and for strangulation, and for pain in the roots of the teeth.
and it's in place of the incision of the cervical; and it's necessary that you command the surgeon to express his hand when he puts it, so that he does not cut the artery, and that blood does not flow too freely.
The venesections below the chin are worth for mouth diseases, and corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it's in place of the incisions of the two lips.
The venesections of the shoulders are worth for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
The venesections of the sides are worth as much as the three veins of the arm, because it treats blood from these large veins;
and command the surgeon not to cut too deeply by front, because the flesh is bare of fat, and knows below nerves and arteries.
The venesection that is above the hip is worth for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases below, and it's necessary that the venesection be great, and made of bronze, so that it has need to draw well; and by chance, if they were subtle, it would break; and it would make large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors,
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.
And if the wound is large, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to subtlety open the path of the large blood flow.
And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out the blood little by little, then we must only do it once.
And if we wish to get a lot of blood, then we do it often; and if the wound is deep, then strike deeply into it, and stop when the veins are cut suddenly.
and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin and who have many pores that you anoint the areas around the blisters with oil that is open and dissolvent. if it is in the east, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of cucumber seed.
and if it is in the winter, with oil of tansy, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the surplus is large and cold, then take bitter oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
And if the person is being treated for tender flesh and large pores, then it is not necessary to put any oil.
but it is necessary to wash afterwards with water of red rose, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of pear, or something similar.
And the one who has much moisture, should rise up with ease, or with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large surplus should rise up with old wine, or water of sycamore, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or something similar.
and it is not necessary to dress with a poultice before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and do not sleep after the poulticing.
and it is necessary that he warn himself when he should be poulticed and when he is being poulticed. And beware of those who are being treated who are choleric, and if the wound is too red and inflamed; and it is necessary that he take cold things, such as green apples, and beets, and lettuce in moderation, and similar things;
and honey, and goose fat, and moist meats.
And those who have a cold complexion, should take honey syrup, and moderate-smelling wine, which is between old and new, and honey in small amounts, and honey with young birds and partridges.
and the day he will be poulticed, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men treacle or musk at times before the poulticing, or after, to comfort the main members; and let the wound be subtlety opened, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The poultices that are applied without striking are those that are applied on the liver, and on the muscles, and podagra, and on the belly and the backside and the kidneys and the buttocks, for these members do not suffer being struck on those places.
and it is done only to attract blood from member to member, such as we apply to the breasts when the newborn is bleeding; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, just as we apply poultices to the belly and backside to reduce the member.
and it removes the pain when there is swelling or piercing; and by its attractive virtue, it accidentally stops the swelling, or drives out the piercing from its place.
and so it does when one applies it to the liver and muscles when there is retained flatulence,
and these poultices are administered empty to suck up as much as possible; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and at other times with cold water.
such as in the diseases of the pleurisy; and in such a manner that one fills the poultice with hot water only, or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been cooked.
The form of the poultice administered to fire is this:
And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have a narrow border around the middle one small perforation, just like to put in an awl.
and it should be of linen, soft before being applied so that it does not hurt the patient when applying it to the member;
and have in the middle a cross-shaped rod of iron or metal, to put a candle pressed into.
and there should be great and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
for the poultices for children are different from those for old people, and for thin ones from fat ones.
And one should thus put this poultice on the member:
take the candle of wax or a linen wick, and put it inside the poultice across the rod that is inside the poultice. so that the light is at the bottom of the poultice so it does not burn the patient;
and then put it on the member, and the fingers should be on the perforation that we said, so that when you want to, the vapour goes out, and take away the poultice;
and take the linen wick just like before, and reapply it often if you need to.
Therefore, the poultice which is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with all water, has no rod nor perforation, and is not applied at all except when it is full of water, and is put on the member alone.
and this is the form:
Poultices are not applied at all except to members where one cannot put poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and in areas denuded of flesh, such as nipples or new-born children, and others like them.
and the quality of the user is that when you find poultices that are in sweet water without any stirring, then take them;
and put them into sweet water, until they become familiar and have nothing in their bellies. and then be treated with vein and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the poultices;
and when they are full and swollen, if it is a place where one can put a poultice, then put it, because this is very good afterwards.
If not, take the place with oil first, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it.
And if the wound heals too soon after the sweating sickness, then wet one linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the sweat is stopped;
And if the wound is multiple, then put on vitriol powder or gallstones and similar things, until it is stopped;
or you put half-peeled broad beans on the skin and leave them until they dry out at the skin, so it will stop now;
and if you need more of it, then take other sweatings.
And if the sweatings don't want to take, then rub the skin with fresh blood or insert a needle so that the wound lets out. and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they dry out;
and when you see that they are dripping, then powder on a little bit of aloes and burnt silk or ash, so they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is for restoring fractures and dislocations.
Learn, dear son, that foolish men do not know this chapter, nor have they ever read any of the old books or letters.
and because of that reason is strange the science in our land, for I never found any good one;
and I know nothing of it, except through the science of old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the subject, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have shortened it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of instruments that are prepared, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue to this book, the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who have been proved may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, unless some thing else entirely prevents it, such as feebleness of the body, or infancy, or old age.
or if the weather is not very cold or too hot; and in cold fevers, it's to know cold fits, and fleshy meat of hare and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat fat meats, and do not fill oneself too much with flesh which fills the veins with blood, until you are certain about a hot aposteme or spreading of matter in the member; then revigorate the patient with their previous government as they used to use.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with flesh that makes good nourishment, or if they have viscosity, as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and peas, and pork belly, and sheep's fat, and fresh fish, and big wine, and similar things. For good nourishment quickly heals the wound and the fracture.
And know that the broken bones of old men and those who are decrepit cannot be well taken up or healed according to their nature due to the weakening of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
but have no care, reattach a thick tendon to the broken bone which dries and joins the member together, so that it becomes strong as before; and do not let it be all of its work, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with thick meats, as we said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is one thing, and the fracture of the breast or leg is another, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that occur in a rounded shape, and others in a curved one, like the cut of a quill to write.
For there are fractures that occur in a rounded shape, and others in a curved one, like the cut of a quill to write. And if with wound, and fracture into a small crack.
And each manner has its own mechanism and proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings it into its place.
and is known the fracture of the bone by that which the joint is twisted, and appears well through a defect, and sounds under the pressure of the hand.
and when there is no twisting nor sound on touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it can well have twisting or cracking or a small fracture. So do not move it by hand, but put on medicines that come later, and then restrain it now subtly.
And know that the fracture that occurs in a rounded shape, and where the two parts are separated, it is necessary now to set them evenly, so that hot apostemes do not come.
and if hot apostemes come, then leave it alone for a day, until the aposteme is pacified. then set it equal to the movement that you can move lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is more light than the restorations of those who have pieces; then restrain it, as it is necessary hereafter.
And if the bone has broken pieces, stretch it with two parts, whether it is hands or foot, or to your hand if it is small members, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand.
and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are displaced, then reattach by all means the additions in their places with movement as you can, and be careful that through your work neither injury nor pain comes to the patient.
and adjust well the two joints of the bone according to the best forms.
And if it feels well to your hand that it is not well: then adjust it nicely and do not restrain it too much, nor press it as those who bring hot aposteme and contraction to the member through their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the member is in place, then chastise the patient well so that it does not move, nor while awake or asleep, nor while turning or in any other way. and be careful that the member is so secure that it feels no pain at all. For when it does not feel any pain, then it is not yet in place, and it must be put into that position where it does not feel any pain.
For when it does not feel any pain, then it is not yet in place, and it must be put into that position where it does not feel any pain. and take care that it is set right, lest twistedness come about when it is restored.
and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I am telling you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: so it is necessary to envelop them in soft and subtle linen cloths.
and those that are big, such as thighs and legs: so it is necessary to envelop them in a wide and strong bandage, for the broad bands encircle all the great limb, and hold it evenly from all parts, so that there is no gap.
then wrap around with light bandages, three or four turns according to the limb, and strain your hand on every part of the bandage, then go above the break and hold it less, so that the break may move a little from the break.
and soften the bandage a little and a little, until you take up a great part of the healthy skin, then take another bandage and wrap it around again on top of the broken limb.
then go back to the part below the break and hold it moderately, not too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first lesson above.
then put between the bandages linen cloths or napkins, until it is all even, then bind everything above with one bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something soothing to the abscess hot, and which takes away the swelling, and let it be so for a few days.
then strain above your splints, and be of the thickness of a well-hollowed cane, or of boxwood from which one makes combs, or of palm wood, and be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint that one puts above the break be a little bigger and wider than the others;
and be also as long as it needs to be for the limb of smallness or greatness;
then strain above the splints just as you did in the first lesson, then bind above with a thread evenly, just as in the first lesson above the break.
the tighter it is here, the looser there; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen.
for if the threads are thick, like I have seen the foolish works of those who make their bandages from twisted linen cords, and that is a great error, for the bandage cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not need to have less than two fingers' breadth between each splint.
And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after the straining in their healthy skin, then put underneath them linen cloths or chopped wool, so that he does not get injured.
When the wound is with the breakage and the ligaments are torn, I will say the treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not necessary to bind with splints all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put splints on them sooner than after five days or six, or more according to your security about hot abscess happening.
and here is the manner of ancient ointments to restore breakage, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a lot of egg, and put this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of restoring the breakage in various conditions, and especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of ointment restoring breakage and dislocation and torsion: take 10 parts of birch bark and lady's mantle and balsam and aloes and myrrh and mugwort; mix 5 parts of mirre and aloes; add 8 parts of alechil; grind into powder, and mix with a lot of egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this ointment, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth to many men.
Another manner of ointment that is worth for torsion: take mugwort and visnagar, 10 parts; mirre and aloes, 8 parts; achillea, 6 parts; Armenian bolic, 10 parts; grind well, and mix with water or a lot of egg, and administer.
Another manner of ointment for joints and devitalized bones from their places, and soothes the pain that follows, and they use to shape the bone and breakage: take fresh wool, and soak it in ass's milk and cooked oil, and put on the wound. These ointments do not restore, but are good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly remove pains.
Another manner of ointment that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig and leaves of terrestrial papyrus, and grind them together, and make an ointment.
Another manner of ointment for the restoration of bone breakage and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of visnagar, camomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, each one part; grind and mix with wine; if the member is inflamed, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another manner of ointment even stronger than the first, when hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of visnagar, and flax seed, balaustine, mellilot, and sansue, and violet flowers and camomile, each one part; grind and mix with saltwater, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Hippocrates writes in his book that one should not put on the broken limb to restore it anything more than a wax and oil mixture, and nothing else, and says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken limb, to restore, things slightly hot and dry, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of ointment that is worth for lesion and pain: take mugwort and human hair or bird feathers, and visnagar, in equal parts, and grind them together, and make an ointment and apply it.
And then loosen it a little bit afterwards, and make sure the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone returned to its place; so do not loosen it for several days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, with no rest or swelling, hasten and loosen it, and take away the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sponge from the sea, and plunge into water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, dampened in water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut, until you are sure of no heat from apostema.
And let the inflammation of the member rest, and be taken away the pain, then begin the subtle bandaging again, and a little poultice, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and continue this way until it is healed.
And if you see that apostema has ceased to be hot and red, and pain and swelling are gone entirely, and you need poultice and bandaging, then begin again, as you did at first.
And if nothing of what we said comes to the member, then do not loosen it for more than three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it twenty days, according to what is seen, until the breaking-off stops, and approaches the adjustment with the flesh above.
Then bind it tighter than before, and let the flesh grow its meat, as I said before; and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that no nourishment can come. Then arise the wound with hot water tempered, every time you loosen it, and let it be so each third day, and slightly loosen the bandage.
By this work then the nourishment is cut off from the member, and I hasten to remedy what fools do, who leave the member in a twisted manner: that is bad, and it is pitiful work, and I see nothing else but to abandon and work correctly.
of various ways of breaking There are many ways of breakings, and diverse shapes, and the causes are destined;
For there are breakings that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone takes away all the bone just short of the sacral bone which is below the bone, as does a hatchet or fist; and for this reason it is called "hachure".
Or the sword cuts through the bone above without piercing, and it is called "absolute" breaking; and the wound of these two breakings is great or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or splitting or collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent breaking, which approaches just to the skin that is below the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if there is a wound that is set in the bone as finely as a mouse's whisker, and it is a small splitting, and for this reason it is called "capillary" breaking.
and if the wound is made or by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes the bone piece go down, and it looks like when the chimney sweepers heat up their chimneys; then the stone goes inside.
And this happens more often in those who have or had moist skulls, like an infant's.
and it happens to all these kinds of breakings that small pieces are detached, as they are; and I will speak of them in their place.
And we know all kinds of breakings by the detachment above them, and the inquiry is made through probing, and by the corrupted flesh that is above.
The capillary likeness is known because when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, then opens up the black break.
In the treatment of the break, take care to note the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, numbness, fever, and the eyes issuing forth and turning red, and other similar things in many dispositions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you see no unbearable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to take out the bone before the 14th day of the moon, as soon as you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to take out the bone before the seventh day, as soon as the skin below the bone is corrupted, and the accidents that we have said come.
And if the break of the bone comes just to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the split part thus: and this means that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover above the bone in all ways you can, and on the figure of the wound as gently as you can.
and if bleeding comes to uncover the bone, or apostema is hot, then take the aid of what is needed, and this means that you fill the wound with damp cloths in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the hot apostema is appeased, and be assured of no further bleeding; then begin to cut around the bone, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut in a narrow cutting before, and it's the shape:
And then put another cutting even larger than the first one.
And the second way is that you have various cuttings of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron untempered; and work lightly, so that you do not wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and stiff, then it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you can administer cuttings with tarers, not too deep that they do not go beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be above the point a margin or a circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each one comes in its place from the edge of the bone, so that you have tarers for all tests; and this is the shape of the three manners of tarers:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one tarer on the bone, and turn to your left or right until you know the bone is pierced; then place the tarer elsewhere a little bit further away, and do this all around, then cut into the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pits, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you bring out the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as tongs, forceps; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sacral membrane.
When you have pierced and trimmed the bone, it is necessary that you restore the apposition which remains between the bone and all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it must be more tense and subtler than the other incisors.
And if nothing remains of the small bones, or no scales, then gently move them with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
And another manner of work is that which the Gauls say, which is more healthy; and it is very strong, and this is their word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lenticular incisor, whose shape is:
And do not cut from one side, but the part is ague on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you cut lightly all around the bone, and take good care of the layer that is below.
If it is attached to the bone, then gently move it, for one moves it without harm or fear.
And if the break in the bone does not reach to the layer, and the bone is cut only above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to reassemble that roughness, and remove the scales with a subtle scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to administer in each place the most suitable thing, according to the work and figure of the break.
So scrape with great rasps, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
In each of the other small and subtle cuts and breaks, it is necessary that you provide a remedy according to its direction; and this is something that is not fully understood by one who has put their study into this art.
And if the abscess is opened up, then it is necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to irritate the abscess, then administer above one layer of linen, and do not strain it too much until it stays only on the wound.
and leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is calmed down, then loosen it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer again medicinal remedies without biting.
and take care that the wound is clean again, so that you do not leave ointment or allow bowels to assemble under the layer of the brain, for when bowels assemble above the brain cloth, they will corrode and putridate, and cause great harm to the patient; for when one puts something biting on the abscess, it will necrotize above.
Take care therefore, if any evil accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if nothing else comes forth except through the medicine one has put on, and that virtue has this power, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and in glue one cloth, and put it on the abscess; then the care by ways of cures that are necessary, until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one by itself, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you straighten your little finger or perforation of the neck, and put equal pressure on that break inside your finger index, and in the pouch by default, until the neck returns to its natural shape. and do this lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
And if the break is in the part above the neck, and the finger cannot return to its place, then it is necessary that you put it equal to the head of a small rod.
And if the break is in two parts, then do it similarly, and try to restore the first part as soon as you can.
if not, then afterwards, on the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calmed down, then tie a cloth of linen around the neck, if the break is in one part.
Or you tie another cloth on the other side, if there is a break there; and let the cloths be so large that they fill the perforations of the neck.
And some restorers say that the cloths should be soaked in butter and changed each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but rather they should be soaked in a mixture of hen's egg white, and mill powder; then leave the cloth on until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes one binds the neck with goose feathers instead of cloths, and if there is a small cloth around, and it holds the break, and blows on the patient's face; or do what you see.
And if an abscess comes to the neck while you are working on it, then put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a small amount of diachylon.
And if an abscess does not come, then apply a poultice by default, made from wheat flour and incense powder, mixed with hen's egg white, and put it on light bandages, and do not bind the neck.
and if the break in the neck is small and it has broken into little pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for this purpose, then close the wound, and care for things that are raw, and binding, as well as poultices and ointments suitable for this.
and if there is no wound inside the neck, then care for the neck with cloths, and put linen strips on it, until he is healed.
This appears to be a title or heading, rather than a translation. It would likely translate to "On the Fracture of the Jawbone" or something similar.
When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no wound outwardly, and the break is only outwardly so far as to be felt by the tongue inwardly, one can hardly recognize it.
It is necessary, if the breakage is in the right part, that you put your two fingers into the mouth of the patient; and if the breakage is in the left jaw, then put your two fingers from the right hand, and press the breakage gently within, and make it equal.
And if the breakage of the jaw is dislocated in .ij., it is necessary that you administer an extension of .ij. parts, until it be equal.
And if the movement of the teeth causes, or dislocation, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw a poultice, and put on .i. double cloth; and put on the cloth a great needle well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the mouth as you can, and command the patient to rest, and serve light victuals.
And if you see that the figure changes, then loose it on the third day, and then put back to point what is changed; and put on plaster, of mill powder with abundance of egg or seme flour, after what you have removed the poultice; and put on the plaster a light linen cloth, and if the plasters harden, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it so until he be healed; many times is healed in .iij. weeks.
And if an abscess comes forth, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, reward not any part of the bone that has been removed; if subtlety of removal with suitable instruments is necessary.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it by fire according to your necessity.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then cover the wound, if it is large, and put on .i. suitable plasters to promote flesh, until he be healed.
of strength The shoulder joint breaks many times before, near the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: or it is broken and dislocated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is this when the break is without wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the assistant that feels the broken shoulder; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then make equal the break with your two fingers, so that the form be as it should be, and there be no appearance or impediment.
And if you need to stretch more, then put under the shoulder of the patient a rounded sphere of cloth or linen, and it should be thick according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the shoulder, and strain the sphere to your hand, so that you make equal the break as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder away from the back, because it comes out too far, then it is necessary that the patient lie sovain on his habitation, and put under the shoulder .i. middle pillow, and have the ministers press down on the shoulder, until the bone of the shoulder be lifted.
And then address the break to your two fingers, and if you find it debrisied, then it is necessary that you cut through it; and draw out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstacle, then use one of the instruments you have at hand; but put this instrument under the shoulder, in order to guard against the syphac.
and resembles a spoon, and is not at all shaved, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and one wide and the other narrow, just like the routure of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then cover the wound, and if the routure is small, or you doubt it may be a hot abscess, then dress the wound with cloths and tents, according to its size.
And if a hot abscess comes forth, then soak one cloth in rose oil and lard and wine, and put it on.
The plastering of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of mill powder and abundance of egg, and put light splints on top, and put a sphere under the armpit, if you need one. Then take a very great bandage of one palm in width, then put one double cloth on top of the splints and plaster; then take a fine needle of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage be hanging down. And put the needle on top of the breakage, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the armpit of the healthy side, and under the armpit of the sick side; and rewrap each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the breakage properly, and you see clearly that the needle is not moving on top of the broken bone, then repair it each day, and when the ligature slackens, then restrain it.
and make the patient sit on his back, and put under the armpit of the sick side a small pillow to lift the assistant high; so that the break of the shoulder will be alleviated by the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not unbind it unless bad accidents occur, up to .xx. days.
then reapply the plaster if you see that it is needed, and strain it and leave it thus, until he be restored; and she is restored in as few as 28 days, and in less than some men.
of the shoulder break
For it often happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes wide and does not fit well, and is not set right except by feeling; so prepare according to the shape of the breakage, and rewrap according to its natural form, in all the ways you can; then put on top powder made from millstone with abundance of egg, and light splints, and put a double cloth on top; then put on a wide and fine needle, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there are rough spots anywhere on the shoulder, use linen bandages to smooth them out so that the needle stays even; and then wrap it tightly with a large bandage so that the needle does not move from its place, and check the ligature each day; and whenever it loosens, tighten it again, and keep the same pressure if it gets worn out of its place, and have the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number is complete, then release it, and be sure, for it is not a bone that sets itself back into shape lightly.
And if a piece of bone projects forward and points downward below the knee, then do so above and below it, making the bone that we have said in the breaking of the forceps to soothe an abscess.
Of the breaking of the ribs.
The ribs are sometimes broken in the middle, but this is rare; but they often break at the back. And when it is broken in the middle, then it inclines downward below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks breath, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the fractures in the broken ribs, and one can well sense.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and one places a cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of both sides with your hands, and subtly applies equal pressure in all the ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place poultices and bandages over the subtle layer of salt or other light material, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the cord around again on the back, and hold it fast, and reward every hour with a bind, and if it relapses, then bind it again; and if it needs to be removed due to corrosion or pruritus that comes from the site, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and remove it, and scrape off the poultice, and apply what has come forth in ways of cures; then reapply the poultice, and hold it until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the ribs.
Know that the breaking of the ribs does not occur except in large people after the back and at the top inside, and they do not bend except because they are flabby; and one can tell well by examination of the back.
And the restoration is that you place equal pressure on the break, as it should be. And then apply a poultice, and bind with a cloth, if you need to.
And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels very great pain and puncturing, as from pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and breathes in gasps, and all and vomits a great quantity of blood, and this is grave sickness, and the ancients have put great art into it.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that fill the belly to push the break backward.
We do not do so, lest hot abscesses come there, if it has not already come. And if it has come, then let it heal.
And some of us say that one should place poultices on the site to suck strongly, and it seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt whether the poultice will draw off the superfluidities from the site due to the weakness.
And some of us say that one should cover the site with wet wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to put equal pressure on it, then be careful with the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure through the bone which pierces the membrane, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut open above the site of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument below to guard the syphac; and then one should trim the bone, and draw it lightly, and then sew shut the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat with poultices until he is healed. And if hot abscesses come, then apply wet cloths in rose oil on top of the site; and treat the site as necessary for an abscess, and be very careful to look after the site where it should be, until he is healed.
Of the breaking of the neck.
Sometimes the breaking occurs at the bone of the neck, and rarely does it bend; and similarly with the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, it does not feel anything. Know that he is mortally in many dispositions, and if they are numb and feel well when one constrains and pricks them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one applies treatment to it.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if their feet are softened, and if there is numbness in the hands, and on the back there is ventosity and evacuation without volition; and when one has relieved them on their stomach, there is evacuation without volition. And when he is relieved on his back and wants to ease himself, but cannot. Know that he is mortally ill: if they do not labor in their treatment.
And if these accidents do not come to him, then the thing is easier.
And the treatment is that you reward him if there is hot abscess, by applying rose oil or egg yolk oil to the spine, until it is calmed; then apply a poultice that comforts and dries, and bind it with a cloth, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until he is healed. And if some bones become loose, it is necessary to cover on the knee; and take out the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat with ointment releasing fat, until he is healed. And if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", then put your pouch in your left hand and place it evenly on top of the other hand at your power, then apply the poultice and cloth as needed; then bind it, and if there are loose bones, do so, and take out the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the hipbone.
Rarely does the hipbone break, and if it does, it is not much diminished at the top; and it becomes long, and inclines downward, and comes to the patient's pain, and puncturing, and swelling up what breaks.
And the treatment is that you stretch out your hand so far as to be above the breaking point; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is only at the top, then place it in that same position until it is back to its natural figure.
And if the break is of great length or it declines inwardly, then cause the patient to lie on his belly until the restoration of that break is accomplished. And when you have put it straight, then place on the poultice, next a piece of wood or horn, and hold the break steady so that it does not move; and apply the hand below the ribs, until the breathing is equal.
And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
And if the abscess comes forth, do not touch it, until the abscess has subsided and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and that's the way.
of the break of the shoulder.
The shoulder is that which is between the back and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of two ways: of which one is that you take a piece of wood as smooth as honey, in this shape:
And tie the two ends with two strings, and bend them upwards, and cause the patient to sit on a stool; then throw his broken arm onto the wood, until it comes into place, and has in middle a piece of wood, then bend on some heavy thing or let the attendants stretch it downwards; then put the break even with their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
And the other manner is that one supports the patient on his hatrail, and ties the hand to his neck, then instruct two attendants to have one hold what is above the break with their hands, and the other to hold below each string, and stretch each one to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold one string below the break, and one above the break, and have each attendant stretch to their part. And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, it's necessary that you put one string in the middle under the stool, and another towards the back, under the break; and also if the break is towards the back, then it's necessary to put one string slightly, without labor, until the break is even on the level, and on the back; then make the break even as it should be, and hold it, unless abscesses come forth.
And if abscesses come forth, then do not hold it at all until the 7th day, and put a moist cloth on it in a warm place and with rose oil, until the abscess is subsided; then hold it, and the manner of holding it is that you put the poultice on the break, then bring the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the wrapping, and hold on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its natural state, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use splints, and put on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, with two spacers between each splint, and have each splint be so large that it passes over the break three spaces to either side; then hold on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, more firmly and less far apart.
And if you see the seat of the splints and the tension, as we have said, in the work that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then leave it until the 7th day, as we have said; then look at each three days to the splint, that boils or swelling do not come to the place, or numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If it addresses, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come to pass, then do not remove the splint for more than three days or longer, and let the patient sleep on his back, with their hands on their stomach; and put under the shoulder a cushion made of equal wool, and look at each hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken member does not change, or become loosened the strings; if it addresses through the virtue of medicine, and give them food as we have said before, in such a way that the food is for the first subtle ones; and when he begins to recover, let him be nourished. And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken up in 40 days altogether; and then one must remove and administer baths and medicines of ointments to bring the place into order. And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, then wait until the splint is removed for one day or two months.
of the break of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fascicles", one of which is small and is the one that follows the pouch; and the other is large and is the one that is below, towards the little toe. By chance, break only the large fascicle alone, or the small one, and by chance, both together.
When the small fascicle is broken, the restoration is gentle, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are both broken together. If it is the small fascicle that is broken alone, then it should be slightly stretched out, and made even.
And if it is the large fascicle, then it must be held tighter; and stretch it out on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little toes lower than the other toes, and have the patient crossed over himself, with a cushion in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch the attendants' arm to the part below his hand, or on a string, and one attendant on another above. And then put it straight, according to its best form.
And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is any that is loose and can be taken by the horn, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and an osteum, as we have said before.
And if the break has a wound, I spoke about it in the individual chapter; then take the treatment.
And if in the early stages of restoration, hot abscesses arise, then apply a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, not too hard or too soft; and bind it lightly above, until the hot abscess is calmed. And then remove the poultice, and put an emplastrum of miller's powder with abundance of egg yolks; then apply the splints, and let the splint of the break be a bit stronger and slightly larger than the others; and know that it should have 7-8 splints or more, depending on the position: whether the break is in one bone or two. And strain more above the break than other parts, and always less far apart, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the drapes above the break be soft and moist, not hard or harsh; and let the thread, which it strains, be linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And reward the member and the string after some days. And if some bad accident happens to the member, such as pruritus that comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member in hot water until those prurites are appeased; and let the member rest not too tightly. And then resume the stretching, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, then address them.
And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little bit, and let it be like that for some days, until the swelling comes, and then restrain it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not unbind them until 20 days or thereabouts, then bind their hands to their neck, and let their necks be even, and take care of movement and distraction, and sleep on their back; and know that this bruise is restored in 30 days or thereabouts, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
None! It seems you provided only a title "de la brisure de la main" (of the bruise of the hand), without any text to translate. Would you like me to wait for the actual text to continue translating?
Know that on the back of the hand and in the fingers it often happens that there are bruises, and only pleasure comes many times.
And when the finger of the hand is bruised or swollen, then it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged and sit upright in front of himself evenly; then he places his hand on a stretched cloth, and stretches out the broken bones, and makes them even with the mirror, until they are well joined; and applies the plaster and poultices, if abscesses do not come, then he puts an elevation according to the quantity of the swelling; and let it be enveloped in one fold of linen.
And if the bruise is around the palm of the plantar surface, then make a ball of cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to his bruised plantar surface; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the elevation be as soft as the plantar surface of the hand, and bind it, as it should.
And if the bruise is at the back, then it is necessary that you put an elevation above and another below on the plantar surface, so that the hand be open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the ligament between the fingers.
And if the bruise comes to any of our fingers, if it's the thumb, then set it even as is necessary; and bind it with the plantar surface, and if you see that a straight small elevation is needed to lift the bruise, and it does not move; and if the bruise is on other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, then set it even and tie it with the healthy finger that follows; or bind all together in one wrapping, whichever seems better, or place a small elevation on top like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot abscesses, and secure what comes, as I have said.
None! It seems you provided only a title "de la cuixe brisie" (of the bruised toe), without any text to translate. Would you like me to wait for the actual text to continue translating?
The bone of the toe is often broken, and well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is to bind one ligament above the bruise, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then stretches each minister to their equal part; and this is when the bruise is in the bone.
And if the bruise is near the root of the toe, then one of the ligaments should be towards the little finger, and the other ligaments below the bruise. And similarly if it is near the ankle, and then be the ligament beneath the ankle, and be the extension downward; then place the mirror so that the bone is even with its two hands, until it is according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster, and tie, if hot abscesses do not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, then let it be appeased and then return to your work and your treatment; the binding is done in this same manner. It is necessary that you wrap a bandage of double thickness in three or four layers around the bruise, and leave any superfluous parts; then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the knee, and tie a long thread between the toe and the leg, beneath the ankle joint, and let the ends of the thread come up; then turn on top of the leg and toe with the bandage, then place elevation on the bruise, and put an elevation on the bone of the leg; then apply a soft cloth wrapping between the leg and toe to equalize the binding, then begin to bind tightly three or four times around the bruise; and when you go above the bruise, and less bind; then hold at two joints of the thread that you have tied between the leg and toe, and tie three elevations that are on top, then return down to the bottom at the end of the thread, as far as you come beneath the foot; and bind tightly, so it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, unless there comes an abscess or swelling or any similar thing.
And if there is an abscess, then unbind it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that ache, then it is necessary to clean them, if possible; and if not possible, then it is necessary to cut the skin, and draw out the pus; and care for it as we have said, until it is healed.
And no matter how many times the toe is bruised and elevations are applied, as in the aid kit and on the arm; yet, in this restoration made it does not bother the patient.
And know that the toe is restored in 1 day, or a little less or more, according to the various complexities.
None! It seems you provided only a title "de la ruelle dou genoil" (of the ankle of the knee), without any text to translate. Would you like me to wait for the actual text to continue translating?
Know that in the ankle of the knee there is often bruising, but it swells many times. And if it breaks, then it is only a cut or a small hole, and has to be treated as a wound, whether with or without a wound, and this is well known.
And the restoration is to set even those things that are bent at their joints, as long as they can be assembled; then apply the plaster, and place a rounded elevation if you need it, and bind tightly as needed, then return all the dispositions that we have said in other bruise cases, such as hot abscesses and any similar thing; and treat each accident with what is needed, until it is healed.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by its right name "malleoli" and the other is called "femur"; and it has all the same breaking as when it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the work is altogether alike.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the slender bone is broken, then it turns forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, then one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns downward. Then apply an extension, and put it in place, and tie the splints equally; but nevertheless, it is necessary that if the break is ugly and there are many pieces, the extension should be less and more gentle; and align according to your ability.
And when you have completed all your work, take two pieces of split wood that surround the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the ankle; then envelop them in two layers with one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle thus, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well; some people use one beam of split wood, and it is made of wood, and one places the leg to prevent movement, and properly does this in the break where there was a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident; so that you care for it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
The ankle does not come to breaking, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and there are two or three positions; and there is no remedy except in more or less conditions.
And if the bones of the foot are broken, and you see those bones rising up one against the other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if it were going to walk; and then place your foot on top of their own, at the spot where the bones are lifted, and press down until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and below the foot a small table with two full feet, then tie it to the foot properly, and then wrap drapery around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the tie, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are some of the toes broken, then restore them, as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint on each broken toe according to its length, and be one step wider; then put beneath the foot that table which I mentioned, and tie it properly; and if there are two or three or more broken, place a splint on each toe according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tie the table underfoot; and let it extend over the top of the table so that it will be held well.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things that I have said about other breakages, as we have said; and treat each accident according to its need.
of the breaking of the bones of the thumb
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit up straight, then incline her back to the part where she has been hurt, and let it be held from behind; then fill the birth canal with cotton, and put in as big as one stone; then lift the woman, and slowly raise her back little by little, and then the cotton will come out until it reaches the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do this for about 7 days or around: the breakage will be restored, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, tie a cord to the anus, and fill the whole bladder into the nature; then blow into the cord strongly until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return to its original state; then it should be filled with cotton, and left like that for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said for the finger; and do not conceal these breakages which are near to him who puts his study and use into practice, and intends my book. For the breaks signify the right path of restoration in multiple dispositions: then understand this.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and insert it into the penis; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
of breaking with wound
It is necessary for the one who has a breaking with a wound, whether it be great, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, so that the wounds which we have said bear witness.
And if the wound heals, then remain it with vinegar, or if you have no other remedy, then start to restore the breakage in that same hour or day, unless abscesses arise.
And if abscesses arise, then leave the restoration just to the ninth day, until the abscess is pacified, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is visible above the skin uncovered, it is necessary that you set it in place lightly with your hands, to a small extension.
And if the extension is not suitable to put it in place with your hands, then use this instrument which is made of iron, which has 6 or 7 fingers or length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the surgeon to take 3 or 4, according to what he needs in each treatment of a breakage; and be strong and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the member at your work, and be pointed forward, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which reason the curved fingers must be placed on top of the apparent bone; and insert once, until it returns, and let them be equal to each other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the tip of the bone, so that the instruments may have power over it.
And if you cannot restore the bone as we have said, then use a suitable instrument for this purpose, whether an incisor or saw, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small scraps.
And when the bone is restored and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do this until it is in its natural place, then wash one cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly do this in the evening; and do not put any ointment or other thing on the wound where there is oil, lest you bring forth decay and corruption; then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constrained with the breakage; and many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, and they have brought upon the patient either death or corruption some time; and be aware that the constrictions are softer and gentler than other breaks.
And if the wound is large or great, and you doubt that bad events will come from it, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, so it is not necessary to put salves on it; but wrap around it, in place of salves, hard cloths, and tie them. And when you see after one day or two days bowing towards the wound, then remove what you have put on top entirely with wine, and put healing ointment for wounds, such as tetra-pharmaceutical ointment and similar things.
And it is necessary that you loosen the member twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is set and healed.
And it is necessary that the members be aligned in such a way that the bow strings down lightly.
And if the bone breaks every day, and it cannot heal but keeps returning to its bow-like shape, know that there are small pieces of bone; therefore it is necessary that you gently probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these splintered pieces that cause that pain.
And if an abscess comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is said in this chapter beforehand. And when the bone is broken and appears on the member, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder, and others similar to those of great limbs, do not remove it; for many times death ensues, but leave it until it purges itself; perhaps after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of the boils that come on the swelling
We often see this after the healing of a breakage, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a sad thing to see the figure of the member; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Therefore, take heed if it is fresh: administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, aloe, and similar others, so that you take any of these things or all together, and mix them with black wine or egg white or oil; and put them on the wound in estoupes, and hold it well, and do not remove it for three days; then remove it, and begin another one, until the nodules are removed; or you strain it onto a piece of well-made cloth; for the properties of cloth are such that they remove all swelling from above the members; and if the nodule is already converted into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut on top, and make the superfluity apparent; or have it removed by any surgeon, until it is removed, and care for it until it is healed.
When the breakage of the bone is restored, and afterwards there remain weak and subtle members, it happens for many reasons: one reason being that they were bound too tightly, and not bound as it was necessary; or because there were too many bonds, and could not come to the nourishment of the member; or because of excess inflammation; or because of too great movements, not in its own hour; or because there is a lack of blood in his body, so he is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften the body, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give him joy and ease; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to great nourishment, and often washes with lukewarm water, until the nourishment flows to the member; and revives its natural shape.
of the twisted member after healing
When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: nor should you believe those foolish people who say that one must break the member all over again; and many foolish surgeons have done this in our land; and this practice is censured, and great evils ensue, and by chance death; yet, if the nodulations and torments are fresh, it is necessary that they be washed with hot water, or herbs that soften be cooked, such as leaves of marshmallow, roots, and millefoil, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, like diachylon well made, and take the poultice of marshmallow, and mix it with goose fat or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top; or take fatty figs, and grind them with colza flour, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And at no time is the nodule removed because of continuous and prolonged friction with many moist hands. And be mindful to move the member every hour.
And if the tortuosity is hardened and indurated, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then cut just up to the bone, with a subtle and light incisor; and put attention and study into the care.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, then it is necessary to bring it back into place immediately.
For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance it is set in place with pains at the site; therefore it is not necessary to move it to the point where it is swollen: many times this brings shame and other pains;
Yet, when this happens, make the patient sicker, then leave him, until the swelling is appeased; then wash the member with hot water and oil, then gently massage it, and care for each member as the cure comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations to an end at this point.
of jaws
It often happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: or they are a little moved from their place, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off saliva from the mouth so he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by several gentle movements.
And if it is complete and accomplished, you must immediately reset it without delay.
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and inserts the mirror's pouch from one of his hands into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if it is two-part; and the other two hands should be free to make equal, and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all parts.
And the mirror adjusts it so that it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult to return, namely if the two jaws are together, then warm water and oil should be applied to them, so that they can be gently reset; nor delay in resetting, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well with a little softening, then place moist cloths on top, made of rose oil and wax, and tie them gently with soft strings.
and the patient sleeps on his back with his head between two pillows, so that he does not move to right or left, nor tries at all to manipulate, but takes gentle food, until the pains are removed and the jaws are settled.
and then eat and drink as he pleases lightly, and does not trouble himself to open his mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well settled and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be returned to their place within an hour and are not converted back to their natural state, it comes to fever and accustomed sickness, and by chance, belly upset, and by chance, vomiting pure bile.
And when you see these things, then know that it is perdition; and many times death comes to him who has it, within eight days.
of the shoulder
The shoulder cannot dislocate from the side inward along its continuity and of the chest, and is dislocated sometimes backward, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies somewhat on his back and stretches out his arms; then presses the dislocated shoulder firmly onto your palm, and it will return; then put on the poultice and bandage it tightly.
and the head of the shoulder that is towards the cut cannot dislocate; if not, and if it does dislocate at times, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the poultice and bandage it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
and thus itself is brought back the head of the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Know that the shoulder blade is dislocated only in three ways: one of which is that it dislocates at the lower part of the armpit below; and the second is at the part of the chest; and by chance, it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder blade, nor does it dislocate inwardly for the nerves; and many times dislocates downward toward the armpit, especially in those who have little fat, for they jump forth hastily; in those who have enough fat, it jumps back and forth, and returns back and forth.
And by chance it happens to some men that they suffer a blow or fracture, and the shoulder blade swells up with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
It is necessary then that you examine it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known when the dislocation is downward toward the armpit, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity. and you will find a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and below it at the point where the head of the shoulder touches, just like an os; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor move with any movements.
and also if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the point where the head of the shoulder touches.
and this manner of dislocation is not to be forced back when it is new or if the child is sick.
And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then places his fingers below the armpit, and lifts the jointure forcibly to its place; and the minister lifts the hand again and stretches it upwards, then puts it back down; so it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said within two days after, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister gently softens and soothes him, just like a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and brings it.
then have the patient lie on his back, and place a layer of wool under the armpit, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirror's heel on top, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and draw the patient's hand.
and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that he does not move downward; now this shoulder returns at once, and if you see that it is reset in this manner:
and it is that you make someone who is bigger than the patient stand beside him, and be straight towards the side, and push his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another minister draws the patient's hand down towards his stomach. And if the patient is too light, then let him carry something heavy with him, and the dislocation returns at once.
And the reset is also done in another way: and it is that one drives a long heated iron into the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is as firm as a piston, and not too big nor too small. Then be placed under the patient, but so that he has a soft cloth on top, and the patient is standing with his foot long of wood; then stretch his hand down to the other side in form, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment: take one piece of iron from two arms thick and three inches wide, which has the head rounded so that it can easily enter into the depth below the shoulder blade, according to this form:
then place it on top of the head of the wooden beam that is covered with a soft cloth, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then put it under the shoulder blade of the patient; and stretch one's arm over the long wood, and tie the assistant to the wood, and the arm at the head of the hand, then place the arm on top of one strap from a wide sheath, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is so, no matter what way it may be, then you should put under the shoulder blade a woolen sphere equal in size, then apply the plaster with powder of the mill, with incense and a little egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around, then hold it under the shoulder blade gently, and turn the lien on the plaster, and wrap the hand around one's neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he stays quiet a little while, until the limbs are comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then stay quiet again after five or seven days, and move him; and if it is firm and has not become softened, then he is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come in or for another reason, then it is necessary that you apply cauterizations to three pores, as described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this and he separates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the chest and shoulders, or behind, is made by force and stretching of hands, and it requires another treatment; and care for it until it is healed.
And if after healing comes grief and tardiness of movement in the limb, then the patient should bathe many times until that grief is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated in points, and it returns to those points; and it has become dislocated from all parts, and especially before and behind, and the dislocation is not restored, for one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocate according to each figure. And when you join the sick shoulder to the healthy one, then it can be seen clearly. For the joint is deformed, and cannot bend the arm, nor bring one's shoulder close together.
And it is necessary that you reset it in this way before apostemes grow there, for if apostemes were to grow there, it would be grievous to bring it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back entirely, especially when it is at the rear; so it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes from it.
And the restoration is such when it can be brought back as one can, that you stretch his hand to your two hands; and his arms are spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around, above, and below, and bring the jointure to its hinges together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and sets the shoulder that is dislocated back to its root.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and do this: two people will extend the arm, and hold it tightly with their hands, so that it does not move at all; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth around.
and when the mirror has joined the joint to his hand, then anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, and then brings the joint back together until it returns.
and when it is back in place, then places on plaster with some egg yolk, and holds it tightly, and wraps the arm around the neck of the patient, and leaves it for a few days, then releases it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then releases the bandage, and leaves it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for a few days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
And if he feels grief after the setting of the joint, and it becomes swollen, then bathes and rubs it gently, and presses until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a layer of fat sheep's wool, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter the bath. and when he sweats, then rub the joint gently, then put back on the layer of fat sheep's wool, and then make him enter the bath; and thus do this two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see that it is necessary, then put on a poultice made from moist vetch warmed with butter, and hold it in place; it will return to its natural state.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is gentle, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same manner as when it was dislocated, even if the swelling subsides or an abscess forms hotly.
And the treatment is that you place the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the minister's hands, and make him put his palm flat against the appearance of the joint, and bring it back together until it returns to its place.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that you check if it is well in place; then make the patient put the back of their hand on a table at the extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then make the patient put their back of hand on the table, and the mirror put their hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it's good.
If not, then one should soothe the strain of pustules with ointments, and thus it will be without recurrences.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in its place after some days, then the joint will remain twisted.
and nothing is of any use to the patient except until his hands are softened, and he cannot strain anything at all: therefore know that the nerves or arteries are cut; so there is no other remedy except to strain through fire cauterization near the case, and by chance it may not be worth another thing.
And when his hands are back in place, then put on the ointment that we have said, then strain and leave it for five days, then release it and let it be so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then soak it in hot water and rub it until it is clean.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or belly;
Then the finger is bent and the dislocation is reduced to its sockets until it recovers, then hold the tip of the finger and bend it towards the part where it was separated.
and let it be for two days, and then put it back in its place that day; and from that time on bind it with a cloth, as we have said, and release it by the day, and make it move, and bind it to the nut; and do this often until it is straight.
and do the same thing if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do so just as you have done before, until it is clean; and also do the same thing when it is dislocated from another side.
of the dislocation of the sciatic nerve of the back
When the sciatic nerve of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, then there is no remedy, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that evacuations jump forth without will, and he cannot hold it, and many times some members are softened, or both hips, or two arms or one.
And many times the sciatic nerve moves to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez".
The remedy is that you reward if the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no remedy nor healing at all.
And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of cures by great words say there is no cure at all, nor any great benefit.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the gilbositez that comes to the stomach before, there is no remedy nor health;
and also that which comes directly in two sides, and one cannot cure it except for that which comes properly to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place even, and have a strain beneath him, so he does not hurt himself.
then stake one iron rod firmly into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a strap around the joints of the patient, and one at the hips, and at the knees, and ankles.
and two ministers know the straps, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two iron rods;
and be well closed, the iron rods as we have said, and the physician put his palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover by this cure, then take a board three arms long, and hollow out the bottom, and the patient be lying on their side, and place the head of the board on the parietal bone, then put the middle of the board on the spine. and the physician put his feet on the other head of the board, and presses well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, then do the same thing on the spiral that turns towards the hand.
And it is that you stake two iron rods at the head of the patient, one arm long, and towards the feet two others, and have between each rod a palm's breadth of space.
and have in each rod one hole, where the spiral runs, and be the rods firmly stuck in the ground, so they do not move; and between each two rods is one rod turning, over which the strap turns, and have in the two turnings two small iron rods a palm's breadth long, to turn the spiral.
and then tie the strap that is between the joints to the spiral towards the head, and another strap towards the feet to the other spiral, and each of the ministers turns his spiral all along the strap, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
And when it is straightened, then put on drying ointment with plenty of egg white, and then bind it with a cloth, and then apply a plaster from a piece of linen three fingers long, to cover the place of the gilbositez and the part of the spine that needs healing, then tie it with a strap, as we have said, and use gentle nourishment for the patient, until they are healed.
and if nothing comes in the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines, with the plaster that we have said before; and at times one must administer a piece of bread.
and at times the appearance comes in the rear of the spine of the back, and it seems to be dislocations; but it is the bone that opens up, for which one should not have any assumption: by chance it would bring death.
of the dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulders come only with dislocations, and there is no other such thing as this in other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more so inside than outside, and less so before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens up more of the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee to the fire. and it is the place that is below swollen apostemes hot, because the knees of the crotch come forth there.
The sign of him to whom it comes to an end is that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in front is that his leg is well set according to its fulfillment; however, he does not double over with pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot at first, and holds back his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he goes, it passes above the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double over, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and there is a swelling on the hip at the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this likeness of dislocation are that you return to the fact that the dislocation is ancient, and it remains according to its disposition, if there is no cure; and it is not necessary that he have presumption.
And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it's of the three manners of dislocation, hasten to turn the joint, and stretch it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must make ready one strong servant, and stretch the leg strongly to two hands, or to one ligature that is tied above the knee; and another servant stretches his hand above in the same manner that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens it with a soft ligature on the hip; and another holds the head of the ligature;
and they stretch it upward and downward all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at one time, and remains suspended.
This manner of stretching is common to the three likenesses, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, it is necessary to apply a treatment to its likeness. When the dislocation is at the parting, you must keep the patient on his healthy side, then place the ligature on the root of the hip, and the point that is below the ankle, then stretch the ligature up towards the ankle, and towards the calf.
then take another servant's arms, and embrace the thick part of the sick hip, and stretch it outward strongly: so it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot compress it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft ligature on both heels and both knees, and the sick leg should be stretched two doits more than the others.
then let it be hung on the head of a beam, and be above ground two arms long; then command one servant to embrace the chief of the hip, and another servant standing with the patient, who embrace strongly the hip, for the joints return now hastily.
And when the dislocation is at an end, let the patient lie down as we have said in one who has gilbosity, and stretch a ligature on the sick leg properly, and on the heel also.
then put two hot irons, one on the head and one at the heels, and insert one iron between the patient's thighs in the form. and have cloth wet placed around, so that it does not hurt the patient, then stretch each servant towards him, and the surgeon sets equal to his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, put him on the table, and press him thus as we have said in gilbosity, and let the patient lie down on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is before, then it is necessary to stretch the sick leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the surgeon's hand on the sick ankle, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at an end, then it is not necessary to stretch the patient downward, nor lift him up onto the earth, rather it should be as if one of his hanches was dislocated at an end, as we have said about lying on two hanches. and be on his face, and the ligature stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
and it will be so when the patient stretches out his legs and they are equal; then adjust the hips, and put the plaster, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and if he rests for three or four days, then loosen the binding, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are equal, then strain as before, and leave it alone. Three days; then loosen the binding, and let him walk well, until the limbs are comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three manners: that is to say, inward and outward, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not straighten to his hip, know that he is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet.
then take his knee with your palms, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee strongly; and another servant stretches his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg slightly.
and put the plaster on, and make the leg go back to the hip, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then loosen it; and do not trouble the patient to walk, until the limbs are comforted.
And if the limbs are not yet sound, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until he is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes strained, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inward and outward.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tends to swell before the part where it is dislocated:
the remedies are gentle, and one must stretch them gently with one's hands when it is only strained.
And when it is dislocated entirely, then you should make the patient sit upright, and have one attendant hold him by the leg above the ankle;
Then draw the foot towards you to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and pull the foot up high;
And do this twice, as we have said, by pulling and drawing the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, then begin the work again, for it will return;
And if it cannot return thus, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and place one bolster firmly in the earth between his thighs, and bind cloths around, so that he does not harm the patient;
Then have the attendant grasp the thigh, and another attendant stretch out the foot to their hands or to a strap that they tie on the ankle of the foot; Then stretch out each attendant evenly, and the bolsters be placed between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when one is stretching him;
Then place the fingers equally on the dislocation in their hands, and another attendant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, then apply the poultice and bandages on top, and strain firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the strap is not too tight.
Then leave him two or three days, and if the strap loosens, then re-tie; then untie on the third day or quarter, and advise the patient not to walk for four days; And if he walks before that term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses come to this, then it is necessary that you ease them, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healed.
knees
When the knees are dislocated, then they should be well stretched without labor, and that is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back of the foot, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on one level or on two tables entirely straight, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press with your foot firmly until it returns.
And when it is even, and there appears nothing, then place beneath the sole of the foot a table at two feet, then strain firmly, and leave it for three days, then release; and make him rest until he is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times happen that the patient dies;
if you are not modest in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, nor overly bold;
and use at the beginning soothing things to abscesses hot, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope, then reset now the member to its place, so that the abscesses hot come;
and when the member is in place, then administer soothing things to abscesses hot, and treat the wound as it should be, with ointments drying.
and if there is a break in the dislocation, and small bones separated, then set them, and do as we have said in simple diseases;
and beware of entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth more than your soul according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of thy arm and thy body. Amen.
