Here is the translation: And it has come to me in a vision that I will fulfill with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from all in all, so the knowledge is perished and decayed, and nothing remains of it except small descriptions in books of old that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the knowledge.
Or it seems to me that I will revitalize together the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of instruments for cautery, and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for this reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged. And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the proportions of members, and forms, and conjunctions, and separations thereof, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and their position and the movement and rest of veins, and from what place they arise.
And therefore says Hippocrates that the name with the name is much, and with work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We tell you in the introduction to this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said beforehand, so guards himself lest he err and kill men; thus I have often seen many of those who undertake this science and then abandon their knowledge and experiments.
For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut out an abscess or boil on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the great size of the stone, and knew well that if it was not removed he would die.
And I saw another surgeon who took in charge the leg of a duke from our land which was broken, and with the breakage had an open wound; and the ignorant surgeon strained the break above the wound to the very bones, and did not leave any flesh uncut, and thus left it at a terminus; and he commanded him not to disband it in any way; and so it remained that the leg became completely swollen and the toes came to ruin.
I was called to come to him and I hurried to come and relieve the leg; and when I had loosened it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But in any case the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was entirely lost.
And I saw another surgeon who opened up an abscess that was infected, and then inflamed it by the evil of his authority.
For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, does not agree that one touches it with iron unless it is in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore it is necessary that you take care to protect yourself, so that the foolish surgeon cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your arms with caution, and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are praised; and leave the frightful diseases of grievous sickness; and put away your doubts from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care to heal a bad disease unless you are called a foolish surgeon."
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medical cauteries, and it deals with the chapter from head to feet; and the forms of instruments, and tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and bandages and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things; and it deals with the chapter ordered and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twistings, and similar things; and it deals with the chapter from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and harm of each complexion.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest and most subtle speech and secret answer; and many wise men have spoken about this and agreed with it; and I am not satisfied with their words, for I fear the length.
I say that cauterization helps universally all complexions where it has matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion with matter and dry complexion with matter.
In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some have divided and said that cauterization is great help; and others have said the opposite: that cauterization is of no use in diseases that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured with heat or dryness; and he who says the opposite says that cauterization does great help in hot and dry diseases that come into men's bodies. For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this saying. For I have found it to be true at times through experience.
And in any case, I don't meddle with fires except for one who has tested it and knows by long use the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the remedies and pace of time; as for other temperaments, we are not afraid, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the physicians gathered together and agreed on the cauterization.
And know, son, that cauterization together with fire is part of the secrets of cures, and of greater good than burning medicines.
For fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is burned, and does no harm to another member if there is none.
Burning medicines come from one member to another, and bring disease to the afflicted member through grievous healing; and by chance kill the patient.
Fire for its excellence and for the goodness of its substance does not do this unless there is superfluity.
And I have found this through experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I excuse myself for the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is revealed in fire, and the quality of the work, how it repels diseases of the body, as philosophers say by demonstrating; or receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and selected patients.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harmful happenings which occur are put below by the aid of cauterization; and likewise if the cauterizations are for necessary and hastening pains that cannot wait for a greater evil to come to the member.
And never think this, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization does not have a relapse; and they say so, but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is not medicine that changes the complexion, nor dries out the humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for its hastiness of value, and for the virtue of its work and lordship.
And it is possible that the disease comes at times according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and the superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless it is cauterizations administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, as with cauteries for dens by pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth after medicine, but their intention is false, and cauterizations are the last resort of medicine because when we administer modes of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cauterization, and it is worth. Therefore it appears clearly that cauterizations are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that cauterizations made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, and they didn't say this just because of the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the heat of cauterization does not cause corruption, but it is not true, for I have tested it and found that it is true in some men; and gold cauterizations are worth more than iron ones, as they said.
And anyway when you heat an instrument of gold, you don't know when it's burned by the color of the gold, and it soon cools down; and if you heat it too much, it melts in the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
And therefore we use iron cauterization because we have made it appear suitable for our work.
Now I have ordered this chapter from top to bottom, so that the view may be clearer to find.
of the olive cauterization
This cauterization is worth against moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two ways to do it because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the top of the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for abundance of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and likewise for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cauterization is that the patient should be purged by soluble medicine, cleansing the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and age and custom of the patient can tolerate; and then rinse the head of the patient.
And then make him sit with his arms crossed between your hands, and place his hands on the scale; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let it be where your two middle fingers will come to rest, so that it bleeds a little before you heat the cauterization called "olivare", which is its form:
And place it on the marked spot with ink, and do down and out with your hand slowly and carefully as you turn; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see the bone a little small; and if you don't see it, start the cauterization again until you see the bone as I told you; after that, take one spoonful of oil, and put in an awed and soft cotton inside, and place on the spot, and leave it three days; after that, put a moist cloth in butter; and leave it until the eschar is removed; after that, cure the wound with ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
And the ancient ones said that when an open wound remains longer, it purges more; and therefore it is more helpful.
And some of them said that one should heat the cauterization until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and be cured.
And the others say that one should heat the cauterization until it is extremely hot, and pound so hard that it abates from the bone as wide as a thread that women put in their looms for the humors to flow out; and one should leave the wound open long enough; after that, one should cure and soothe.
And these two methods of cauterizations do not seem to me to be good in all cases, except perhaps in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it alone; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and likewise when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salutary and fruitful for me, and that is what I use to work together in harmony with salvation.
of ancient pain of the head
When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, the patient should use year's herbs and pills called "cochie", and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes the cauterization that we have mentioned before, it is not worth.
Take note if the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below that previous cauterization.
After that, make a cauterization on each horn of the head just up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cauterization at the place called "vasselz"; and there is one place where you put poultices; and lift your hand so that you do not see quite to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those of the middle part of the head, and that's the form:
of the head cauterization When sudden pain comes to one part of the head, and the disease extends up to the eye, and the head is purged by medicines of a common nature, and all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases have been done, and yet it does not help: then he makes cauterizations according to two manners, that is to say, of medicinal fire and of burning.
The medicinal fire cauterization is that you take a handful of almonds, remove the skin and crush one portion to two horns, and then make a temple or the place where the pain holds in such a way that you can pour the crushed almonds under the skin; and when it is poured, secure and tighten it well and leave it so for twelve hours; then release it and treat the wound with oil for two days or three; then put on cotton soaked in butter until pus comes out.
After the treatment of ointment until it is healed; and if you see that you have done these things from some burning medicines that I have written or discussed in the treatise on burning medicines.
The fire cauterization is according to this manner. Heat the cauterizer with which it has the form:
And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a bell or if there is one piece of charcoal, and in the middle, it has a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, until half of the ash of the ember is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and discharge an abundance of blood.
After put cotton in the shape of a seal, and put it on the place for three days; then put wet cotton soaked in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cauterization called "cultellare", all at the point, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache which is not ancient.
of migraine
When you cure migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the previous cauterizations with medicine and fire do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cauterizer called "cultellare" until it is white; and then sign on the painful place a line half a finger's length long, and lift your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and do not come too close to the bone; and beware of the jaw muscle that moves when eating, and the nerves have regard only for the movement and that spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of bloodshed from the artery when it is cut, or if there is great fear and especially in one who does not know what he is doing, and who is not a scholar or experienced; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the head in the same way as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see fit, administer the cauterization that we have said or chapiter of extracting the artery, with the cauterizer that has two knives; and this cauterization is better than the other one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears due to cold
When pain comes to the ear due to cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cauterizer called "poins" with which it has the form:
After, prick all around the ailing ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move slightly above the root of the ear after you have marked the place to be cauterized; and make 10 pricks around each ear; then treat the wound until it is healed.
of the torment of the mouth
Torment that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease; and do not make a cauterization on similar things that come from scorched nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torment that moves from phlegm and idleness and purging of the head and gargarism, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and put the cauterizer in the part that appears healthy, and make the cauterization near the top of the ear on the inside of the head, about as long as a finger; and let the cauterizer stay until half of the ember is burned; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
And this is the semblance of the "cultellare" that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and necessary that the knives be a little bigger; after, treat the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
from lethargy
To this sickness it is fitting to give the patient great and pungent pills for the brain; after, read aloud all that pertains to the chief of the patient; and place on the back of the patient's head a poultice of mustard as written in the treatise on poultices; and this is the manner of cauterization: if you do it just as I have said.
If he is healed thus, well it is; and if not, then make three cauterizations around the head from top to bottom until the neck; and leave a space of one or two fingers' breadth between each cauterization; and cure him as you would the others; and if you see swelling or inflammation, make one more cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and cure him until he is healed; and it is the "olivary" cauterization, just as I have said before.
from the chill of the head It is fitting that the head be cleared of years and what we have said before; after, read aloud all that pertains to the chief of the patient; then make a cauterization in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the boil is burned, and lift your hand; after, cure him until he is healed, and it is the "olivary" cauterization that we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use cauterization except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is fitting first to clear the brain of years and other remedies that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from excessive medication.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make him gargle and massage the brain frequently with good meat; after, read aloud to the chief in the middle, and make one cauterization according to what we have said before, and one on the basin, and on each horn; and if the patient is severe and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said for someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and it is the "olivary" cauterization according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make one subtle cauterization according to this manner:
When due to melancholy the superfluities or moists are corrupted and thickened phlegm, then apply the same cauterization as we have said for someone who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be cleared, according to what is before in the division.
After reading aloud to the chief of the patient; after make one cloth of fine linen well made, like a circle, and put it on the head; and have the patient sit cross-legged, and be well held from all sides; after present the liniment, and moisten with butter of ancient herbs; and heat it over moderate fire, so that the brain may endure it; after empty the circle within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with another good government, until he is healed.
Or if you see the cauterization not working well, make more points all over the entire cauterization. This manner of cauterization moistens the brain adequately; and then put on a damp cloth soaked in butter and goose fat.
of the awe of the eyes When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink which clears the head, and watch out for all moists, and make him sweat or take a bath several times fasting.
After this, command him to lift up his head, and make a cauterization on the head, and make two cauterizations on the two temples if the descent of awe is on both eyes together, or if it is on one eye; and stop all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and be the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and take care of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop the bleeding with such power as you have.
And I will teach you how to stop the bleeding in the extraction of arteries and incision, and what caution to take when making a cauterization or haterel below the two bones behind.
of the chest of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or below the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that it is cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: one cauterization in the head, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and three cauterizations or haterel below the two bones; and if there is need for more, then cauterize slowly above the eyebrow at every little cauterization.
of the chest of tears within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three nights' worth of cock's blood; after, read aloud to the chief, and make a cauterization in the middle of the "olivary" cauterization; and make two cauterizations of the "clavilis" cauterization on the two eyebrows, one a little below the hairs; and take care not to cover the artery. And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
When the parchment of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this "olivary" cauterization. Here is its form:
And if you see that it is necessary to make two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrow itself is; and do not leave your hand there except until the third part of the parchment is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
of the hair that points the eye Never happens that the hair of the eyes is converted towards the inner side, and pricks the eye, and then make cauterizations in two ways: it is to know by fire or by burning medicine.
For fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are born.
When they are born and are even, then put the patient in a good condition; afterwards draw a figure on the paper of the eyes such that it is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be below the hairs; then put moistened cotton in egg white and musk-scented persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the cautery where the form is.
After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn, do it a little at a time many times, until the burned area is red nearby; and the sign of health for the work is that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be like this for three days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the scorching is removed; afterwards anoint with ointment until they are healed.
And if afterwards the hairs come and the paper is softened, then start the cautery again on that same spot, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and be even, and do not prick the hairs on the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a form on parchment like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coal, each one third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made such as the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of the eyes; and if the patient's illness is in one eye only, you should work in one, and if in both equally; and put moistened cotton under the eye in egg white; and the patient's head should be in good condition and put your thumb showing above the medicine, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for he feels biting as from fire. When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your thumb. And when the biting is gone, then lift the lead of awe, and reward if you see the paper raised as if it were raised by constraint of fire or incision; and if so, then it is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the area or the medicine has no effect, until your work is even, and your eyes are in place; then put on moistened cotton in butter until the burned area is gone, afterwards cure the lead with ointment which is called "dyafenis" and others, until they are healed.
And if you need to be careful about your work by great care that it does not spoil the medicine for the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then start the medicine again on that same spot which is softened by its own proper paper, just as you did before; after curing until they are healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this you should make your constructions; and do not respond to anyone the right path who does not have the study of this art.
It seems like a new section has started! The text is now discussing the treatment of fistulas using cauterization. Would you like me to translate the next sentence?
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your cures do not help, then it is necessary that you make it cauterized according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put their head in your hand; and hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor leave their head; afterwards put moistened cotton in egg white or persimmon juice on the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is like this: and it is shaped at the top as if it were the form of a vulture's feather, together with the cautery; if you see, then it should be aligned from one head to the other, and if you see, then it should be like a tent; but nonetheless, this one that is shaped is worth much for your work.
Afterwards press the fistula if it is open, and take out the purulence and dryness; and if it is closed, then open it and remove the pus from the bowels; afterwards place hot cautery on the surface, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the eye above the eyelid, so that your hands do not go astray; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, then it would be well. If not, then start the cautery again once more, and another time if needed, and let it sit for three days; afterwards put on moistened cotton in butter, and the dry ointment cure until they are healed, and if forty days pass and they are not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and then take according to what comes into its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand it as follows: at the fistula, and make an incision; afterwards place in the incision one subtle camel's hair which has this form: and make it the size of one third of an ounce of pitch; and hold your hand or camel's hair firmly, and do not move the patient until the pitch does not flow to their eye; and it is necessary that you put on the eye of the patient moistened cotton in egg whites or awe: the pitch thus cleans the fistula and heals by marvelous health.
And if the fistula is healed through the cauterization that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice to the eye, and bring the fistula back to its natural place in the eye according to what is proper for its own location.
It seems like a new section has started! The text is now discussing cracks in lips. Would you like me to translate the next sentence? Many times, cracks occur on the lips which are called "piles", and likewise on the lips of children.
When you cure these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not help, then heat a small cauterizing tool according to this form:
And place it promptly in those cracks until it reaches the front; afterwards treat the area with cerote until it is healed.
From the abscess of the throat
When the abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth, after making a putrid and rotten and being walled off and becoming a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not help: then it is necessary that you apply .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron becomes cool at the fontanelle, and in the rear; and do thus once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
The movement of teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not work, then put the patient's head in your own; after heat the cautery that will form hereafter in this manner as you place a cord over the tooth; and put hot hasten into the cautery, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and resume the cautery according to your pleasure; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let it stay for an hour and then rinse.
And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gums softened restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
From the pain of teeth
When the pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or heat, and the medicines do not work, then it is necessary to apply a cautery according to two manners: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and melt the end in an iron or earthen spoon; after take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and soak it in boiling butter, and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and do so often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on one hot iron until the fire comes to the gum of the tooth.
The cautery together with fire is such that you take a cord of iron or earthenware, and it should be thick so that the fire does not come to the patient's mouth; after heat the cautery, in order that the form will come hereafter, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter during the application of that cautery, and then rinse; and that is the form of the cautery:
When the scrofula are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery so that the form will come hereafter, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery on the other side; and put the hot cautery once or twice as needed, until it reaches the fontanelle of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and put on soaked cotton in butter until the soreness is removed; afterwards cure the wound with ointments and tents until it is healed.
When the moisture prevails on the channels of the thorax, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by soluble medicines; after which apply a cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come close to the throat, nor burn too much, but only a little. Afterwards apply another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" from which we have the form before; and cure the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
Of the throat When all and every disease of the thorax are of cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or shivering, and the disease is old, then apply two cauterizations on the ribcage in front; and one other cautery inside the chest between the breasts; and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see, apply a cautery in piercing to the entire "poing" which is called "poing" from which the form is as before in the disease of the ears; and be the poings just up to .xxx., or around that. Afterwards cure the wound according to what is said before, and it will be the cauteries at three days according to this form:
And because of this are the cauteries lighter, because you do them in three at a time.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder ( Same translation as before ) After being seated the patient on his back and on his sides; after lift the key which is inside the titillate on the shoulder of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then raise the cautery that has two handles like this is its shape:
and cauterize the key until it is pierced all along the shoulder, and comes the figure of the cautery together with three cauters; and for this reason is made a cautery with the cautery that has three handles, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauters; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery that has three handles:
And at times it is joined above this one nerve so that there are eight cauters.
After place on the cautery a poulice bruised with oil; after make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens then, afterwards make a cautery on the thick part of the bone, or many cauters in piercing. For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
of the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients say that one should make for pleurisy cauteries of aristologe roots, and in this manner: take a long aristologe root, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the forehead and the neck, and two small cauters a little below in the part that is under the beard; and two cauters between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining a little behind; and one cautery in the breast, and one above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the sides of the breast outside the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it open as in smelling.
And certain ancients say that some men use a cautery like a razor, and heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; and then the pain ceases, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse in the way we have said through the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then three manners of cauterization are added that are all good.
One of which manners is that you make three cauters, or four, in aligning according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver's cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be seated on his back.
And another manner of cauterization is that you heat the cautery with two handles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the key which is near the mouse, or the patient's ribs come towards the left, and be the elevations which you lift the key according to the key, according to the length of the body, and the cautery according to the breadth of the body.
After put the two handles in flames so that the key is pierced from the other side, and then take away the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, then cauterize all the cautery with three handles. After cure when it has gotten purpuration after a long time, and this is better than the others of the cures said before.
of dropsy
Cautery is not good for dropsy, except by the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary to make four cauters around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one on the liver, and one near the mouse; and two behind the back on the spine, and one in front of the breast; and let the cauteries be well pressed against the edge of the key.
After leave the cautery open to generate purpuration for a long time, and do not neglect the cure of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly is the bone that we showed before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is placed here.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish moisture, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deeply into the flesh, lest the yellowish moisture come out, and let the cauters be according to this shape:
After make two cauters on each leg, one at the tip of the cuticular and the other below the knee in front and behind, inside the leg; and let the cauters stay open for a long time without healing, until the yellowish moisture comes out; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the menstruation
When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by manner of cures; and you see the patient well suffering and having strong virtue, then make one great cautery on the stomach according to what was said before about the stomach's cautery, at the circulatory cautery; and three cauters around the belly subtle as each individual bone is subtle, and two cauters on the hips.
And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the knuckle, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauters on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, one or more, and are old and composed of thick, cold, moist, corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, then make cauters: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely behind the almecade, little by little in triangular shape, and one cautery under the belly. Two to do;
et if you think his stomach is cooled, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swelling, then the face one great fire cauterization on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen at all the cauterization nails; and leave the cauterization open for a long time. After cure him so that he is healed.
of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
When you cut into the fleshiness called "thelul", if you scrape off the cauterized part that looks like a rasp, and then put all ablaze on the cauterized part of the fleshiness cut; and leave it so long as the cauteries come to the opening of the vein, so that the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much fleshiness, then cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of ointments, profiting until they are healed; and if you cauterize a great fire on the flesh, it will have greater aid.
of an untimely wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes such a disease that it cannot be healed except by fire cauterization.
When a fistula comes to someone, and is inflamed and discharges putrid matter and corrupted moistures, you must prove it thoroughly with a subtle tent, and be careful about the depth of the tent. After, scrape off the cauterized part that looks like a rasp, and pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and continue the cauterization until those putrid and corrupted parts are burned away, once, twice, or three times, depending on the quantity of what is needed; and beware of burning the nerves which are nearby, and the great veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestine, be careful about these things, and do not make fires that are not in a well-tempered place, and think it is not perilous; after cure him so that he is healed, and if the wound is sealed and the matters have been removed for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed; and if the matters are not removed, know that the wound is torn and corrupted the bones at the fontanelle; and thus as one of those who we will say in its place.
of the disease of the kidneys When cold pain comes to the kidneys and great windiness, and does not take on a womanly appearance, then it is necessary that you make a fire cauterization on the kidneys from one side and the other at the nails of fire cauterization as we have said before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cauterization on the outside of the part where the hair begins to grow on the pubic area, and one on each side, and each be as long as the nail of a thumb; and make one cauterization on the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauterizations be nails according to the form said before.
of the membranes When the membranes are cold and moist, and do not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted and their term is delayed; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the mouth, as we have said for the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and let the cauterizations be nails, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistures descend to the hip of the thigh, and because of this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and there is found the wound of the departure, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip of the thigh with a cauterization resembling a circle, and sign before the wound around the hip as it turns, so that the hip be inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those which have been cauterized in the stomach.
And if these cauterizations are not present, make three great fire cauterizations on the olive-shaped part, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the keys; and cure him so that he is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes to the hip of the thigh, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient has been cured with what we have said in the division, but the cure does not hold, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or other good-looking pills similar to them.
Afterwards make a cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization. Fire cauterization is according to many manners, one of which is this: that you cauterize on the hip of the thigh three triangular cauterizations in this form, and make a good depth and great size, and have between each cauterization a space equal to the thickness of a doornail, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on the top of the hip, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then cauterize at the fire of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in this manner so that the circles contain all the hip, and all the keys of the cure be burned.
And this is the manner in which we do in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg. And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations on the side where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization on the ankle .iiij. doins away, a little bit; and let the cauterizations be knife-like, and let the fatty part of the cure be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two inches from the foot or almost there, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four on the "point" cauterization.
And if it is necessary, make more of them; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then make a cauterization at the knife-like or circular cauterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who had a fire cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they were left so that the leg was completely inflamed, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted all the feet. After a purging of the belly from which he died.
And if the pains are together in two parts, do a fire cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Here is the translation:
Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regard, and if we see little who uses it; and yet all the same it is one of the good cauteries which can be suffered, and where it applies itself.
of the pain from the back
When pain comes to the back, either from falling or percussion or from excessive blood evacuation, or from similar signs of cold matter expanded, none of these similarities is worth cauterizing, unless it comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient be freed from fetid pills or other similar things, and that one is applied to their back, where the pain persists, three lines marked with a lead, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauterization be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see fit, make .iij. cauteries or .iiij. at the middle nail-shaped cautery in this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight and narrow back when they wake up, and fear; and you find in the last vertebra of the back and in the appearance which appears above other vertebrae.
When you see this and you can cure it, then cauterize at the point called "celcle" according to this form.
And so the cauterization shall be applied to each part of the vertebra equally. And if you see fit, then cauterize around the vertebra at the pointed cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing, leave it as is until it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cauterization in gilbosity which is in spasm of nerve.
of the pain from joints
When pain from joints is due to moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which doctors properly call "podagre", and when it is caused by cold and medicines do not cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: make many cauteries around the jointure of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you apply the cauterization to the face of the foot, then make a cautery at every point where one claims "point". And if pains come as far as the knee and to other joints, and this happens many times, then make three or four cauteries on each part, to all the olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, then do so, but do not keep your hand there longer than until the sparks of the caustic are burned.
And if the pains descend as far as the knee and back, administer the cauterization that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are to the hands, make points around the wrist .ij. lines; and if there remains pain to the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come as far as the shoulders or as far as the hips, cauterize each part, and do good governance to the patient and give medicines. For if you do good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed with the help of God.
of the running of the suppurating boil
When the running comes in sores, and the boils descend to the groin and it is newly, then it is necessary that when you see it curing, it does not waste the day; and that he uses things which loosen the belly, so that the wind descends from his belly; after this make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the boil is repaired, and then lead him back to your side, and mark with a lead under the running sore on the bone of the elbow, and at all one sign which is similar to half a circle above the body; then apply the cautery in this shape:
until it is white and gives off sweet scents. Then lead the boils back to their place; and have him hold your hand so that they do not return behind; and work well on the patient's hips, and put one cushion and one servant on his hips, and another on his breast which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your might, and hold it steady until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again and again until you reach the bone; and be careful subtly so that the boil does not burst when you make the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that by this means the patient does not die or suffer other evils.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing. It is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their measure, and of great people also great according to their measure; after this cure the wound of the cautery with butter until the swelling is gone; after this cure other ointments until he is healthy, and have the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well bound; and it is necessary that his nourishments be diminished long enough, so that the boil does not burst when he prepares to go into chambers.
And after 40 days, when he will want to get up, give him a well-made bandage and have it wrapped for another 40 days; and let him have good rest, that he does not work too much and beware of excessive fullness of drinking and eating, and high laughter; and when he has done this instruction, then he is entirely healed. And I will say hereafter the cure of cutting in its chapter. of the running of the belly
When running sores come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one cauterization of the same kind according to its quantity, and let the third spark of the caustic be burned; after this cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancient ones have said that one must cauterize at three angles in this shape:
but mark the first sign on the lead and make one line along the width above the running sore, and another below, and stretch your hand all around the whole nail-shaped cauterization. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more fleeting.
of old pain in any member When pain comes in any member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize with the "poins" caustic, and make the cauterizations according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, virtue, and location of twisting and pain. If he is healed by the first cauterization, that's good; if not, start another cauterization on top of it, because such cases are accustomed to require cauterizing in the member that is nearby, therefore you must make the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
A surgery.
The ulcers are helped sometimes by fire treatment with great aid, and likewise the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt that corruption will prevail over all the patient, then do five cauterizations on the head: one inside the head to nine, and the other towards the forehead to the end of the hair; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape; and leave your hand so long as the cauterization comes up to the bone, and until the skin peels off so that the vapors of the thick humors can issue forth; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
And if the surgery is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize those cauterizations on the head that we have said, and one cauterization in the navel, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one large one on the groin and another below, and two on each shoulder; and two on the sides, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and take care of the nerves that are on the back surface, so you do not burn them; and sometimes make a cauterization on the bone of the arm, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more I do of cauterization, the more it helps and brings benefit; and know that the patient does not feel pain during the cauterization as healthy people do, because the body is already entirely corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauterizations be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of iron. Afterward, cure the place with flour mixed with honey and other cures until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes to any member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, but it is not healed, then do cauterizations on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cauterizations be slightly entering into the flesh of the limb. Then cure with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes one makes a cautery and at the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the swelling is removed; and notwithstanding, no one should intervene unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of ulcers
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the art of medicine is of no use, then cauterize it with one cautery slightly deep, according to the quantity of the flesh of the limb, until the pus is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour mixed with honey and lentils, and oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and blood of hen and blood of almond, each in a part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply to the wound until it is healed.
The cure for chancres by cauterization
When chancres come at the beginning and you see them stopping, then cauterize around it with a cauterization that seems like one circle, all around the chancre. And although wise men say that one should also make a cauterization in the middle of the chancre; and although this does not seem good to me, for I fear it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen once or twice; and it is more proper to cauterize around it with the cauterization that is called "circumference", as we have said in many cauterizations.
of the swelling that cannot be cured
When someone has a disease called "adubelati" and it delays in dying or because of the excess it produces or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, very old) and he has little blood or because of time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauterizations that are painful; afterwards leave it thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it piercing all the way through the cauterization, then heat the cauterization until it takes on its form:
And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauterizations have pierced through to the flesh, and be such cauterizations that the patient feels them outside in just such a way that the course of the corruption is alleviated. Then cure until it is perfectly healed.
The cure by fire with iron.
Another type of disease exists which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a corruption of the member, for it corrupts the members just like fire corrupts dry ropes. If you see this disease in a place that can suffer both cauterization and fire together, then heat the cauterizations very slightly, small and great, according to what is needed at the place where the disease is; afterwards, cauterize all around until you have removed all the corruption, leaving nothing but what was corrupted gone. And then leave it for three days, and apply to the cauterized places a poultice with oil so that the fire's scorching effects are removed, and all corruption gone. Afterwards, cure with ointments generating flesh. If you see after three days that healthy flesh does not appear, that is good; and if it does not, then reapply the cautery to what remains of the corrupted places. And this corruption has sometimes been cured without cauterization by medicine in place of fire; but all the same, cauterization by fire is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure with medicinal water in the division: take as much as you need.
of boils that come to the feet
Many times it happens that at the feet, by outward appearance, a disease called "clos" according to our intention, arises, which is a big, festering boil that wounds the foot. And the cauterization for this disease is done in two ways: by fire and by hot water. The cauterization by fire is when you heat one cauterizer as thick as a thumb nail, and make it of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the boil from all sides, and have fine margins; afterwards, put the whole thing on top of the boil, and turn your hand around the boil until it comes to the head of the boil; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to emit corruption; then apply a poultice made of wild mallows crushed with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the boil will fall out and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the area with ointments generating flesh until it is healed.
Et s'il sont convertit par defours lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d'aigue chaude;
The cure for shakiness
When some people shake from chilliness or fever quartan or another, it is necessary that you make four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the weight, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; if the shaking will cease, and the health of the cold illness will hasten.
of stinking pimples
Sometimes boils or stinking pimples appear on the bathed body or pustules that come from corrupted matter. It is necessary to make a cauterization at first when they appear, on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization with myrtle wood, so that the point is grasped by fire, or with long aristologe root, or with lenticular cautery. And sometimes one cauterizes them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they do not grow any further ahead, but are broken down the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut off Often great hemorrhaging of blood comes from the artery that is cut off at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a member, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
And although this happens to someone, if you hurry and put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold them tightly until the blood is stilled beneath your fingers, and no more drips out; then take up the olive cauteries, many small and great ones, until they are all red; then grasp one, either large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery runs, and put it on that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cauterize so that the blood is staunched.
And if it spurts forth when you lift your fingers off the vein, and the cauterize is extinguished, then take up quickly another of the cauterizes that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing these one after another until the blood is staunched; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, one cannot well staunch it, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of the three ways we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong binding with thread, or by medicines put on which have the power to stop blood; and let it be bound and held in place.
Who will instruct the patient to staunch with a tight binding of cloths or by placing burning things on it, or other similar things, unless they are not beneficial.
And if this happens to someone and he does not have a mirror or medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it tightly until it is staunched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often when it is very cold, so that the blood may congeal and swell and be staunched; and make preparations for what he needs of cauterizers and medicines ahead.
We have told you in the first chapter about all illnesses where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or burning medicine, and the questions and causes and preparations and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from top to bottom, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way so that what one wants to find may be found more easily.
And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterizations, and therefore it is necessary to take greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come to cures. Some come from such a state with their illness that they will die quickly because of the severity of their disease and the great magnitude of their malice; and one should fear these things. And there are those who will give you their sense and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the disease is spiteful. It is not necessary that you consent to these people when they come to you with this manner, but rather put a greater custody on your honor than on your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about those things of which you are certain and about which you can take and hold; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your diseases for the sake of health being converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Now I have arranged this chapter in sections, as is before the section of cauterizers, that I have arranged from top to bottom, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
from the head full of water
Know that this illness often befalls children during childbirth, and when the woman holds the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
And I have never seen this illness except in children, and all those that I have seen hastened death; and therefore it seems to me that it would be pointless to continue the work on such cures.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head was swelling each day until it could no longer be supported; and so much moisture accumulated that it seemed to be dead, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone above the sphenoid, between the skull and the bone; and the work is such that when the moisture is between the skull and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you make a cut in the head, making a wide incision; and it should be as long as two noses, as long as the moisture flows.
If the moisture is more swollen and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs that the commissures of the head are open on each part, and the liquid jumps forth when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you: so it is necessary to make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
And after the incision, extract the moisture entirely. After, close the incisions with cloths and powders, and put wine and oil, and let it be like that until the fifth day; then release it, and treat the wound with tenting and anointings, and let the head swell equally, and thus feed the patient dry meat without moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And another manner of incision is that you look where the opening of the abscess is, and the gathering of the liquid; for sometimes it is before; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Cut then the place where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the liquid, and the flesh as far as you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if there is bleeding of blood, so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
Of pus
When it happens to someone a disease called "catarre" in the eye or at the liver, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last remedy is the fire cauterization with those that will cut off the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them cut off, the patient must turn back his head; afterwards, rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull out the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the vein bleeds, and the veins of both sides are behind the ears, and they are not responsive; then mark the veins from end to end, then cut off one and the other with a sharp spatula, two parts as far as the bone comes, and that will be through the width of the head.
And if you see, push the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting as two should be across.
And when the vein is cut, blood springs out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open to sensing, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space for three fingers, then mark from end to end and cut up to the bone; and what is necessary regarding blood is to let it flow out so that it is .vi. c/, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point of the syphac, cut off what abscesses come, then strain the wound and bind, and treat with ointments until it is healed.
Of migration
When old migraines come and sharp catarrhs, due to moistures of tears and heats in temples and soothed ancient forgetfulness and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medical cures and yet all this does not help, then we cut off the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have counted.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient turns back the hairs of his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is hardly responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then pull out the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and raise the liquid of hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula which has this shape:
then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then take it up with pincers, and separate well from the threads that are below each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it to the point of the awl, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two veins. For if it is not cut off, blood will not flow out entirely.
And take out the blood of .vi. c/, up to .iii.; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a double strong silk thread, so that no bleeding will occur before the wound is healed, and blood will flow decoratively; then cut off the excess that is between the two ligatures at that same hour, and then, if you see, cauterize the area with the cutlery cauterizer up to the bone until the veins are cut; and this is the true work, if the patient has no fever and is of a hot complexion.
For fire cauterization is aid to finish off moistures: for this reason it is more helpful against moistures. Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that you fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made tents; and when you remove them, be careful with dry medicines that produce flesh, and with tents, until he is healed; and if the artery bleeds so much as you work on it, hasten to cauterize by fire, or apply the place with vitriol and strain it with your hand until the bleeding subsides; and if you do not have this present, put your finger on the place until the bleeding ceases, and raise the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and be strained as necessary; and what is true and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this fire cauterizer cutting to two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to withstand more heat for a longer time. For when the cuttings are too close together, they retain their heat less well. And it should have one large space between the two cutters, and then when you have marked from end to end the two places, take the burning iron and apply it so that it reaches up to the bone, and cut off the vein in two places; and be separated between the two veins because they are not sewn together by this cauterization entirely; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the forehead of the head below, and medical treatment does not help, and you see the patient's face growing red, and feel a burning sensation on the forehead as if it were trembling; and the oils are hot and moist so that the hairs of the papers have fallen out, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to use this cure.
Et l'apelerent li ancien "cure contuse"; and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease the hairs on their forehead, then you make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one incision be like two going into the forehead downwards as far as the nose, and the others two on both sides above the papers, and take care not to cut the arteries which are on both sides above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, and each wound should be the size of three fingers across the joint.
from the incision that is above the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the membrane that is between the two cuts as far as the surface of the bone, then make another part from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
so put the instrument called "culterelle" into the first incision; and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting on the other side, and that's its shape. And put the edge cutting towards the fatty tissue near the membrane, and the soft edge towards the bone, and push it until it comes to the middle incision. And cut off all the vessels that are coming down from the head into the wound as long as the incision is continuous up to what opens out of the membrane; and then make another part in the middle incision up to the other side; and then extract the blood equally, and express the place where the blood was taken; then put a cloth of old cotton into each incision, and put damp cloths soaked in vinegar, oil, and aloe on top, and take care that abscesses do not form; and on the third day release the bandage, and administer great purulence with stale water, then the ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until they are healed.
of the swelling of the eyes
When anyone comes with a burning in the eyes as usual, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakening the sight, and the papers burnt; and the hair falling out, and the head deep in pain, and the patient is exhausted; then you know by these accidents that those matters and that burning do not come from one voice alone, but from many voices, and the true cure that is there, is this.
And it is that you instruct the patient to lift their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead and another of the same width one inch deep. Begin from the temple on the left side to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that are moving at mealtime; and when the bone is exposed, then absorb all the blood with a sponge, and then desiccate between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton and linen cloth there, and cover it with damp cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, and take care not to form an abscess; when it is healed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with things that make flesh inflamed.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and three parts of aloes, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to inflame flesh everywhere.
of the treatment of earwax
All that falls into the ears is one of three things: either grains, or beasts, or pieces of rock or similar things like iron; or seeds, such as millet, beans, peas; or flowing things, such as water and oil and similar things.
When something that doesn't belong in the ear falls into the ear or grows there, and it's not suitable for the ear, don't let it stay there. Put the ear in the sun. If you see a stone, extract some violet oil or sesame oil, then administer an extraction; and make the patient sneeze with condiments, and stop their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and lift the ear up. Many times this cure works; and if it doesn't work, administer extractions with fine tweezers, that's the shape:
If it jumps out with the tweezers, that's good; if not, then administer an extraction with a fine thread of small double wire; and if it doesn't jump out in this way, then make a chain of iron and put the head of the chain or the ear canal strongly, and stop what is around the chain with beeswax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then treat it forcefully, for many times it works as we have said; and if it doesn't work in this way, then take glue from which birds are taken, and put in some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and wrap a little cotton around; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and treat it. And if it doesn't jump out from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear in such a way that an abscess forms and swells; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient well with cephalic ointment, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or bone depends; and let the incision be like a moon, as long as you can reach the stone, then cut it out according to your ability, and suck it hastened to your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it's grain that is in there and it swells, then administer an extraction; and if it can't come out, then administer one subtle spatula according to this shape:
and administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is easy.
And then, when something flows into the ear, it's good for the patient to use condiment-induced sneezing first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it sit on top of that ear itself where the flow is. If it jumps out because of this, it's good. If not, then take many stones according to their length and lightness, and heat one end slightly; and put the patient's ear orifice into the stone, and pull out from the other side with another stone on top of the stone that's in the ear; and don't stop doing this with stone upon stone until all the flow is gone, and thus it jumps out entirely. And if you see, then take one reed, and put one end in the ear and the other end in the fire until the reed is completely burned; then do the same again with another reed until the flow is gone, just as we have said in the stone.
En the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, such as a mouse and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, then use forceps extraction; and this is the thing easier to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of lice from the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then it is necessary to look at the ear to the sun: if any lice appear, then treat them with fine forceps; and if they do not appear, take a thread whose form this is.
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle thread in the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering; then pull strongly on the entire thread; do this often until all the lice come out. And if they do not obey to come out, stop around the thread with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not jump forth as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proved in the removal of lice, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and then distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, whose form this is as you see:
And it should be made of silver or tin, narrow below to one small hole, and wide above for distilling; and for pressing within the distillation with one instrument of well-made tin, and if you see, take a rasp and wrap it around the point pleasantly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice into the canal, and that which you see of your medicines in the thread, and the thread should be in the ear; then push down into the rasp all the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or flows from the ear; and if the patient feels it inside, and it is a small pot heated over the fire so that one can distill in the ear; and take care not to let it be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the stopping of the ears
No child is born without some hole in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stopping of wound, or new growth within the ear, and these stoppings sometimes occur very deep in the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes there is a small pot that fills up the hole, and it can be seen well.
That which comes very deep, if one cannot see it, is of grievous inflammation in many dispositions, and that which can be seen requires that you put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent thickening, then work with all this spatula whose form this is.
And be sharp and cutting in front and back all plain, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the thickening is of new flesh or cartilage of the ear, then hold it with fine forceps, and cut lightly, until that cartilage is completely removed.
And if the thickening is very deep in the ear, then take a fine and light rasp and heat it slightly over the fire, then put it on the cartilage of the ear. If you sense the thickening that the patient feels pain to hear, cut lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten with Egyptian balm.
Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder on vitriol broom; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another moist tent made of roset oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
And if hemorrhage comes from the wound, then plunge an absorbent and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the hemorrhage which are found in the treatment of distillations.
Of the flesh of paper
This all that comes out of paper from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch with tenaille and forceps, and cut off at a spatula of its roots; then put on the place vitriol broom.
And if they flake off without a core, then cauterize with the lenticular cautery, and after the incision it moves; and many times repair, but no part remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Of the Grisle (a type of wax)
Many times there come out of the eyes' papers things that resemble grisle in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the work is as follows: be careful if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know; then make the opening wide, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with forceps, and cut. If you cannot cut without piercing a small piece of paper, it will not harm the patient; and if the tear is large, gather it together, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do nothing to it, for the ointment will soon restore it and bring forth flesh.
And if the grandine is descending from the inner ear to the upper part, then turn the paper over, and extract the grandine with fine forceps, and cut and press on both sides; and if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it will not harm anything; and when the grandine is cut, pour salted water into the ear, and cure the place where flesh grows forth until the patient is healed.
Of the grease of the eyes
Exinach is a grease that is produced in the films of the papier above, and this happens more often with children than with adults, and it causes great pain to their eyes; and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces soon, and sleep, and their papier below their eyelids is moist from the inflammation and appearance that has covered the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts their head in your hand; and then take one linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, then put it on them; and press with your fingers on both sides, so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle; then make a cut in the middle of the moisture with a spatula, cutting a slit of the width, but not more than the wound one makes to heal a vine; and make the skin very thin until you come to the exinach; and in several dispositions comes the exinach from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white grease.
Here is the translation:
And if the hernia does not open at the beginning of the tear, so slightly widen the tear until it appears; then pull it as we have said, then moisten cloths in warm water and cold water, and place them on the area, and hold steady with bandages.
And if there are such men who break and place poultices to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then care for it until they are healed. And if the abscess becomes hot at the area, then care for it with emplasters soothing until they are healed.
of hairs of paper
When hairs of paper grow, other than those that are natural, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes and cause ways of illnesses such as tears, softening of the paper, and whitening, until it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes; and there is care according to four manners: or by fire cautery together, or by medicinal water as described in the chapter on cautery, and this is done either by incision and sewing or by cauterization, as I will say.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head on your shoulder; then turn the paper of oil towards your left hand; if it has converted, it is good; if not, put an awl into each thread above; and let this be at the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow among these hairs, and lead one thread above to all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs that are adjacent, all the spatula copulating from the great tear to the small; then draw out one thread, and place beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth; then sign on the paper a figure of anointing, like the leaf of myrtle, and yet it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevating the paper which is divided in all.
And if there is someone who has need to cut out a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper is softened; then make all the spatula above the two lines that you have signed, and start from the great tear to the small; and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the ligature into one of the two angles of the key, then skin it entirely; then assemble the two lips with a seam made by an awl on each thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make the superfluity of threads above the two circles to all sticky things, if you see fit to do so; and if not, then have no care, and leave the seam and threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without any binding or constraining things, because the paper revives at the healing of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is troublesome (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear.
and if there is another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, with three separated ligatures according to the form that is here:
then cut off what goes above the small threads equally according to the form that is here:
And if you are unable to hold the forceps and the things are not equal, then take an awl where it has one thread, and put it in the figure; and put another thread beside the great tear, and the second thread beside the small one, and assemble the threads equally between your two hands; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above what you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by seam, and care for it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: then it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the seam in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and make a hole in it according to what I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut off the two ends of the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what goes above the paper of oil, and strain the two cauterizations from the two parties together; and let it be like this for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and decay and fall off, until it falls away by itself.
If it takes too long, then cut off the excess forces; and cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn up, and the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prick with hair; and this is the form of the two cauterizations that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you take a fine awl, and put one thread of silk into it and make it soft and subtle; then assemble the ends and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be as long as a palm; then arrange another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the head of the thread; then place the patient's head on your shoulder; and be below the sun so that the work is declared, for this is a subtle and gentle work; then put the awl into all the chase in the root of the adjacent hair, and make it pierce the paper quickly until you reach the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and put that hair into the chase if there is one, two, three, or more; then pull your hand away until the hairs come forth to all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull out the chase from below to all the thread that you have arranged, until the chase comes forth from the pores above and you see it by the sight of the eye; then pull out the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh rises; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural horse's mane, and be elevated with that which you leave, as long as it is elongated and then lift.
of the oil's purging
When this disease called "aleacrati" or purging comes to the oil, there are two kinds: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, incision, or cauterization, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l'ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, and dessevre les levres de li, and met dedens tentes de lin, and la lie tant qu'elle soit sanee;
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care to ensure it does not heal unequally according to its former form; and these works that we have said are not other than remedies for this disease, so that it may return according to its former form.
of the flesh which comes into the eye
This disease that is below which is truly called "axacrati", and it is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and gash and cautery and similar things; and the way of the treatment for this is that you take an awl, in which it has one double thread, and push it into the flesh, and make it pierce all the way to the right temple so that the threads come out on both sides of the flesh; then lift the flesh up over the entire awl, and cut off at one spatula width.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is required, it is good; if not, then take a rasp and put it in the gash, and turn the paper, and make two gashes or incisions inside the paper; and be the holes of the two gashes at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter that has no name "one Greek"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are worn down below, from what precedes the paper; then join the two severed parts with one thread of linen; then make the cure for this disease using softening medicines and tents, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from gash or seam or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the treatment according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an instrument for every possible way that it may return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
of the sudden removal of the paper
When this suture has been done in the same way as the paper above is sewn with white of egg, and it cannot move nor perform its natural actions, then it is necessary that you put the point of a rasp underneath the paper and lift it up; and let it be so pinched, until you cut what is at the subtle spatula, which is not too worn away nor too torn, so that the patient cannot endure having the spatula too worn away or blinding the eye; and your incision, from which you remove this assembled part, should be slightly done, so that the paper may return to its natural form; and let all this assembled part heal, and sometimes do something in the water, and raise it with sweet water, and vinegar; then put between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye a moist linen cloth, and after three days use the colic remedy and similar things until it is healed.
of the corner of the eye
Know that the eyelash is in two manners: it is nervy and resembles a hard scaly skin, and another which is not nervy, but resembles white congealed moisture, which when one touches it with iron and cools it with pincers, cannot be handled; and both appearances begin at the great temple and grow slowly by degrees until it covers all the sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient places their head in your lap, then opens their eyes; and lifts the paper to your hand, then cools the eyelash with pincers of small double-edged scissors, and lifts it up; then take an awl, and put one hair from a horse, or ox, or buffalo, and a strong thread; and double the point of the awl a little and insert it into the eyelash, and pierce all the way to the entire awl, and tie the eyelash with a thread and lift it up, and scrape away everything that is on the side of the eyelash from the prune and the silk to the hair tip; then cut off what remains in the root of the temple at the subtle spatula and small forces, and leave the natural skin or the eyelid, so that through the incision the body's tears do not come forth as usual; and sometimes the eyelashes are only set on the needle and thread, as we have said; then scrape everything off the entire soft spatula from which is the form.
And take care that the spatula does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little bit of boiled silk into the eye, and make a colic remedy with litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then apply the cure for what needs to be done until it is healed.
And if the eyelash is not nervy and you cannot insert the awl, and the needle cannot enter, then this appearance of eyelash is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have recounted in the division; and if you see it grow, then work on the patient's eye, and take a spatula slightly worn away according to this form:
And remove the eyelash above subtly, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth to the eye a colic remedy made of litargyrum and red colic, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
If nothing is contrary in the eye, as if an aposteme were hot, then let it cool down, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healed; then begin the treatment again just as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts the eye by great harm, then suspend it with a needle and cut off part but not all, so that tears do not come forth; then distill into the eye red colic made of litargyrum.
of the flesh which grows on the prunele
Some men's skin grows red, and covers the prunele and restrains it above the paper and turns it back, and seems like a balauster rose; and the treatment is that the patient places their head in your lap, then opens their eyes, and cools all that flesh with suitable pincers for this, and sustains it by force; then cut off the first layer of skin, and go all the way cutting to the razor edge until the end, and take care not to bleed the eye during the treatment; and make the incision of the spatula as we have said in the incision of the eyelash and at the subtle spatula and small forces from which one removes the seal, just like the form after this chapter demonstrates.
et when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of silebourn or distill red pepper and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton on top with egg white so it is sure to warm up an abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the pus starts to rise, and you doubt an abscess is hot, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do the same for all flesh removed in the oil by this method.
But it is necessary that you ease the cure of each weak oil by the natural way; and by the accidental way, in iron work; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that those members are bearing up to that work.
of veins of eyes
Those are veins that are red and are covered on the eye, and tolerate with their sight its work and weaken the eye all the time. It is necessary then for you to look at where the oil is, in which those veins are, if there is no other disease besides the vein; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in your hand, then suspend those veins completely around the entire circle according to your wisdom, and let the circles be subtle double according to this form:
And let there be two circles by degree in one body according to this form:
Then coil those veins subtly with force, and remove the blood hour after hour, until you see those veins moving away from the eye; and beware that you do not touch the oil at the points of the spathous membranes, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut off those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the oil green and red pepper to corrupt what remains from the sebel.
And if you are unable to coil all of it in that hour, then apply a poultice on the eye with soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and let it remain for some days until the pains are eased and you are sure of an abscess hot; then resume in this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The surgeon calls this "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and by hot medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a reason in him that you incise on the abscess, where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then receive it with all the instruments by which this form is; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron to one head again, and be pointed as a file so long as it is in this present form:
And put it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this some times, then restore the surface with excitative medicines.
if the surface is sealed, and flesh grows, and the body of the bowstring is sealed, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemated, and bad accidents come to it, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other reason than to return the fistula to the point of the nose according to this form: and that you uncover the bone the second time by iron, and by hot medicines, and when it is uncovered, take one file according to this form, and let the iron be at 3 angles, and let the fistula be reduced to a head as you see here.
then put it on the bone beneath the skin, and withdraw your hand from the eye a little, then turn back to the entire file until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the abscess by what the vein goes in if they hold their hand on their nose; and then restore the surface with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the surface, then the matter goes into the nose; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the issue of the eye
When the eyes are fully open and there is no obstruction to the nose or diminishment, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal them, then apply poultices or bandages made of linen in a way that will not cause harm in order to draw out; then put on the eye a lien made from aloe, gall, and aloeswood, and then bind the eye with cloth and drapery; and the manner of the drapery is that you take soft drapery and double each one into four, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount the eye needs; then bind it tightly with a bandage and begin the poultices again in order not to cause harm; then remove the poultices and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the lien becomes moist, you should bind it very tightly; then remove the lien after a day and a night, and if you see the eye recovering, that is good; if not, then repeat the application of the emplaister, drapery, lien, and poultices until they are healed.
of the tearing of the vitreous humor
When a disruption comes in the vitreous humor, then it opens and comes forth like grains of resin, and it is shocking to see; then if you see it opening, the work is such that you insert an awl into the root of the part below up to where it is above, then insert another awl where there is a double thread from the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to its disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and bind a part of the vitreous humor around, and tighten it well, then extract the awl and put on the eye a wet linen cloth with egg white; and let it be until the threads choose with the vitreous humor, then cure the eye with soothing things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the vitreous humor each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eye has great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes from behind the eye and corrects the moisture of the albiginous and descends the eye, and enters as soon as possible; then extract it until it is healed.
of the eyebrow
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;
water of oil
We have the appearances of waters in division, and what is needed to pierce; if you work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light for the sun, and tie the healthy eye tightly shut; then put the oil paper on your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or on your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand if the eyes are left-handed, or your left hand if the eyes are right-handed, the instrument called "almagda"; then place the point of the instrument below the crown by the thickness of a grain of corn in that corner of the oil near the lesser tear duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" properly, and turn your hand so long as it pierces into the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of almagda be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the prune to the end of the nourishment; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the tanned hide, and then put the instrument just above where the water is, then press down one path after another. If the water does not come out now, the patient will see it before him and the instrument in his oil.
After resting a little, and if the water rises the second time, place the force with the instrument, and when it is well inserted and does not rise, then extract almagda slightly by turning your hand little by little; and then put back into the water a little bit of the same gem, and leave that oil inside. Then put aside the stopped-up oil or moistened linen in rose ointment and abundance of egg yolk, and tie with the healthy oil. We, and those who are of our time, mix oncoming broth with abundance of egg yolk.
And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, for there are some people who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
And then pierce the conjunctive alone, and do not go too deep, but make a subtle movement, and then put in almagda, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a gentle sleep, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be careful to avoid all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head or turn it to the right or left, and tie him according to his disposition until three days; then release him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put back the tie on the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the cure or after incision now, but it is necessary that you hasten, because the water rises quickly.
If an aposteme comes forth, then you must release the oil before the seventh day, and address it with what soothes the aposteme; and when it is appeased, then release the sight and put on his face a small patch to cover for some time, and be there in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert yourself into your own condition; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us from the land of Yrach, who told us that in his country they made someone almagda pierce, so that they could suck up the water, but although I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read it in the books of the ancients; and by chance this is a new thing.
And these are the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see; and they should be made properly from earthenware.
And the ends of these should be of this same subtlety, and the last in three angled corners.
of the flesh on the knee
At no time do the knee flesh or knee joints come forth as diverse, and there are some that seem like scorpions to many feet; and if it has such or it has flesh enchanted with fiery color, and if it has smooth flesh of bone color. In that then of those flesh which is smooth, and not at all enchanted, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour the vinegar onto those flesh, and treat them fiercely; then pull out what you can sustain by the fine subtlety of a sharp part from one side, until you know that that flesh is completely stripped.
And if there remains any part that cannot be pulled out, then open it with all one's subtlety and delicacy, so that nothing remains; and if without troubling oneself, or an aposteme comes forth, then cut as needed. And if they are malignant apostemes, then hasten and cauterize until the blood is stopped and all the flesh is removed, then pour wine onto the knee, and water.
If the knee opens and moisture comes up to the palace, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not flow as needed, know that there is flesh born in the bone above, so the instruments do not come forth to cut: then it is necessary that you put a linen thread about a finger thick, well oiled by hand, with between each knot of space one or less; and place the patient's knee on the thread at his own power, and lead it to smell until it comes into the mouth through the nose; and many times children do this in school, and it is a light thing for him who wants to make it. Then hold the chief that comes out by the nose with one hand, and the other chief that comes out by the mouth with the other hand, and know the one after the other as we are on the thread. Do this until you know that the night has corrupted that flesh; then pull out the thread, wipe off the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the knee just like before; do this three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a lead chain on the knee for some time until it is healed, and if he needs medicines such as those, then use them. And this is the form of the instrument to purify the chief, with which we distill oils and medicines into the nose:
And it should be of silver or earthenware, resembling an open lamp, like a chain, and lead them also; and if you see, then make a closed chain, and have the instruments full to purge the chief; and have one handle on the chief to hold it when heating the oil or some liquid.
from the flesh to the neighbor
Many times there is a disease in the head of the neighbor which is called "tumor", and it grows and becomes large over time, so that it is visible to see; and therefore it is necessary that you make a hole at first, and remove all the fat, then put on top the fire cautery or burning medicine; and if one waits too long to do this until it is large, take heed if it is hard, of bad color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted abscess, for when you cut it at all, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of gentle touch, not of bad color, and you can see that you can remove all of it, then empty the patient and the abscess without fear, and treat the wound with things soothing and restraining.
when the neighbor is cut and cauterized
Know that when solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, more than in some men. It is necessary then that you do this for someone, if you look at whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together to a seam, and treat until it is healed; and if the lips are already detached on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape off all the parts of their crust as long as they are bleeding, then bring the two lips together to a seam, and bind, and powder upon powder with dragon's blood, and incense powder; and put on top of the powders a piece of plaster or another plaster suitable, and leave it until it is made whole by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
The method of the seam is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the seam of the belly; or by thread, as I have made known to you.
of abscesses of the lips
Some men have within their lips a hard abscess like grains of millet, smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut each notch, and take as pincers and cut in each part; then apply oil to the wound after the vitriolic incision, so that the blood is staunched; and then leave the wound open, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healed.
of flesh of the gums
Many times there is flesh attached to the gums which the ancients call "albulus"; it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let the bow or blood flow; then put on top of the wound vitriolic powder, or other powders restraining and desiccating; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms for cutting.
of ulcers
Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh scabs that are ugly and unpleasant; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as far as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell; it is necessary that you make the patient sit in your hands, and his jaws be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs as they appear, until there is nothing left; and thus do with the blackness and yellowness and jaundice and other blemishes, until they are removed; and if one removes what is at the first stage, that is good; but if not, then begin again on the second day and third day, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work shows, because those who use razors to clean between the teeth have different forms than those who use them to scrape off the teeth; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay the extraction as long as possible, because this should not happen at all; for it is a very high substance, so much so that one has no excuse for extracting. Then when the patient is constrained to extract, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth's condition. Many times the pain would leave the patient and think that the tooth was a holy one, and make them extract the good tooth; and yet the pain does not depart at all because of this, as long as the bad abscess remains, for we have already said to do so with these saints. And when you are well certain of the tooth's condition, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth in every small crevice, very carefully to protect the gum from all sides; then move it to your hands or subtle forceps at the first point and point, until it is well extracted, then firmly hold the forceps; and the patient's hand should be in your holy place between your knees, and you should keep it still so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, then take one of these instruments and plug it into each side lightly, and move it as you did first. And if the teeth are pierced and mangled, it is necessary that you fill them with cloths, where the perforations are; and then strain subtilly with forceps, so that it does not break while being strained; and it is necessary to carefully work around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take good heed that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and the root will return to the patient with greater pains than the first time. And beware that you do not act like ignorant saints who, in their haste and boldness, sometimes break the cartilage and do not bring what we have recounted; but often bring great illnesses through the roots that remain, or through the cartilage they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the wound with wine or oil and vinegar; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply the wound with vitriolic powder; and if this does not work, then cauterize it.
The forms of instruments with which one should extract teeth first are those with long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
And they should be of thick handles so that they do not bend when pulling out, and be made of well-forged iron, and be toothed to hold in place.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains at the extraction site, it is necessary that you put a moistened cotton cloth or a poultice on the wound for 1-2 days until the wound is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", with which the wound appears to have been licked by a surgeon; and they should be made inside like a file, and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out of all these pincers, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put the instrument called "althali", which is also known as "palainche", for this reason:
And let it be thick and large so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps over this, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, for which the forms come after this:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has two reins, for this reason:
and other fixings that are in front of the ratio of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like great pincers, for this reason:
And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break; and know that many instruments of the teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and wise and subtle masters find for themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the diversity of cases, and one does not break the skin or the other bones, where it can, so he searches for instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, for this reason: And let them be large and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can be held and removed; then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then replace it with all this instrument:
When the teeth appear not according to the natural form of the body, and the shape is ugly, and especially in young girls, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is newly after the dentin, and is not in its right place, and one cannot smooth or file it: then draw a line; and if it is attached with the tooth, take this instrument of which this is the form, and it resembles a small beak, and let it be made of iron with an edge in shape.
And the copper becomes harder and harder in a few days because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a similar file of this form:
and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little over a few days, so that it does not move until it is done; then make it smooth at the end to any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then file off the roughness as much as necessary, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
when the teeth loosen
When the teeth in front loosen, either by percussion or by falling out, and the patient cannot press down on what they eat without choking, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, but it does not work; then one must restrain them with a golden thread, for silver wire becomes green and rotten, but gold never changes; and let the thread be of medium size neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see directing the teeth, take the thread and insert it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the hooks between the teeth that are loose, as many as there are or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and quietly, so that it does not move; and let your finger be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then file the hooks of the thread with pincers, assemble them, and re-point between the healthy teeth, and put it so that it does not wound the tongue; then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if it comes loose or the wire breaks, one must restrain it with another thread; if it remains and serves thus throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of directing the two healthy teeth, and the two loose ones, just as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, then one puts it back in its place gradually, as we have said; and does not interfere with someone who is not wise and cautious, and at times one makes the form of a cow's bone tooth, and puts it in the place where there is a deficiency, and strains it so that it remains and serves thus for a long time.
to cut the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue or is natural, as one is born with it; or by accident of healed wound; and the work is such that you treat the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your own hands, and lift up the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament from the wide part, so that the tongue is dislodged from its dwelling, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is a sudden wound, then apply an unguent and cut the ligament; and be careful that the incision is not too deep, for the artery is below; and when you have finished, raise the patient's head with rosewater and vinegar, or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue; and let the patient's mouth bleed every night, so that the wound cannot heal. And if there is bleeding of blood, put vitriol on the wound; and if the blood flows forth, cauterize it with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
and if you see that it is of foul color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards gangrene, and there is moisture, then apply an unguent and make a fine poultice, and deliver it from one side to the other; and if the wound bleeds at your work, put vitriol on it until it is stopped, then return to your work as long as you are treating all the way; then raise the patient's head with vinegar and oil, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of abscesses in the throat
Sometimes an abscess called "godath" comes inside the throat, and they are properly referred to as the two "amandres". And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, beware: if it is a hard aposteme of little sense and foul color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, nor for the bleeding of blood; but leave it until it dies, and then you will cut it open, or it would burst on its own; and if it is white and red, and the root is subtle, have the instrument ready to cut, but first look to see if the aposteme has calmed down and is appeased. Then have the patient sit before the sun, with their eyes closed, and press the tongue against all the instrument, in the form of which it is; and let it be of silver or tin, as delicate as scissors:
Press the tongue all along this instrument and you see the abscess, then take the needle and the thread in the almond, and draw it forward above as much as you can; and leave nothing loose with the threads, then cut off the instrument so that the form is like one force; and although the head is curved, and from one place to another, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel.
And if you don't have this instrument present, then cut off with forceps so that the form remains:
And be cutting from one part and the other part numb; and when you have cut off one of the almonds, then cut off the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and cold and easy, and if there is bleeding, gargle the patient with vinegar, or grated pomegranate peels cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding ceases; then apply a cure until they are healed; and sometimes abscesses arise in the throat that are like the two almonds, so cut them off in the same way as the two almonds similarly.
And I healed a woman from an abscess that was born inside the throat, namely one small abscess; and I had well closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not expel air through the blocked conduit, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she remained like this for a day or two. The abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two stones through the two openings of the nose. I hastened then, and put a needle in one side, then drew it forward, and pulled out a large portion of pus; then refilled the other opening of the nose, and opened up her mouth and pressed her tongue; after putting the needle into those abscesses, and cut off a part, and only a small amount of blood came out; and thus was unblocked the conduit of the woman's throat, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess kept recurring, filling up the space I had emptied, until it became very large; then I bound it up and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it grew no more; and I left those parts, and all was as God did with them after me.
of the vein
When swelling occurs in the vein, and it is inflated and long, it is called "perpendiculaire"; and if it is under a thick and rounded one, it is called "vein". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the abscesses are appeased, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and the one that is rounded and not long; and if it is sanguine or has a reddish-brown color or is black, then it is necessary to avoid making an incision on it. For there is great danger for the patient. It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, of its thickness and length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press their tongue onto the instrument which we have made mention of previously; then put a needle into the vein, and pull it down, and cut off at one of the two instruments which I have said in the incision of the two almonds. And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cut too much, it causes pain to the voice, and to speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear of cutting, then it is necessary that you use a trick at the cauterization so as not to cause fear. The manner of the cautery is hot water. It is that the patient puts their head in your hand, and then presses their tongue onto the instrument which we have said in the chapter on cautery, and mixes with living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and apply the weight of this instrument, to form what appears:
And place your head or have someone else hold the medicine, as the hairs of a comb, and place the instrument on all the medicine above the vein; and have the patient sit up straight on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down to the throat and cause bleeding; then keep your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the vein, for the amount of time equal to half an hour, until you see it turn white and the medication's irritations be appeased; and if you see fit, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument into all the cotton in the cane above, so that the cotton rises up onto the vein; and do this often until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to start again with the medicine cautery, then restart it, and after the cautery, surround the vein with cotton wrapped in butter, and cleanse everything around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until they are healed.
This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament, ysope, origanum, rue, camomille, and avronne, and similar herbs, and mix all or some of them together into one pot, and add a small amount of water, and make it boil; and let the pot be well glazed with earthy matter, and have an instrument inserted in the pot according to this manner: And it should be of silver or copper, and one of the keys should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the vein through the cane, until the vein is mortified; then repeat this often, until the vein dries out, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the abscess's heat, for many things happen then; and don't make it too hot except at the decline of the abscess's heat. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put an eggshell inside the patient's head, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to oppress the mouth, and it is good care together with salvation.
Many times it appears on the throat as a bone or fishbone, or nothing at all; therefore, you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue onto the sun at the instrument's entire length, so that you can see the thing being affected; and what does not become apparent and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit while the food is cooked in their stomach; perhaps this will dislodge the stuck thing through vomiting. Or have the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a dry crumb of bread; and tie the sponge with a thread, and then re-swallow it; and when it comes up again, you can pull out what we have said; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take an instrument made of plover according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu'il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;
of the sweat of the throat
No medicine is good for the sweat, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not help, then look at the throat of the patient at the sun, and then press the tongue to the instrument that I told you. And if you see the sweat, so treat it with a small lancet or fine pincers that are worth it. And if this does not work, take a braided cord and put it in the throat of the patient, and then insert the hot iron end of the cord into the patient's throat and do it often. And if the patient drinks water all day, then take a full cup of cold water, and open the mouth, and spit it out without swallowing, and move it frequently with your hand; and as soon as the sweat feels the water, it will stop.
And if it does not stop as we said, then suffumigate the patient with afezade at the instrument that I said in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will subside without harm. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot where there are hot coals, and let the cover be covered by a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that hole be the key to the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cord in their mouth, and closes their mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but reaches the sweat; and the sweat will now stop, and if it does not stop, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then there is need for it to go away by this governance.
And the form of the instrument with which you treat the sweat is such that when you can see it, it resembles curved pincers to enter the throat; and it has a resemblance to a doctor's beak, and has an asperity like lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and behold this form:
the chapters of abscesses
There are many kinds of abscesses, according to the remembrance that comes afterwards in this book, and they vary in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is similar to itself, and that is due to moisture. And the second manner is for those who are on the bone. For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the charred bone are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the pus is mature according to its completion; and there are some that it is necessary to pierce when they are hard and do not die according to their completion, such as those that come on joints. For when abscesses come on joints, and you leave them so long that they become putrid around them, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, which causes contraction in that member. If the abscess is on the main limb, and you delay perforation until it is mature, it will harm the main limb; if it is on the foundation, you should pierce it as soon as it is dead; and one must not pierce a hard abscess without digestion being complete, except for that which is on the foundation, lest it become perforated and lengthened within, and a fistula forms; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the sign of perforation of the abscess when it is dead according to completion, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the departures of fever are ended, and the reduction of pain and heat, and the quieting and soothing of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the perforation where it appears most prominent on the surface of the abscess, and where it opens up; and let the perforation be of sufficient length to reach through the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints, and on nerves and arteries, and in all equal parts where there is no pain.
In those that are painful, according to the one member. And when abscesses are in charred bone, it is worth more that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before then, there will be lengthened the body with venom from it, and it will be full of much ordure; and by chance, the lips and the bottom parts of it may become hardened. And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member requires. And it is necessary that you make small perforations for small abscesses, and large perforations for large abscesses, and many openings according to the appearance of the great size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut off the key, and cover; when it has become as dry leaves, and is exhausted, then it is necessary to do as one does with babes: and if there are those that are split into three angles, and if there are those whose covering is like the leaf of myrtle, such as abscesses of the angels; and if there are those where you make a rounded shape, and other shapes and similar coverings.
Those who do not have a head, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them thoroughly. And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has accumulated great pus, and you pierce it, so do not draw out all the pus in one hour, but only a part; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing more above it; do this gradually many times until the pus is gone. Likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old men who are decrepit. For the hopes sometimes jump with the issue of the pus, that by chance the patient may die, and you would not be aware of it. Therefore, proceed with great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, then dress the wound, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cutting, then apply tents made of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that they come together; and if you have cut off a part of the skin from the abscess and you have shaved it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or flax without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove it, and care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor leu decorrant par maintes fois.
And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: and I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here the chapter.
of boils
Wherever small abscesses come forth from the head, they are like boils on a sheet of cloth, just as a spider's web is woven; and there are many similar ones. Some are fatty and humid, like pustules; and some are hard and stony to cut through, and one need not doubt if the artery does not make an obstruction. And the work of cutting is that you test all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", from which the form comes after, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, so be it poured out above the long one. And when the moisture is emptied, so scrape away without leaving any skin containing that moisture, for it will return again if you leave anything; then dip in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in water and linen, and fill the wound, and let it stay until the next day; and those who remain of the night. Then start again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night; then cure the wound with ointment as is suitable, until it is healed. And if the abscess holds a fatty night, cut along this form from above, down; and throw away your scraps, and scrape off all around, and put all your care in extracting everything that is there; and if the artery makes an obstruction, do what I told you afterwards. And do the same with the abscess if it is stony, and of cutting and curing as I told you.
And the cutting above the stony abscess and the moist one is lighter, because they are full of blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or on the head where there is no moisture, and I found one such abscess on the head of an old woman; and it was like a stony block, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if anyone had done anything to it, they would have made as much of a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming from the head, except those that come from the heads of children and the roots of the ears, the opening should always remain at its most dependent part, so that the pus may issue; and cure them as is necessary.
of scrofulas
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck and under the armpits, and sometimes in the groin area, and each one is connected to another. And each scrofula is properly contained within its own jacket, just as the night and the abscess of the head, as we said; and the similarities of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malicious ones that refuse to obey good health. Therefore, when you see one with a good disposition for touching, and it is similar in color to the body, and quiet on each side, and not hard against the nerves of the neck or the artery or the conduit, and not too deep; then you should cut above it, and scrape off each part, and make the two lips of the wound as thin as possible, if necessary, just as we said in abscesses of the head; and be careful not to cut the nerve or the vein, nor be too careless or hasty, lest your hand escape, and you do not see too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, so put vitriol or some powder that remains blood in the wound, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound becomes soft and begins to rot. And when the blood has stopped flowing, then return to your work, until you have completed it; then look at your duty if there are any small scrofulas remaining, and cut them and clean them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, it is not necessary for you to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and cure it.
And if you cut the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any superfluity due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at its root and draw it out, and sew it as we said before. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, burst forth where they are most swollen; and burst forth in this way, depending on, then apply poultices with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment bringing forth flesh, until it is healed.
of gangrene
The old men said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the writing of their word.
To those who have gangrene, it is necessary that the incision of the throat which is called "epiglote" be avoided; and one does not provide help by doing so, because all the veins and the pulsations of the patient's body are hot in those who have an abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both shoulders. When the disease is in the channel of the pulsation, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary therefore, when we want to cut the epiglote, that we cut it under three circles or four small incisions across, between the two circles, or according to the quantity of the abscess in the syphac, not in the cartilage.
and it is suitable for the section of the epiglote that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long and swollen.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all the extent, then cuts the wound until it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the abscess, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the phlegm from the channel which bursts forth through the broken ligament, and by the lack of voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
When the time is passed of which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound by the key, and sew all smooth without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until they are healed.
All this said is that one should not do this just as long as the throat is completely filled, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and the fault is being wasted. Then cut open the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and they are breathing through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
and therefore the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw a young woman take one knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut away part of the channels of the Adam's apple.
and I was called to cure her, and found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and knew well that she had not cut open her jugular vein nor anything but the throat, and the blood was flowing forth through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured her until she was healed.
and it happened to the young woman that she was restored to her voice, and returned to her normal state afterwards.
therefore I say that in cutting open the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
of the thick throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the greenish color of jasper, and it is very common in women.
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or the natural one has no deceit.
And the accidental is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fat in us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from an artery. and there is fear, and it is not necessary to operate on those that are small, and he proves and searches at every intervening point. if you find it just like one fat lump, and cannot be cut in any way, if you cut it, as one cuts flesh, and treat it all around, if there is any. and search well everywhere, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
of the flesh
Many kinds of flesh are, which I will tell all the likenesses;
and it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between flesh and issue.
I say that issue is hot and feverish, as long as the ebullition has not passed, and the corruption is accomplished; then the fever and heat cease.
With the flesh there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains one abscess, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins just like a greenish patch, and becomes large.
and they are according to two likenesses, either fat or moist, and many in color are such as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the flesh, that you prove and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "intermittents", according to what its form will come in the chapter which follows.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses of flesh is that you take or more moist probe than you find in the abscess, and turn your probes back and forth, until you know that the instruments have pierced the key, then according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the intermittent, and take care in what flows forth.
If the moist discharge is clear, whatever its color may be, then treat it as I have said about other abscesses.
and if after the intermittent there comes no more moisture, knows it is fat, then treat it thus: take pincers and pinch it lightly from each part and guard the coat where it lies, so that you may lead it out with the flesh.
and if you cannot lead it out whole, then tear it into pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return the flesh many times.
and if there remains a little bit and the blood bothers you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and hold it firm, and put on soothing things to hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
and if the flesh is large, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what nourishes flesh.
and if the vein beats against you or some other obstacle is contrary to your haste and you apply a leaden weight of vitriol, let it remain for two days or three, until the wound has purified, and the ebullition of blood subsides; then return to cutting what remains of the flesh.
Behold the forms of the intermittent instruments, and they are of three kinds: great, middle, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, middle, and small, in order to search out abscesses of fistula.
and they are also like the needles with which one sews sorceries, and they are of citrine stone, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more proven to be used for searching out the ravages of fistula.
and they are of three kinds: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
The forms of the probes are of many likenesses, as you see here: great, middle, and small; and there are also probes that have two ravages of three kinds.
and there are probes that have three ravages, and they are also of three kinds; and there are probes that have two ravages, and single probes with only one ravage, and they are all necessary in their place.
The heads of these are cutting, and there are some that do not cut at all except from one side, by which one skins the flesh, so that one does not cut the vein or the nerve.
and from these instruments are the cloths wrapped around in strips, so that the patient does not notice at the opening of abscesses;
and they are of three manners: great, small, and middle-sized, as you see;
and one does not use more than in a well-oiled joint, such as knees, and arms, and shoulders, and hips, and similar joints;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling scabs of flesh, according to this form, by which blood is staunched;
and one puts it sometimes in the place that heals quickly from veins and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form;
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like a woman's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, should take note according to this form of the line b from here to .g. then scrape off the fat, and apply the wound with medicament letting it become dry, then bring together the two lips of the wound at the seam, and care for it until it is healed.
and if the breast droops down and is dimpled because of its size like that of women, then make two grooves above it, by two similar incisions; by which one is joined to the other at the end of both, so that the thicker line contains the thinner according to this form from this line b up to line g; then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about seams and powders, and everything necessary in the treatment, until he is healed.
and if he is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not wish to rest, or due to the loss of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive oil; and leave it so long as the remaining flesh and fat are melting, then care for it until he is healed.
of abscesses of the armpits
These abscesses that come from under the armpits are hard forms of scrofula or there are some that contain moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and care for it with ointment according to this form until he is healed.
And if the abscess is of the kind like scrofula, then do it as we have said in incisions for scrofula, and if the wound discharges pus, then apply a cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is sealed, many times abscesses come forth, and it also happens to the vein that is swollen and abscessed.
and if one knows thus when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep. and when you feel it at your elbow, you will feel a stiffness; and when it is due to the vein, then it appears as if it were going to burst forth.
and it is foolish to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and hips and neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and also for the one at the head, and in the one who is swollen from artery, make an incision above the long skin.
It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and also for the one at the head, and in the one who is swollen from artery, make an incision above the long skin. then operate on the size of the inch, and separate nicely the artery from the flesh, so that it is uncovered.
then insert a needle below the one and make it pierce through to the other side, and bind the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
then prick the place that is between the two ligatures with an instrument until the blood that is there issues out and the abscess is relieved.
then apply the treatment that brings pus, until the ligature breaks. then care for it with ointment according to this form, until he is healed.
and if the abscess is due to the swelling of the vein, then it is necessary that you daub with your hand all that you can of the abscess to all the skin. then insert the needle below the place that you are holding with your hand, and make it pierce through, and there will be one doubled thread, so that you can pull it from the other side. then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or the ligature of one part to the two keys of the thread.
and if you doubt that the thread will not come loose, then insert another needle under all of the thread below all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and bind the threads in four places.
then cut the abscess until the surplus issues out, then cut the surplus of the skin and leave what is tied.
then put on a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until he is healed.
of abscesses of the nails
Also just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, so too do abscesses come on the nails when they are forced, or due to excessive labor, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the joints and elbows and all places where there are joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and it is accompanied by many dispositions without pain.
and when one presses strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depth of the body, but just below the skin.
and it is well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor above or below, and the one in the joints should not be cut with iron: perhaps there would be contraction.
and that which is on the head or forehead, make the skin at the spot. If the abscess is small, then hold it with tweezers and cut off its root.
and if it is large, so suspend it on the gallows, and flay it, then take out the bone and put together the wound to the seam, and let the care be until it is healed.
of great haws hanging Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere at all the same, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by its resemblance to ears, and it has fine roots and a thick head; and there are small and very large ones.
and I saw one person who had two of them in his belly which were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were cut open, and inside ran with moisture.
I cut them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 Z., and the works of the incision are such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the articular tissue is white and moist and of subtle root.
if you cut at the spatula-like large, and be in your presence the fire cautery. For when cutting comes many times too great outflow of blood, and if the blood overflows, then hasten to cauterize.
and if you see the patient espanting and fearful of the incision with iron, then take one good well-made cloth thread and bind the articular tissue as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the cloth thread until it cuts the articular tissue, and take care by it as much work; and if the roots are large, then you should fear to cut it yourself for the belly, but you can well cut half of it.
then cauterize it so that it does not reappear; then treat the wound, and be sure that you do not cut the tissue which is of a foul color and poor sense and regards milk.
For it is an enchained abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancre after this.
when the bowel is foul
If the appearance of the bowel comes from a cautery of wound or fissure of syphilis, and is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other wounds, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness;
and if it is from the wound of syphilis and from the issue of the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to diverse issues. And if it is from the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it to its two sides it rebounds, and then returns, and by chance it may be stuck, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through great labor.
And if it is from moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, not at all constraining; and if it is from blood, then it appears by these signs the abscess is great and hard, and fixed according to a quantity.
and if it is from windiness, then it is tender to the toucher, and the works are such that you look to see if the appearance is from the blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the care. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his linen, and be stretched out straight, then sign by encircling all around the bowel; then command him to sit soon between your hands then go around the place where you have signed at all the spatula-like then split the half of the abscess above to the great incision;
then work on the half of the abscess stretched above the binding, and put your thumb's index finger, and probe the intestine; if you find it caught by the binding, then loosen it, and push the intestine forward out of the belly.
and if you find the bowel, then take it on the gallows, and cut off the superfluity;
and if the artery or vein gives you contrary resistance, go around it well, then come back to your work and take two needles, and insert two good threads, and insert the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as if you were piercing.
then restrain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the place be such that it can heal, and take care of the dead flesh by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and can be done, then treat it as necessary, and shape the abscess as we have said;
or you cut it when it is subtle and can be done, then treat it as necessary, and shape the abscess as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as necessary, and bind the wound.
of the chancre
We have said in the division the likenesses of chancre, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment by fire; and we say that chancre breaks out in the groin, and great caution is needed in its cure; and the ancient ones say that when chancres are in a place where they can be removed like those that are on the breast, and in the armpits, and in similar places, one should remove it all at once when it begins; and when it is large and old, then it is not necessary to approach it, for I never saw anyone heal from it; nor did anyone ever before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient with black bile at times; then make him sicker if he has manifest repletion; then bind the patient well on a good bed to perform the work; then throw away your gallows or chancre, and shape it all over, and cut it off all over leaving nothing behind; and let the blood flow freely, and press the place well with your hand or something, and if the outflow of blood makes you resistant to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then cure him with another cure until he is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division about the likenesses of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by fire: it is only lit up; and one should not touch iron on these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and hydropisophobia, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy which is called "lit up" by medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then consider if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as indigestion and similar things; so do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient with strong vigor, and they only have dropsy without any other illness, and they are neither too young nor too old, then thus work. Lay the patient right across your hands, and have the attendants press the belly from below the water to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spoon-shaped instrument according to this form: And be cut off into two parts at a point, yet not so deep that it can come up to the intestines when you insert it, nor can it harm.
Then consider if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if so, it is necessary to cut into the belly three fingers' breadth above the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the belly three fingers' breadth; and if it is due to bile, then make it on the right side, and do not let the patient lie over the incision so that the superfluities do not flow towards that weak part.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument and plug it, and lift your hand to the spatula-like tool between the skin and the fatty tissue just as when shearing at the thickness of a fingernail or in a quarter; then pierce the fatty tissue until the spatula comes up to the point of view, which is the water's way, then treat the instrument so that it takes this form: And it resembles a silver thread, and it is made of lead or of light earth, and has a small pit in the lower part; and on one side, three pits; and two on the other side, and one on another; and the edges are cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writers shave with.
At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, now empty it onto the instrument; then take out half or one-third part, for if you empty more than necessary at this hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit from the arm, or they may faint, or approach death.
But empty it according to the amount of their vigor, and according to what the dispositions of their patient's vigor signify, and their pulse; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now because of the key that stops the pit which is on the fatty tissue, as I have spoken, so you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw off a small quantity of water.
Do this each day, and take care not to draw out too much water at once. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave a great deal of water, it will be cured by heat or sand, and by sweating or bathing in the sun, and drinking; and treat with desiccative medicines until they are healed, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before.
Of the stoppage of the urethra At no time are children born without a pit in the urethra, or the pit is small, or it is not in its place. If so, it is necessary to pierce at once each and every spatula very finely according to this form: then put the pit one fine cloth of linen, and tie it and keep it thus for three or four days, and when they wish to urinate, then remove the cloth, let them urinate, and then replace it; and by chance there is no need, because the urine that comes forth does not leave the cloth closed. Those whose pit is small will be helped by the medicine of fine cloth, as we have said, and it will expand. Those who do not have their pit in its place are harmed, because none are born with the pit at the top of the urethra, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift up their penis; and cannot evacuate because the matter cannot come to the exit, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, and then you take hold of the head of the urethra and cut it as the shape of a feather, so that the pit opens in the middle, as it should; and beware of excessive bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and cure the wound until they are healed.
Of the boils on the penis Many times these abscesses come on the penis, and it is a foul appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you take them to a subtle onion, and cut and clean all of them, then apply moist cotton in Egyptian ointment; then treat with divine ointment until they are healed. And if the abscess is malignant, with a foul color and pus, it is necessary that you apply fire cauterization. When you have cut it open, and the abscess is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the part inside first; and when it is sewn up, then treat the part outside. For if you cure them together, it is not certain that the head of the penis will not be pierced, and there will be more corruption in its own flesh and in the groin; so it is necessary to cut out everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the bark of green pomegranates and vines, then treat with other remedies until they are healed.
And if bleeding comes from the wound, apply lunar cauterization according to this form: The cauteries help in two dispositions together: namely, at the bleeding of blood and at the corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you put a linen cloth around the penis and make the patient urinate through it; and when the skin is worn out at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or has been wounded or affected by aposteme, then it is necessary to cut it with a sharp instrument, so that the ligaments are loosened and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
et se c'est grief chose de deviser ceu, if it is a grievous thing to discuss this
Of the circumcision
Circumcision is not the removal of continuity like other wounds; however when we perform this work of our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best work and the lightest for salvation.
I say that the ancient ones did not circumcise their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen the greatest part of masters and doctors who performed circumcision around one inch, with force, and to everything a new skin; it would be hot because there are two layers, and by chance if you cut above and leave that below.
Then it must be covered up, and the pain is doubled, and at the moment of skinning that part of the member is not ensured; and at the skinning of the wound by chance the iron slips out, and the work is ruined, and many times thus it happens that there is no need for skinning and I have seen this.
Of the skinning which is done with force to all the thread of wool I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above as below.
For when you press your hand, it cuts equally well in every way as one; but that the thread is well stretched around the skin; and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing more than just tying the thread around the penis so only, and then you let him go in all ways that you can. Then make it stay between your hands straight and the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is; then clean it well from the filth that is gathered there, then tie the signet with a double thread, then tie it below one fold to another; and hold it with two strings by the second knot at the pouch and thumb index, and cut between the two threads, then lift the cut above hastily and pull the head of the penis.
Then make it stay between your hands straight and the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is; then clean it well from the filth that is gathered there, then tie the signet with a double thread, then tie it below one fold to another; and hold it with two strings by the second knot at the pouch and thumb index, and cut between the two threads, then lift the cut above hastily and pull the head of the penis. Then let the blood run out slowly, slow and slow, for that is the mothers; and put powder on top and top a sheet glued with an egg yolk cooked with rosewater, tempered with good and fresh oil, and leave it there until the next day, and treat him with another treatment until he is healed.
The form of the forces at the skinning is this: the two heads should be held and should be cutting, and should be the heads equally as big as the fingers equally.
The error of the skinning is when the iron inside flows into the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the edges make an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot keep it at your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
And if it exceeds three days, and what is below the penis is swollen, then leave it until the abscess has subsided, and scrape off lightly; and cut as you can move, and take care of the part of the penis, for nothing will harm it.
Then cure the wound with sudden powder, which we have said or treated about powders, and if you cut too much with the iron, and it goes above, then it will not harm; then cure him as we have said, until he is healed.
Of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction of the stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or flesh new, or similar things that we have said in the division;
And if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the urethra or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and have his feet placed on the back, and stretch out his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as he can; and then force the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that the urine is released.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", of which this is the form: and be made of subtle silver, as thin as a bird's feather; and be the handle one and a half palms long, and be subtle at the head.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of a piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread into the siringue; and cut off the excess thread and put it up to the head of the siringue, then anoint the siringue with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a stool, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and dry water.
Then put the siringue gently into the penis, so that it comes to the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the belly; then push the siringue forward just to the bladder, and let the patient feel come to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order unless the conductor or she who guides her goes awry; then pull out the thread all along the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out and make the urine run.
and repeat the siringue until the bladder is empty, and comfort the patient.
of diseases of the bladder
When ulcerations or blood comes into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, then use all the instruments called "clepsedre", and this is the form:
It is closed, and has three perforations: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the edges are trimmed so that the medicine flows well without addition, so that it can be drawn out when needed, and inserted when necessary.
and when you see your medicines go into the bladder, put the head of the instrument into the moisture, and pull it back as far as it goes; then pull out the moisture with the instrument, and then push it strongly back in; then the moisture will enter and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of subtle collyrium used to purge the bladder: thus it is
And it is made of silver or archaute, and the head is higher; and below one side or the threads fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you see purging the bladder, then tie between two breasts with a good double thread, and warm half of that moisture over the fire; then fill the head of the collyrium into the vessel, then strain your hand on the bladder to all the moisture coming forth, so that the patient feels that that moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put in a strong thread into these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tile, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, by pressing your hand until the moisture comes out to the bladder.
of stone
We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone incurred from rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one should work by size; and in the bladder, and in the vessel; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is incurred in the bladder happens more often in children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and there appears hairiness, and the patient's member grows, and swells many times, and then becomes inflamed; and at many of these jumps the foundations are shaken; and is lighter the healing of children until they have three years, and it's very grievous in old men, and it's moderate in those who are between youth and old age; and is the cure more light for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by purging, in order to draw out all the bad blood that is at the intestines. For it sometimes hinders finding the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and turn him over and move him down, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes falls from high up; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then search for it and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in its place, then hurry now to cut on the stone. And if it does not fall at all when touched by all, then moisten your two middle fingers with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child; or your two median fingers, if the patient is young and completed; and fill it in its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your fingers, then guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press on your fingers and push it out to where you see cutting.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him that he stretches out with his right hand the intestines up high, and with his left hand takes away the skin which is below the intestines in the part where one makes the incision; then put the spatula closing, thus it is the form:
And make it between what is between the intestines and the foundation, not in the middle but alongside the left side of the naeves; and be straight on the stone, and your two fingers be at the foundation, and the incision of the traverser so that it is wide behind and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
by chance the pressure may cause the stone to jump forth with little work; and know that there are some stones which have angles, and margins: it is grievous to extract; and if there is one that is smooth, like a flint, and rounded, from which the issue is easy.
To that stone which has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump forth, then it is necessary to strain on the pincers that are like a file at the head, in order to grasp the stone so that it does not escape; or you put below one instrument with a subtle curved tip; and if you cannot extract it thus, then enlarge one hole slightly, and if the sand decays, then strangle it with vitriol.
And if there are more than one stone, then first extract the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut on top, then pull it forth, and the small ones afterwards if there are more. And if it is very large, then it must be split, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out immediately elsewhere than where the wound cannot heal; but still strive to extract or break with pincers, until you pull it apart piece by piece.
and when you have completed your work, then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and strain it, and put over one damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then resupply the patient with his collar, and do not remove the bandage until three days have passed.
And when you remove it, then arise very well the wound of oil and water; then treat him with diaphonic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
And if hot apostemes come to the wound and corroisons, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by that urine which is known in such a way that it does not jump out with the urine: then put your two fingers into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and destroy it.
Then lift the wound with water and oil of silex, and help him in all the ways you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works that you do to cure him, that you bind his two thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the leech.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the channel of the penis, and stuck inside, and the urine cannot come out; then cure him as I have said before, that you make an incision many times, or excuse yourself from making an incision for this cure. I have already proven it thus.
Take one iron rod according to this shape and be fixed at three angles in one soldering:
Then take one thread and tie it around the penis under the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the rod into the penis slightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod in your hand in a small hole by small hole, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; soon urine will come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. It is soon broken, and jumps forth with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et if you cannot do this because of anything that prevents it, then take one thread under the stone and another above, then make the rod between the two threads in place around the stone, then pull it out and release the tie, and clean up the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It often happens that the stone is lodged in women, and if it ever happens, then the cure is difficult, and it is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who will reveal herself to the doctors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way it is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of surgery; and the fourth way it is that the stone of the woman is more inward than the stone of man, for which reason it requires a more profound incision, and there is great fear.
And if necessity requires this, then it is necessary that you take a woman who knows well, and bring her to the truth, and if you do not find one, then take at least one chaste and subtle midwife; and present to her a wise old woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you order regarding the examination of the stone.
and examine very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to press her womb or foundation and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain her to place it under her womb, and command her to press her womb or the patient's womb with her left hand on the bladder firmly.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to under, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the cord, where it appears in its place, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her womb above or below the stone, and make the incision small.
then press the knife into the incision, if you feel the stone so far along the wound that it can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; so learn their likenesses in order to know the outcome.
And if the blood flows freely, then place vitriol powder at the site, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding is stopped; then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to help you with your work.
and if the blood flows freely, and it is from the artery that was cut, then place powder on the site and strain of tents and bandages, and do not continue this, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest the patient should die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the swelling has passed, then return to your work until the stone is out.
of fleshly hernia
Fleshy hernia is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is below the layer of the scrotum that contains the egg; and it is called "syphac", and sometimes it is properly in the lining of the egg, as if it were another egg; and this is the skin of the scrotum between the white pus that we have said; and this only happens when it does not.
And the generation of this fleshy hernia is from weakness that comes to the scrotum, and it spreads this material.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the scrotum, and this moisture has many colors: or it declines to yellowish, or it is without redness, or black, or water-like white, and this happens more often.
and these are the signs to know this accumulation, for if it is white pus that we have said, then it is a reabsorbed abscess, long and like the shape of an egg, and does not open the scrotum because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper lining, then it is a reabsorbed abscess with part of an egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white pus, then one senses it well; therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, try all around the four-cornered entrance, because the shape is as we have described before. Accordingly, what appears after the entrance, judge what is inside.
Accordingly, what appears after the entrance, judge what is inside. And when we cure it with fire, then it is necessary that the patient be healed according to our power and the replenishment of his body; then place a poultice on his back, on something about a foot high, and put many cloths under him.
then sit on his left side, and command the attendant to sit on his right side, and stretch the rod to one of the two corners of the scrotum.
then take the spatula and cut the skin of the scrotum between the long and short parts, up to the groin, and make your incision entirely straight, cutting through the skin of the scrotum just to the white pus, and scrape off subtly according to our power.
then pierce the white pus with an aqueduct to one large perforation, and extract all the water, and then place your fingers, and stretch the white pus upwards; and do not touch the scrotum, but only the white pus; cut it out in pieces even if it's small, so that you don't cut too much, lest the water return.
and if the egg comes out during your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the white pus; then assemble the two layers of the scrotum skin with a seam, and then cure it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you stop the bleeding of the vessels that are suspended; then cut off the scrotum above the suspension, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two hernias; then cut off the other part similarly to what you did with the first one, then stop the bleeding, and put a wet linen cloth soaked in rose oil into the wound.
and place another damp wool cloth in vinegar and oil, and place on the two balls, and place above doubled cloths, and tie it above all the bandage that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and wrap them with wool yarn according to this shape and be sewn together in the belt of the breeches, and one of the ends will take up to the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the pinching; and the other chief on the two shoulders, and all assembled into the restraint of the girdle.
and sometimes medicine this thread of cautery in place of iron cutting, and it is that you take one subtle cautery knife, and cut the skin of the balls, and be heated as we have said, so that the white pitch contained in water is revealed.
so take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that pitch on the nails, and scrape it off with this subtle hot cautery.
And cut it in all ways you can, until you have removed everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the yolk; and know that this work is more saving; and take care to avoid disfigurement of blood, and take heed of the works of cutting.
and if nothing else makes you contrary, or abscess forms or disfigurement of blood or anything else, then treat what makes you contrary according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then perform a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well assured by the signs which we have said that the abscess is ripe,
so make the patient sit on a light stool; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the scapula as far as possible, and make the perforation long enough to reach through the entire length of the body; and be wide the hole, so that all the water can run freely.
then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and let the remaining water run, then treat it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not allow water to come out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you insert a probe or instrument used for draining the fluid from dropsical patients, as described above; and enlarge one pustule in the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or thereabouts, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
of the abscess of the balls
Know that in the section of this thread there are many fears and dispositions, which is why it seems to me that it is better to leave it as it is.
and I will tell you the work and likenesses of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed to the balls; and this is by many cases.
It is to know by excessive bitterness and ague, which spreads to the balls, or from impact;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and there is no pain, and it is a grievous abscess.
and by chance some grievous abscesses are fearful and piercing, and of a foul color, and sometimes come from no artery or from swelling of the vein.
When it is by no artery, then it is known by the hot abscess disposition, when you press it to your hand. and it is not necessary that you touch it.
He who is caused by swelling of the vein is known by his disposition to the expression of touching with the hand.
and can do well in cutting on this shape and on other bones. and it is that you cut the skin of the balls, then lift the yolk up high, and draw out the white pitch, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all parts of the yolk.
If the yolk is already bound with these bones, then it is necessary that you draw out the yolk and the skin.
and if it is airy within the pitch or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that tension and cut it back again.
And if the birth of the bone is in the rear, then it is necessary that you cut it all off and draw out the yolk, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, then wrap the wound in damp wool cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
of the abscess of the balls
This is an abscess enveloped in a covering similar to a bunchberry, with the softening of the balls. and if the patient groans grievously when he walks.
and the treatment of this disease is just as fearful as the one before.
and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a high stool, then tie the suspensory ligament of the balls down to your hand. to all the vessels that are near the penis, and tighten the master cord, and stretch them forth.
then cut at the scapula, cutting wide across the transverse part between the vessels, until they are uncovered.
and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein came in, and tie it again at the other end. then cut them evenly in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisters.
then treat the wound as with others that are joined in a bow, so that no vessel may bleed that nourishes one of the testicles.
for if this is not done, no harm comes from it, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to draw out the testicles with all the vessels. so that the sperm does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and are unable to assist.
of the rupture of the pitch The events of this thread are by the section that comes from the pitch, or the extension on the belly in the part of the shoulders, which is why the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles.
and this sprain is either in the groin or from stretching it, and there are these two ways of causing it: by percussion, or by jumping, or by pulling, or by lifting a heavy load, and through similar things;
and the signs when it is from stretching the groin, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the very top, because the groin presses on the intestine.
And the signs when it is from cutting the groin, are that it makes a sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing under the skin close by, and this is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's reaction to the cut in the groin.
And sometimes the entrails become entwined with the intestine, and it is retained there, and causes great pain to be suffered by the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these iron treatments one should fear, because of which one should avoid them.
And the manner of the treatment is that you instruct the patient to push his intestine back into place with his hand inside the wound, if he can get it in there; then be steadied on his neck between your hands and lift up his hips;
then straighten the skin above and cut away all the skin of the scrotum long. then push inside the flesh of the abdomen with a thread wound around it according to what you need to open up the wound and be such that the bone may come out.
then scrape off the groin that is under the skin of the scrotum, until the white fatty tissue underneath becomes visible from all sides.
then place your two middle fingers in the crease where the scrotum is, between the white fatty tissue that is under the skin of the testicle and between the second groin.
and part what is behind the testicle and between the second groin; then move your right hand into the skin of the scrotum and lift up the white fatty tissue to your left hand, and lift up the testicle away from all the groin towards the belly. and instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards and to release what is behind the ligament.
and search with your two hands to see if the intestine has wrapped around or is entwined with the white fatty tissue, and if you find anything, then put it under the belly.
then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten threads and put it in the back part of the groin which is after the skin of the scrotum, after the belly, then cut off the hairs that appear from the threads as long as there are four threads. then tie them together one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the groin which we have said is under the skin of the scrotum with a strong bond from two parts. then wrap the hairs of the threads around each other and tie them together from two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter in there, lest an abscess may come. and place the bond above it according to the first long bond of that one, and after these two bonds leave the groin which is under the skin of the scrotum a gap of about the width of a finger.
and after all the rest according to the roundness that the testicle bears; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the scrotum as long as it is sound and free from corruption, as we have said before.
then anoint with moistened linen dipped in oil, and put it on the wound, and apply the bond that we have said. And sometimes the white fatty tissue that we have said is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood loss.
For this often happens, and leave the bond until it falls by itself; and if it does not fall soon enough, then apply hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls.
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
of a fleshly hernia
In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to do the treatment by fire.
And the ancients say that it is done in such a way as the branch which is together with the vine, in this manner that you tie the vessels after the belly has been slightly lifted downwards.
then cut into it and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed; and then cure it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Sometimes a sprain comes in the groin, as we have said, and opens up the flesh; and none of the entrails come out to the scrotum, and if any do come out, it is little by little, and repair all hours.
and yet if he stays too long in this point, the wound or abscess becomes infected, to the extent that the entrails come out.
and this happens due to the stretching of the groin which is at the groin, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and swelled the flesh and opened.
and the cure is done by cauterization, as we have said before; and never is cured by iron in this manner.
and it is that the patient lies comfortably on his back between your hands, then cut away the swollen flesh of the sprain from the wide side according to the quantity of three fingers.
and then extract the fatty tissue that is under the skin which follows, and take the raw flesh and place it on top of the apparent fatty tissue.
and press it to the deepest part of the belly, then sew the two apparent fleshy layers of the groin on top of the raw flesh, and sew one and the other.
then extract the raw flesh, and do not cut anything of the groin nor stretch the testicle or any other thing, as I have made you aware in the treatment of the sprain of the entrails.
then treat it with a wound treatment. And when you cut the threads, have someone else assist and treat the wound, until it is completely healed.
The groin is constricted, and has no appearance in the sprain, and the cauterization is more effective in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men, because the things that are inside are softened, and it is a sight to behold; and when one wants to treat it, one must have the patient lie on his back, and cut away the softened skin from the natural skin. Then tie the two edges together with a seam, and if you see fit, sew off the excess of the softened skin at three or four stitches; then cut between the stitches, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is completely healed, and let the thread fall.
The punishment
The punishment. Know that punishments are ordained in our law, and therefore it pleases me not to speak of them at all in this book; and it is only necessary for two purposes: one is that the physician may respond when asked and provide a cure; and the other is because we often have need to punish certain beasts to aid us, such as oxen and sheep and goats and other beasts. I say then that punishments are done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision. In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and pliable; then we take them to hand, until they are relaxed and you no longer feel them. Regarding punishment by cutting: it is necessary that you bind the beast, and press the skin of its testicles to your left hand, then tie the suspender, and strike on each testicle once with a blow, when you have well cut them; and leave some small piece of fat and subtle fat which is above the vessels; and this manner of punishment is more effective than that done by attraction, because at attraction something remains of the testicles by chance, causing the beast to desire lust; then heal the wound until it is sound.
Of Hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are according to two ways like men: one is that between the two testicles it appears as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair and sometimes urinates in court. And the other manner is in women, and it has on the nail as much as a penis and two testicles. And the cure for man and woman is that you cut off the parts that are joined together, and cure them like other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
Of Tenting
Tenting is a growth attached to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have as much of it as a hand, and that is the cure. It is necessary that you cut off the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or fingernails, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep by fontanelle, lest blood flow forth, then cure it with another cure until it is sound; and at another growth that arises at the mouth of the womb, and swells, and perhaps jumps forth, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for that reason they called it in olden times "cow disease". It is necessary that you cut it off as we have said about tenting, and cure it until it is sound.
Of Erratic
Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the womb is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that has come upon it; or it's because of a growth attached to the womb, or from subtle or dense sacs, and it's made in depth in the womb, or on the sides, or below, or wherever; and it hinders conception, childbirth, and perhaps having flowers; and knowledge of this is by looking at the belly. If the stoppage is nearby apparent, it should be done to your hands or armpits. If it's from subtle sacs, and it's near two leaves, hasten and do thus: put your two hands together, and have the woman sit on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two leaves until the subtle sacs are released, and let the stoppage be overcome; then take flax, moisten it in oil, and place it on the leaf, and keep the woman at home each day, so she cannot sew. And if the sac is hard and dense, it's necessary to cut it with a spatula-like thing resembling a myrtle leaf. If the stoppage is from born flesh, suspend it at the fingernail and cut it; and have medicines that stay blood, such as alum, dragon's blood, incense, together with egg-white; then administer a wide bandage of cloth, so the wound cannot heal; and thus be long, and administer a linen tent; then be cured by other cures until it is sound. And when flesh arises in the womb, it should be cut according to this manner, unless it's an enchanted abscess. For an enchanted abscess that is in the womb, one must not touch with fire.
Of Hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without courtly habit, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened; and we have said in the division the likenesses of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive curation. I say that hemorrhoids and the hardened abscess, when they are made deep in the womb, and one cannot feel it, there is no cure by fire. Those that are at the mouth of the womb, can be felt, and they can be cured. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then set the hardened abscess on tongs, and cut off its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and apple peel and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make one poultice on her back. And if it stays, that's good. If not, make her wear ventouses on the back and breasts so as to avoid fire; then take flax, and moisten it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the wound. And when the abscess subsides, cure the wound with ointment until it is sound; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so it must be cut as I said about the hardened abscess; and then cure it until it is sound.
Of Abscesses of the Womb
There are many ways that abscesses can occur in the womb, such as chancre and piercing abscesses and herpes and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It is therefore necessary for me to say about the hot abscess that occurs in the womb, which is not one of the abscesses that forms a boil. And if you want to know how to use iron, then look at whether the abscess is full of heat and fever when it first begins, and whether it becomes red if you can see it.
From childbirth
It is necessary first to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman hastening downward, and desiring to give birth; then the child hastens to emerge; thus know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue below her head, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly, so that the child emerges quickly; for when it descends above her head, the secondine is with it, and the marris of its superfluities is purged by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes upon its feet, and comes forth through the body or shoulder, or hands, or it comes upon the belly, or womb, and is converted by chance on her neck, and by other bad figures; thus it is necessary for the bailiff to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one should help.
If the child comes out above its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and her virtues are weak, then make her sit on a stool or have women hold her; and let the mixture of oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then pour it between her breasts, a little spatula-shaped thing, which is in this form: And split the secondine, and cut at her umbilical cord until the moistors that are in it dry; and press on the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, it is necessary to purge the woman with fenugreek and oil of sesame; then make her take hold and stretch out comfortably, and keep her mouth and nose shut for an hour: thus the child is now emerging. And if both hands emerge first, it is necessary that you gently pull them back a little at a time; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up; then set the stool down on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall down; and if the hands cannot enter and the child dies, cut the hands at the cord that is here before placed, and extract the infant, and pull it evenly.
From childbirth on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, it is necessary to support it high up; and then turn it a little at a time, until it is even;
then take one foot and stretch it a little at a time.
Can it jump as far as the knees, if she is commanded to take hold, and make her stretch out comfortably; if it jumps further, God wills it.
And if it is not further as we have said, then turn it a little at a time, until it is according to the natural figure. For then it becomes lighter.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take fenugreek of almonds, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all together in one mortar; and put it on the woman's natural body inside and outside with this ointment, then make her sit in hot water up to the armpits.
and when she is moistened beneath, make her a collar of myrrh, and put it under, and let it stay for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her stretch out and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press on her belly, for the child is now jumping. From childbirth on its knees When the child comes in this form, then I put my hands gently around it.
From childbirth when the child comes with one hand hanging down It is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk.
if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and gently lift her legs strongly.
then administer the mixture that I have counted.
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study how to bring back the hand; and gently pull the child according to the natural figure, and make her stretch out, and command her to take hold until the child emerges further.
From childbirth on its neck, with spread-out hands and face turned towards its mother's back It is necessary that the nurse takes its hand, then turns it gently a little at a time, and pulls it lightly.
and when it is even, then put on the natural mixture of fenugreek and oil, as we have said, and command her to move gently a little at a time.
and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and command her to take hold; and make her stretch out. in the same way for all the afterbirth
in the same way for all the afterbirth When it comes forth in this manner to all the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your finger, until the moistors are empty.
and if the child is on its face and neck, then cut it from the mouth, so that it is not retained, and kill the child.
then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it so that it is necessary, and command the woman to take hold once.
From childbirth of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens frequently. Two are a rare thing, and do not live if they are not named.
I know that these two are multiplied, and are divided by the sacrum that divides them, which is attached to the mouth.
and sometimes they come forth naturally just like one under, as we have said.
And if they are gentle, so let the cure be as we have said, and may the ball be subtle, and do soon and lightly what it does. and do thusly as is best for health. of many children
of many children No times are formed in the womb, i.e. one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of an infant by the measurement of divine wisdom.
and it is fitting that the ball knows everything, for by chance similar things happen to it; so do according to what is fitting.
of a dead child
When you cure the woman of a dead or stillborn child, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained to operate with hands; so it is fitting that you know whether the woman has good health, and is not afflicted by any accident or fears death;
so it is fitting that the woman be placed on her back, and have her heels inclined downward, and her legs lifted;
and the minister should tie a cloth of two parts around her, or she should be tied to the bed so that she is not troubled by the descent of the child;
then grease the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with aloes and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint your hands with these oils and these ointments. then pour them into the womb lightly, then take one or two of those fingers that are suitable for this.
and take heed whether the child is formed and descends onto its head; so insert the fingers into his eyes or in his throat or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs.
and if the descent is onto the feet, then insert or pierce and cut the membranes of the sides.
and it is fitting that he holds the finger in his right hand, and puts the compress between the fingers of his left hand, and pours oil all over his hand lightly, and inserts the finger into one of those places that we have said until it comes to the empty thing.
then insert another finger opposite to one another, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are even;
and then stretch them evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that the fingers are bent for movement, and are held in place as this is the form.
And if a part remains, then anoint some of your fingers with oil and pour it into that part, and draw out the other part.
and if there is none left, then place this finger or higher one, and do so until everything comes out fully.
And if one hand comes forward of the other, and it cannot be returned due to constriction, so it is fitting that you envelop on a cloth, until everything comes out.
then wrap it in the jointure of the foot or at the knee, and thus it is fitting that you do the same with the other hand, and for two feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is stretched in the issue, or it has an assembled sharp point. so it is fitting that you insert a spatula between your fingers and push the head and extract the liquid. or you will round it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with instruments or chapters that are after this one.
and thus do the same if the child has a large natural head. and then draw out the bones with forceps.
and if the head jumps forward and it is constrained to the forehead, so that they are split, until the moisture that is in the issue comes out.
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, so it is fitting that you make a hole until the moisture runs.
And if the child is on its feet, then the extraction is gentle, and the direction to the mouth of the womb is gentle.
And if it is stretched in the belly or at the chest, so it is fitting that you extract it onto a cloth wrapped around your hand. and open the belly or chest until the moisture that is there runs.
and if other limbs are removed, and the head remains. so anoint your hand with oil right up to the mouth of the womb, and draw it out up to the mouth of the womb. then insert one or two fingers, and draw it out.
and if the mouth of the womb is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come there, then it is not fitting to work. rather it is fitting to apply moist and greasy things. and the emplaster should be applied in liquid, softening and moistening.
And if the child is on its side, and you can place it evenly, then apply what we have said for a living child.
and if one cannot do so, then draw it out by pieces, and leave nothing of the placenta.
And when you have done this, then apply what we have said for hot abscesses that come in the womb.
and if hemorrhages of blood come, then it should be stopped with water and restrained, and other remedies applied.
And I saw a woman whose belly contained a dead child, then she consulted with another on top of it, and rejected the death of the other. After a long time, an abscess came in her mouth, and swelled up so much that it opened, and began to cause great perturbation.
I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
I put on an emplaster of strong attraction, and out came a bone, and after some days, another one. I was very amazed, because the belly does not have bones.
So I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
I searched the wound and drew out many bones, until the woman was in a better state. and the woman lived for a long time like that, and would occasionally have a little bit of blood dripping from below.
And I have not remembered this chapter other than for this reason that when the master finds a strange thing, he knows how to put aid there.
and bring back the mother to her place
Next comes the shape of the pressure, with which one reads the books; and to the two turnings at the two joints of the two ligaments. However, the combs should be more subtle than the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood.
and the mouth of the wood should be one and a half feet wide, and the edge of the trees one and a half palms long. and between the two ligaments should be two anchors of this same wood, which are fixed in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
and these two anchors are fitted in the mouth of the mother to open when one turns the two combs.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of wood from ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of pincers. and have at two joints two anchors, as you see, one palm long and one and a half palms wide.
and when you see the mother open completely with all the instrument, make the woman sit on one seat, her feet pendant and her legs outstretched. then insert the two anchors together into the mother, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs. then work your hand on the entire instrument, just as you have done with pincers evenly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the mother, until the patient does what she wants.
These instruments are all mounted and their similarities multiplied; and when the apothecaries have prepared them, then is the work more hasty and higher to men for their quantity.
So do not despise the instrument that you have prepared, because their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained at childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her breath, and then have her exhale slowly, and hold her hands on the mouth and navel. and if she jumps for this, well it is.
If not, then take a pot, and make a hole or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mother, such as chamomile, rue, anise, camomile, cassialigna, and centoria.
all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put one hole or opening of the pot and the other head into the mouth of the mother.
and hold it thus until the vapors come inside the mother; then have her exhale, as we have said. If the afterbirth comes out quickly. And if she remains after this treatment and is not fully healed, instruct the patient to wet her left hand with sesame oil or mullein from alethee, and then insert it into nature.
and takes the afterbirth; and when she has found it, then take it and stretch it out little by little directly, so that the mother does not harm during the extraction. but it is necessary to move slightly to the right and left, and then pull; so it will come out and be discharged.
And if the mouth of the mother is too narrow, we have said the treatment of exhaling and fumigating herbs;
and if she does not accept all that we have said, then beware lest you fail to pull.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the mother, you bind to the woman's crotch, and then anoint her with ointment from tetrachamphor.
so she will be cleansed and restored, and come forth fully; but nonetheless, when she has purged, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
So it is necessary to do fumigations suitable for this: none of the ancients have proved the fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the afterbirth is this:
And it looks like a cord, and one puts the head of it into nature, and the wide ends over the fire.
and let the fumigations be above the coals, and hold it until she is satisfied, and then begin another one.
of piercing the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather it is stopped by a subtle syphac. So it is necessary for the patient to pierce that syphac at its root, and not pierce too deeply with a sharp spatula, and guard the ligament so she does not touch it.
then put on a moist linen in wine and oil, then the treatment with ointment until he is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put in a hole a cord of cloth, and let it stay for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
And sometimes this stoppage comes from sudden wound or abscess; so it is necessary to cover that stoppage: if it is cured, as we have said of the cloth cord.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodations, and grow larger than those that come from above the foundation or in the space between the two parts.
if there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodation is ancient, it works, and brings forth moisture, whitish or subtle pus.
and sometimes these fistulas are purulent; and are known by this that there is either emission or discharge or flatulence when the patient makes an emission, and by chance lets out one's urine.
And if there are fistulas that pierce just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and reach just to the joint of the crotch, and just not to the knee.
And thus one knows if the fistula is purulent at the foundation, and not purulent. and it is that you insert your two fingers or foundation, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuousness.
And if there is tortuousness, then insert a thin piece of cloth or one hair from a horse, as far as you feel the cloth or hair to your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and there is no pus discharge nor wind nor urine, as we have said: know that it does not puncture; therefore hasten to cure.
And when the fistula extends all the way to the bladder or the urinary channel, and it lets out urine, and cannot be healed by medications.
If it punctures all the way to the joint of the hip, then the intestines come out at the same place. if there is no twisting and the invention of pain around it, then it is that he will come out again, and it will not be helped by medicine or healing through anointing.
and in these fistulas that puncture there is no cure other than surgery, and the vanity of foolish doctors who get involved with it.
In one that is not punctured and is not old, there is hope of recovery through iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you lift up his legs until they reach his hips, and have his hips inclined towards his stomach. then insert a plug of clay or of lead if there is twisting, as far as you know where the intestine comes out.
If the patient feels it around the fundament, then you should insert your two fingers there.
then sense that the intestine has punctured it; and be discovered where you feel between your thumb and the sac or flesh, then know that it is punctured. if you don't intervene at all, then it cannot be healed.
One says however that one can heal some, but this happens rarely.
and the aid you provide is to cauterize the subtlety according to the width of the fistula, as was said before. and seal it all hot in the fistula, until it reaches the fundament; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these burned edges are like a feather of a bird.
and then cure it with moist tents in butter, until those edges are gone, and then cure it with anointing oil bringing forth flesh and binding.
If he is thus healed, that's good. But if not, no other way can be healed.
and if the intestine enters and does not puncture all the way to the thumb which is at the fundament, and between your two fingers and the intestine there is a thick covering of flesh or sac, and you see the fistula where the covering of skin ends. so cut from the beginning of the fistula, and seal it then before the intestine, and then apply the cauter after, as far as it reaches to the head of the intestine.
and then the intestine will be delivered and fall away; then remove those burned edges that resemble a bird's feather, and none will remain.
And if the blood swells up and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicine.
For the cauteries of fire assemble two good things: namely, the burning away of those charred edges, and the stopping of blood and the drying up of moisture.
then cure it with moist tents in butter or in crushed hazelnuts, as long as the flesh flows forth, and let the burned edges fall away into the flow.
then cure the wound with anointing oils that bind and harden tough flesh, and are the medicines dry.
For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back again.
And if the fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the fundament and is far from the body, then insert your two fingers into the fundament and investigate this matter.
If you feel the intestine and it is between two layers of skin or sac or flesh, where it is near to puncturing, then there should be no doubt except for the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it all the way down to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and cure it as previously.
and do not go too far down in the fundament, lest you cut the tenement that holds the foundation, and the evacuations come forth involuntarily. then cure it, as we have said;
then cure it, as we have said; by chance if it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it when it is cut away from the fundament, either by tent or by another instrument designated. then remove that burned edge which is in the wound, as far as you can.
then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the fundament: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the fundament below the skin above. so take a pierced tent at the head according to this form: And I insert one twisted thread into two, and insert the tent with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is punctured on the edge of the fundament inside, then draw out the thread from that perforation, so that you insert your two fingers into the fundament.
and pull out the head of the thread, and bring together the two ends, and hold one to the other, and let it remain for one day or two.
and restrain it at times, until the threads cut away those edges that are between two, and fall off.
then cure the wound until it is sewn up and healed.
If the fistula does not puncture, then make it puncture in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
For it does not need to be cut so far down and then cured, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spine-like spine from which one makes the fistula is very much bent in one direction and twisted. and on the other side not, because of which you should not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
Wounds are according to two manners: or they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and great ones, and in between blood flows. and there is one or more, and they are outside the fundament and at the head of the fundament; but those that are outside have very little moisture.
and then put it next to a little bit of yellow water or a little bit of blood, and have the same color as the body
and the cure for those who have them in the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to stretch and yawn frequently until the foundations become loose, and then they will appear. if you hurry, and hold it with forceps or at your fingernail, then chop it at its roots
and if the bandages cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them from one cloth, or cotton, or a piece of cambric and extract them to your hands, then chop them, and powder them with some hot powders that are in place of cauterization or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
and if the foundations cannot come out, then purify the patient with a biting and harsh purgative to clean what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly.
since the patient cannot feel, and if the threads are loose from the foundation, then the cure is easy. and it is that you take them at your fingernail or with forceps, and chop them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and so that he fears the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you bring the stitch together in this manner: take one twisted thread, and insert it into a needle, and then pull the thread up above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle. and if it is of a width; and hold the thread tightly, then tie the thread, and extract the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one for correcting any surplus blood.
then put a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or cerotic on the foundation, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then leave him until he has had a bowel movement, and when they have ceased, then treat him with ointment and other treatments, until he is healed.
of the putrefaction of the devil or foundation Many times there is putrefaction of devils in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is not effective.
It is necessary that you bring to the tip of a spatula or at your fingernail the rind above, which does not let it become moist. then treat him until he is well, as is necessary.
and if he cannot be cured, then rebegin the scraping more strongly than before, until he is healed and scarred. then treat him until he is healed.
of the tremor Fomice is a small, faulty appearance above the body, and goes very deep.
and sometimes it seems to be frozen there, and one feels it also like being dead from the tremor, and comes throughout the body, more in the arms than other parts.
And the cure is that you take a cord made from an oyster's quill or a strong goose's feather, and place that cord on the tremor, until the circles mark out the tremor all around. then turn your hand over the entire cord until you have circled around the tremor, and push it deep, and uproot the tremor from its roots.
And if you see fit, then do so with a cord of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and above, drawing it up.
but do not pierce, in order to keep it at the two, and press down. And if you see fit, then cauterize the tremor, as is said before or in the chapter on cauterization.
of the form of purgation Sometimes one makes a purge of silver or archaute, or melted iron or cloth; and sometimes one makes these small and large instruments, according to the way they are brought together.
Those then which are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of purgation, small and great, is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this manner:
and it has a deviation or the belly is bound, as you see, and the threads are pierced within; and has on one side two holes, and on the other one hole.
and the belly or womb receives the medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes.
and has between each hole one thread of espace, then insert into these holes one strong thread of twisted thread in ten or eleven turns around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat. and when the medicine is inside, then bind with an instrument in front of a strong thread, and purify; and this is the form of the circle:
And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the purgation with oil or egg white or similar thing, then insert it lightly.
then instruct the attendants to grasp it with their two hands together, until it is fully visible, then extract the purgation, and raise the patient's legs to the appearance.
and if the medicine wants to come out, then hold it as long as it can; and if he sleeps for a whole night afterward, it is a greater help.
And if you purify him in a disease of rectal obstruction, and the medicine hastens to come out, then rebegin it until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, then be the purgation as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle purgation above which the skin should be strained:
of wounds
We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicines, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where the wounds are made, and from what things they are made.
The things from which wounds are made are by cutting with stone, and striking with sword and knife, or with lance or club or stick, or similar things.
or those that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members.
I will translate the text line-by-line into English:
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stone or similar things, and the skin is torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly about a warm abscess: if it is healing soon itself even if it comes from the wound's blood, and the healing is on the contrary side of the injured part;
and instruct the patient to take fullness of wine and thick foods.
And if it does not heal, let the patient's food be reduced, and do not drink wine, nor eat meat;
and apply it to the wound if a warm abscess comes, with moist cotton cloth soaked only in rose oil or wine solution.
and if there is no warm abscess, put powder on the wound if it is fresh and full of blood, and not changed by air, which I will say a little later.
and if the air has changed it, put some unguents on top until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like the cut of a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together with suturing, just as I will say for belly wounds from suturing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone and putrid, and only holds together by a small amount, then cut it open; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin. and instruct the patient to eat thick foods, such as cooked testicles and wheat, also like fowl, and similar things.
And if you find putrid flesh and it is not attached to the bone, cut out all the putrid part and throw away the decayed matter, then treat it.
and if it has an artery in the wound or vein that is not bound by a ligature and cannot be stopped with medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it loosened, then bind it with a thread. and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and that is to put this powder which cures when air has changed it.
And the manner of the powder is: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of living sulfur, and grind it subtly, and apply the powder to the wound, and bind it firmly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood.
and then bind it well, and let it remain undisturbed unless it swells, for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And one never does this with sulfur alone, unless one has no incense or dragon's blood, but only when the air has changed the wound.
And if the air has changed the wound, and it is in this state, then one must not put any of this powder on it.
but put on some digestive unguents or poultices made of barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it flows freely. then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then extract it with subtle forceps;
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and not put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and causes them to retreat. and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuance is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but make the medicine soothing, such as sulfur washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and wash it also in sweet water. and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, cut and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and there is pus and full of discharge, then puncture or drain it lower down.
and if the artery is cut and there comes forth a stream of blood, then open it up, and tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary.
and if the spine of the throat is cut or the vertebrae, and the conduit is preserved, by which the flesh goes. so cut the vertebra above the canal of the throat, and do not touch the throat but leave it according to its natural shape. and then bind it properly, and let it be for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then tie it. and if there are pieces of bone, then remove all that you can, and leave those that you cannot have until the wound putrifies. and let the discharge flow freely.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
of the wound from a lance or knife
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are signs of windiness coming from the wound that the patient is suffering from: know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder at first hour, nor bind it for the blood that does not flow deeply. and reverts to the heart, and kills the patient. but I put an attractive unguent on it, and bind it twice a day.
and if you do not have unguent, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture and fluid.
and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four days, or more. if there is no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor any signs of faintness from alarm. and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed. Then treat it with tents and other remedies, until it is sound.
and if it cannot heal or open, then know that there is a fistula; and treat it as one should.
And if the wound is a cut from a sword or knife, and it is shallow, or deeper on one side or back, then treat what is in front.
if it is large, by stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone and has broken pieces, then close the wound and treat the burnt areas if they are raw. and if they are not raw, then let the wound become septic, so that it will ease the extractions;
and for other wounds on other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are great, moderate, and small;
from a great wound sometimes the intestines or the contents of the intestines protrude, for which one must introduce them;
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a great one.
therefore one should insert the intestines slowly and carefully, rather than all at once; because the intestines swell immediately when they feel cold, so they enter more slowly.
and therefore it is better to make the middle wound, because one should reposition the intestine to its place, rather than with the others two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
the two common stitches happen in the stitching of the belly,
and the stitch for other wounds of the body and two other special stitches are common to other wounds;
and yet they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine protrudes, and if something needs to be returned, it is by one of the two manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: soak a sponge or one cloth napkin in lukewarm water only, or boil it in water with squalin, and cypress, and spike. and warm the intestine until the swelling is gone;
and sometimes make this wine restrain and be quiet that it only swells to deflate.
And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestine with water or with herbs that are cooked. because by this it is eased the entrance to a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is quieter than the cut. that none should cut it without great necessity.
and that is the instrument to split it:
so cut inside in the curvature and not outside, and look at its shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes forth, so return it to its natural shape in its proper place. if you have the power, for this is more effective.
When the wound is large and it is in the part below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient sit on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two sides, so place your attention on that which the injured part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to arrange what I say about great and moderate wounds.
For small wounds, put forth what appears to you,
then have in your hands one pitiful minister who holds all the rupture in his hand, and bring together the lips; and that is the common manner of stitching.
and that is the common manner of stitching. and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave a space of about an inch at the head of the wound and insert a needle where there is a good strong thread; and pierce the two leather thongs with the two thongs of the siphac,
then strain it with a doubled thread around the needle from both sides, then bring together the two edges of the wound smoothly,
and then leave about an inch of space and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this until you have need of the needles. until all the wound is restrained;
and be the needles moderate, between fine and thick. for fine needles cut all through the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they be moderate;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and leather,
lest they cut and open the wound before the suturing;
and then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient in their sleep, and I put tents or cloths on the ends of the needles to keep them steady. and leave them until the wound is sewn.
and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use one needle or two.
The second stitching is common, and it is that you bring together the two leather thongs and the two thongs of the siphac in one bundle, with a needle that has a strong middle thread. and when you have pierced these holes all together four times
and when you have pierced these holes all together four times so remove the needle from the part where you started, in the way one cuts threads.
and place a gap of about the thickness of a small denier between each seam.
this seam holds the flesh
and I sewed up a wound that one man had in his belly
who was wounded by a knife and the wound was more than a palm's length deep. and the intestines were torn well two palms' length deep
and the wound was in the abdomen. I brought back the intestine and it had been out for 24 hours
and the wound was closed in just 15 days, and I cured it, and it healed.
And the doctor had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not anoint him with ointment, for I was in a place where there wasn't any to be found, nor any medicine; and I put a piece of old cotton on top of the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
take the needle and push it through from the outside part to the inside part.
when it has pierced the course of right on right, so leave the end of the thread or stitch where you put in the needle.
and make it pierce from the other side through the inside part to the outside part.
and the purpose of this stitching is that you stitch as tailors do with furs, and that you leave the thread once on one side and pick it up again on the other, until the stitching is all complete.
The second way of stitching, which Galen calls properly
is as some people do who assemble the two parts together naturally and apply one end of the thread to the other end in this way:
insert a needle or pick up the thread close by and make it pierce only that point. and leave the two ends of the thread. then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside part to the inside part. and leave the two ends of the thread again.
then make it pierce one and the other from the outside part to the inside part, in two other points of the thread that are on the other side.
and this is the second way of stitching and the most common one.
Galens says that this phrase is true, and others bear witness to it.
one must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread in each.
and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather.
and knows that when the rupture is inside the belly, it is the stitching more difficult than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, even if the heat has changed it, then put back the intestine and the flesh; then place on top a powder of burnt charcoal,
then put back the intestine and the flesh; then place on top a powder of burnt charcoal, and if the heat has changed it, then put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals. and cut the thread, and have the stitches and the thread tightened. then treat the wound as with others, until he is healed.
and if you don't have medicine, then put on, as soon as it starts to heal, old cotton. and move it two times a day until he is healed.
For you don't need any other medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound may cause community infection to the principal members, so it is necessary that you moisten linen lightly with temperate heat oil or rose oil, and place it around the wounds and under the armpits.
and if he feels pain or purulence in the bowels, and many times this happens, then give him enemas of black wine tempered, and similarly if the purulence comes just to the intestine;
and pierce it from inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jun" cannot heal if it is wounded, and it's because of the flatness of veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the approach to its nature from hens.
And if the intestine jumps out of the wound, then put it back in place just like the intestine, while it is still fresh.
and if it is old and has become greenish or black, then it is necessary that you tie off the part that is black, so that no more blood may come from there. for there are veins and arteries;
then cut what is between the ligature, and put the two ends hanging from the part below the wound until it reaches the outside to ease the extraction when the intestine falls and the wound heals.
of the rupture of the belly
When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, one can restore it in some men,
because I saw that one man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it was envied and became a fistula, and there came forth evacuation and flatulence.
I treated it according to what I could do, and did not cease to subtlety until he was healed, and the wound was closed.
And when I saw it closing, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly; and there was no longer any ill, but he remained in better conditions, and eating and drinking.
and certain experimenters said that when someone has a small wound in the intestine, he must be tied in this way: take fresh fig leaves, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the fig leaf has opened up the mouth, then place it on the two lips,
then puts another fold after in that manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered;
and sews the wound. That chief stays in the intestine and does not cause any harm to the patient,
and one can tie off the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in this manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that is quite loose, and then tie to the head of this thread a fine linen thread twisted, then push the thread through the needle, and sew up the intestine, and tie it off in a knot;
and this manner of stitching of flesh is not other than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the smaller intestine, there is no remedy or health, except for subtlety.
of fistula or whatever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it festers, is universally called "fistula", and especially when it breaks and runs below.
And a fistula is according to the natural nodulation, hard and white, or one does not feel pain, and it also breaks out like the feathers of a bird;
and sometimes jumps high down below and at other times is thick. sometimes small and at other times sufficient;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed and there is no scar, is not except through one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by the smallness of blood or body; or because of its wickedness; or because there is hard scar tissue inside and on the lips that does not allow new flesh to grow; or because there is too much pus; or the flesh is rotten and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because the property in the region is late in digestion and hinders health, and flees by nature; or there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicine in the division.
or it is necessary that I inform you about the treatment for fistula which is done by handwork.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the spleen, or intestine, or bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come up to the level I have said, and you have faith in the treatment, and you see it with your own eyes, then take a tent of iron or earth, if the fistula is straight, and sew;
and if the fistula is twisted, then search for a fine tent of linen, for the linen folds itself around the twisting;
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well search it with tents, so cleanse it through one of the openings,
for the moisture cuts from one opening to another and cleanses it;
then sew it up as well as you can, knowing if there is bone or nerve, and cut deeply enough;
and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where it is located;
and when you know truly the location of the pain, and whether it is far from a jointure, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the decayed and corrupted flesh that is inside; and then treat it until it is healed,
and if the fistula is deeply opened in the right place, then it is necessary that you cut deeply enough, as far as you can, then I put moist tents of medicated linen and tie them up to the head of the fistula,
then I put moist tents of medicated linen and tie them up to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excessiveness that remains at the bottom;
and then I put in gentle oils to heal good flesh, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, then let it be cauterized as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it. If veins or nerves do not bother you or the principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then scrape it away until all the corruption is removed. then treat it with gentle things to heal good flesh until it is healed.
and if it is not healed and runs below as before, Know that you are not yet at the end:
then uncover and sew until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that's good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep to come out; so there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature's course;
and if there is a little bit of corrupted bone and you can pull it out with forceps, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, then remove them all, leaving not one.
and if the moisture makes it unpleasant for you and there is no error or fear, then cut and remove the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you can't remove them in an hour, then put on the wound a poultice of purifying things, and leave it so that the flesh is worn out around the bones,
and then if they have less weight the bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as that of the leg or hip, so just remove the corruption until the marrow is entirely removed. then restore the wound;
and if there is great part of the corrupt one and comes just to the bone; so it must be scraped and covered all around the corruption, and then cured until it is sound.
and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
until the matter came to the leg and was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to delay opening it;
but the physician by their foolishness cut too high up that the abscess opened, and a great deal of matter was flowing out, and it became a fistula, and there came forth many pus-filled bubbles that all went down into the moist parts of the body.
and many physicians put a poultice around for two years, and there was no skill in the art of healing,
so that I was called to it, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed out through the pus-filled bubbles into the great body; and the flesh of the young man was becoming red and had a citrine color.
I inserted a tent in one of those abscesses, and then searched all the abscesses,
and found that one was connected to another in all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and cut into one of the abscesses until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption was coming right up to the bone inside;
I removed what appeared from the corrupted bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except for what I had taken away;
and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long period, and could not heal;
and then recommenced, and found the bone just as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then took it away, and was about to set the joint;
but I could not do so until I cut around a palm of the bone, and brought it forward to its natural state, then restored it with medicines; and it was healed and set quickly,
and there was no need to continue the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him. For through the evacuation it bled often, but he was healed entirely,
For through the evacuation it bled often, but he was healed entirely, and a hard flesh grew in place of the bone, and he was in good condition with no harm or opposition from anywhere, whether coming or going.
and stretch the top, so that you bring the corrupt flesh below, and uncover the flesh above the joint where you see to scrape, so that the scraping does not wound the flesh; and put a burning iron or a wooden splint under the bone to cover the corrupt flesh; and it is necessary to scrape until one can see and feel the corruption, and then scrape again.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, so uncover all the flesh; then put a burning iron under it,
and then scrape from one part to the other the corruption, and make sure the scraping is along the length of the corruption about an inch, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and scrape the bone on the other side where it contains.
and if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, then there is no other remedy except to cut it out;
and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or in the toe, then that is a very strong case, but nonetheless it is necessary for you to examine this corrosion, how it appears; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not hinder you.
and know that the incisors and the scrapers for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and their appearance. and their coarseness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare each instrument for every kind of work.
and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to your knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so think about the instrument you need according to what it requires.
of fire The head of the shoulder can be dislocated due to a reason within or due to a reason outside.
and when you have tried medical treatment for that corrosion and it does not help; then it is necessary to cover that member up to the point where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes by these means from death or from evil, which is greater than the loss of the member.
so that the patient escapes by these means from death or from evil, which is greater than the loss of the member. and the signs are that the members become black, as if they had been burned by fire, and then pus forms after the blackness, and the corruption spreads from member to member, and takes hold of everything in the body; and hurry to cover it.
and if this is due to the stinging of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar creatures,
and if the corruption is at the head of the vein, then cut it off, and do not give it any space to come all the way to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, so cut at the joint, so that the decay does not come up to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, so cut at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that's death. and it is not worth amending further except by the quantity of his virtue;
and so too when the decay comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then cut the whole foot; and if it goes up to the thigh, then cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except to let the patient die from his sickness;
and the manner of cutting or sewing the member is that you tie it above and below, and stretch one minister to the lower tie, and another minister to the upper tie; and you expose the flesh that is between the two ties to one broad spatula, until the bone is uncovered;
then you cut or sew, and put one linen wrap on each side, so that the seam does not touch the healthy flesh; and another injury and abscess comes to the patient.
And if bleeding comes from the wound when you work, then cauterize the flesh hastily; or you put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete,
then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed;
and I will tell you what happened to one man in my time:
he had a boil that seemed like burning fire,
and that decay came first to his toe of the foot, until it consumed the whole foot;
and when the man saw the decay, he hastened to cut off the foot, and was healed;
and long after that, the decay came again on the toe of his hand, and he came to me,
and I put on him things reflective after the purification of the body, and he could not cease the decays;
and he asked that I cut off his hand, and I did not consent, because I had hope of reflecting the matter; and I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land, and then he hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed;
and I have this tale only because it is necessary for others who make other treatment.
Sometimes an abscess comes on a hard skin, and stays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; and then they burst and pierce, and the pus jumps out, and the skin remains empty, just like a vessel; and the skin that is above is as thin as a delicate silk cloth; and they do not come up to the bone, nor up to the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain";
but if it is so long that it comes right to the bone and in front, then it is called "fistula";
and the skin is such that you cut around the entire skin, and similarly when it is thin, like a cloth; and it is not affected by its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not in front; and if the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a clyster thus:
look and see if the breast is large, and the pus that comes from it has a foul smell, then use Egyptian medicine made thus: take aloes, oil, and ladanum, equal parts, and put them in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and use the clyster to treat the breast, and stop up the pus; and let the medicine sit for two hours, then strain it out slowly;
do this many times, until the breast is cleansed and all pus has been removed.
and sometimes it is clystered with ash water; when this medicine is not present, and you take ashes from grapevine, and pour water on top;
then let it flow, and use it as a clyster, until you know that the breast is well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot bear it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor ash water, then use a clyster of water and honey, with a little ladanum added; or you clyster it with honey and wine of honeyed grape, which the honey has the property to cleanse and wash; and the wine makes the flesh fresh;
and when you have done this, and you have faith that the breast is well cleansed, then use a clyster of what makes flesh grow in it;
and that is when you take definite plaster, and mix it with rose oil and wine; or you clyster it with some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have said or to treat ointments;
and if the abscess on the breast is small, and the instrument of the clyster cannot enter it; then enlarge it with a little iron, and put in a tent made from Egyptian ointment; or Basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged;
and if the wound is too wide, then sew it and leave just one place or opening for the clyster to enter;
and if the abscess that pours pus is above, then cut it or lower it so that it is below. Because when the pus is in front, it does not allow flesh to remain; and if you cannot cut below the breast as you see; then arrange it in such a way that the pus flows to the lowest part of the wound.
and if you cannot cut below the breast as you see; If it is prepared in this way: that the bowstring runs smoothly downward, and leaves nothing of the bow; and take consolidative medicines to apply on the chest,
and spread one linen cloth that covers the entire chest; then cut around the strong area near the breast cavity in a pouch slightly larger than the first one, and spread soothing oil on another cloth according to the size of the breast cavity, and place it on the breast cavity to relieve the bowstring, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once.
and that which is on the breast cavity, is often removed in order to remove the bowstring, and know what comes from the bowstring, whether it is venom or pus or enough or undigested;
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been extended in this way and you see the natural discharge that springs forth on the breast cavity, so know that the chest is now healed and approaching health;
and then loose it in the morning or on the third day, and when you loosen the wound, you change another cloth and renew the oil.
And if the chest spouts undigested bowstring after many days, know that the chest is not healed. And if subtle poisons depart after a long time, do not despair of health,
for health is approaching. For there are men whose flesh takes long to heal in their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
and if undigested bowstring springs from the chest after many days, know that the chest is not healed;
and if the chest takes long to heal and is far gone, then add medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as defined oil, for there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine;
take defined oil, and mix it with rose oil, and add an equal part of old wine in substance;
then congeal it and use it; and the same makes cooked honey enlarged, when defined oil is not present,
or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and crush it, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire; and then anoint with a cloth, and spread it on the chest, and at no time administer or make aristology prolonged, and roots of lily of the valley, which is also like the flour of vetches and centaury;
and roots of lily of the valley, which is also like the flour of vetches and centaury; and use simple or compound medicines: crush them, and make powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use; and if the cure is prolonged, and not cured by this remedy,
and if the cure is prolonged, and not cured by this remedy, then know that corruption has penetrated deeply, and makes an impression on the bone, or causes hard limbs, or joins; so the treatment of fistula is, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the lung
Fungus is an abscess that arises under the armpit of the hand; or foot, or by chance arises in other parts;
and when it is neglected and not taken care of, then a foul abscess comes forth, and flows and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the lung, and by chance even all the way through;
and comes to corrosion just to the bone, until it brings foul pain, and is the joints of the hand wide apart, and is the color flushed.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help; so it is necessary that you cut away all the excess pus that remains from the lung, then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the lung is healthy;
and if the lung presses on the flesh, and begins to puncture and pierce; so it is necessary that you place a cloth under the lung that pierces the flesh, and tie it up tight, and cut away that subtle and delicate flesh; and apply to the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut away and remove it, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the hand corrupting, then cut away a portion of it as is said before. then treat with oils until it is healed;
and if it is inflamed, and bound up, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first; then cut the lung of the spatula-like thing across on top,
and take care that the incision does not reach the flesh which is under the lung, for the patient would feel too great pain;
and if it happens, then put something on top to soothe.
The joints that arise in some people's hands by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes it has a bone or a joint, and at no time an abscess;
and some of them are born in the root of the joint, or the birth is in certain fingers of the hand. The one that arises in any part of the hand does not move; and the one that arises at the joint of the hand, by chance moves.
the shape of the one who is fleshy is light, in this way: cut it at its root with a broad spatula-like thing.
The one that arises in the root of the joint is hard to cure: you should hesitate to cut it.
In the one that arises or is located at the back of the hand, it is necessary that you cut away the flesh all the way to the bone first. then cut the bone to a suitable thread for this, and then treat with oils until it is healed.
The swellings that come on the hands together come by birth, or by swelling of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
It is necessary that you cut away the swelling, and then repair the hand according to its natural forms; Then place between two tents or wet cloths soaked in oil rosed, so they do not stick together; or you put between two thin pieces of plank, until the bones are joined, as is fitting.
If any swelling comes to one of his feet with the palm, then strike that swelling as is fitting.
Of filth
Warts are large, swollen and full of melancholy excessiveness, which come upon many members of the body;
and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Therefore, you should administer to him sometimes purging with hellebore, and then the healing of the basilica.
The iron remedy is according to two manners: one is by striking, and then drawing out the black blood; and the other manner is that you lift the vein and draw it all forth.
The cutting is according to this manner: arise first the leg of hot water very strongly, until the thick blood is made subtle. then hold the patient's leg above the hip joint down to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a broad stroke,
then lift and draw forth the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the patient can endure.
and then bind it, and command that he hold himself back from eating meat until black blood is purged out.
and recommence the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and it is harmful to the patient.
The application of lard is according to this manner: rise the leg of the patient if it has many hairs. then put him in a bath, and rise the leg of hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell.
and if you do not have a bath, then heat him by the fire, and then cut in the place of the vein at the long part of the knee or in the part below to the ankle.
then apply the skin to the ulcer, and scrape off the vein from each part until it appears when you touch it.
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems just like a white string.
then tie the thread underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then dip it in the ulcer lightly.
then cut in one place above three fingers; then scrape off the skin on top of the vein until it appears. then lift it up to the thread, just as you did, and dip it in another ulcer, just as you did first.
then cut another stroke, or more if you need to, then lift it, and cut at the toe of the foot.
then draw it out and lift to the second stroke; then pull from stroke to stroke until it comes out all together, then cut.
and if you cannot draw and lift it, then insert an awl into each strong doubled thread, and tie and draw it, and put underneath one thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out. and be sure that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot draw or lift it, and it comes to the patient's harm.
and when you have drawn it all out, then place a wet wool compress on the wound in vinegar and rosed oil; and dress it until he is healed.
And if the skin is contracted and twisted and swollen together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary that you cut it obliquely, but do not cut it all the way through; and draw it as we have said before.
then it is necessary that you cut it obliquely, but do not cut it all the way through; and draw it as we have said before. The form of iron used to cut the skin is curved, and does not cut through, so that it cuts the vein;
and is of great curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is situated in legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or tree, and in earth where there is no moisture;
and by chance it arises in another place than in legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes from below the skin,
as if a serpent or worm arises within the body, and is inserted between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the limb changes and the vein begins to emerge, just like a root of a plant.
When the abscess opens, then it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plank from one and a half to two and a half inches, and bind it tightly.
and leave the plank on the leg, and every time it is not gone to the end, wrap it around the plank, and bind it tightly. and if it is too long, then cut off a part, and wrap the remaining portion around it, and do not cut it at its root until it is all come out. for if you cut it, then it will enter the flesh, and bring forth abscess and corruption at the place, and a bad disease.
therefore it is necessary that she be drawn out gradually up to the head, and nothing remain in the body.
and sometimes this vein when it is drawn out to five palms or ten, and one man came to me who had it issue from ten palms in length, and when you cut it, he inserted one thread or peg, and pierced it down to the bottom.
so that everything comes out; and the material inside is emptied, and he applies to the place medicines which prevent corruption some day, then cures it just as with abscesses.
And sometimes this vein has many veins, and even when it opens in the joint of the foot or the foot itself. and there come out many pegs, and from which it jumps veins; therefore cure him just as we said before.
Of the worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "disease of oxen", because it often affects oxen,
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes up and down throughout the body. and he feels well when walking from member to member, until they desire the skin where it goes, and jumps further;
and he is worried about the purging of some humors, such as those that come from worms, serpents, and lumbries, or ascarides in the belly;
and doubts about his illness, for when he goes through the body and it rises to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance returns, and destroys the eye; and such things happen often.
When you see him being cured and treated, then one can only wait until he goes:
then it is necessary that you apply the oil above and below with a strong tie very tightly,
then bind on top and treat him further, and if the vein is too deep in the flesh, and you cannot find it, then burn with fire above until he dies;
and the greatest harm that he does is that he corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see him coming or near the eye, then hold tightly below the bone, and bind on top, and treat him further;
and it is necessary to use the patient with purging of bodily medicines soluble for bad humors poured out,
and beware of foods that induce purgation.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and moves from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise also like a worm on the shoulder, more quickly than any thing, just as bright silver when it cuts from one place to another;
the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder,
and soon after it ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm;
then she told me that it turned around the body again, just as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed at how she moved from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner before. However, I had seen many others who had the same experience of their pain moving from one place to another, but I had never seen it before, just as I saw it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman's body was dry and her veins were uncovered, and therefore appeared to be a constrained windiness;
and do not appear in accordance with this reason for those who are plump, and have moist bodies and responsive veins.
And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then bind above and below hastily, and then bind on top until the constrained windiness is forced out to its full extent; and burn with fire at that place; and if you do not see it at your hands,
then treat him with those things that counteract the windiness, such as fetid pills and serpentine pills, and similar others.
Of arrows
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they fall.
The diversity of theirs is that there are some with great points, and small ones, and hooked ones, and soldered ones; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those that have pieces; and those that fall in some member do so in two ways: either they fall in the principal member, and are hooked;
like brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When she falls in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: then it is necessary that you beware of extracting this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions; and if this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and heal the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and jumps out from above the brain which is called the suture; is when there is dimness of sight and numbness and swelling and redness in the head, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and mixtures of the understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it impairs speech and voice; and jumps from the moist white wound like boils, and also bursts forth like a boil in flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the wound and extract the arrow if it is not embedded.
The sign of the arrow when it strikes the heart is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. and perhaps the arrow becomes still like a boil, and discharges black blood, and comes with coldness and cold sweat, and syncope: then know without doubt that death is certain.
And the sign of the arrow when the liver is affected is that without foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's face turns pale, and he sighs deeply and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow strikes in the covering of the ribcage, it is below the small ribs; and he spits up a great deal and suffers great pain and sighs; and all the muscles of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow strikes in the stomach, perhaps something from undigested food jumps out of the wound.
And if the arrow strikes in the belly, and a thread of fine matter comes out through the intestines, there is no hope for cure or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows away, and the patient feels very strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and arms and neck and shoulders and aiditory and spine of the back and forceps and cuneiform bones and legs, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, for this reason do the same.
It happened to one man that an arrow fell onto the floor in the corner of the bedchamber at the foot of the nightstand: I tried to remove it and pulled it from another side under the ear fat, and it was removed without causing any harm.
And I pulled out an arrow that fell into the fatty tissue under the eyelid, beneath the parchment paper, and the arrow was stuck, and I could only grab hold of it by its tip towards the wood. and the arrow was about as long as a Turkish bow, all light iron without ears; the pull was smooth and there was no bad accident to it.
And I pulled out an arrow from a Christian's throat, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
I softened the feathers, and made it so fine that I pulled it out, and the Christian was saved.
And I pulled out an arrow from one man who had it stuck in his stomach, and I thought he was going to die;
and then after he had passed 30 days, his condition did not change at all; I cut above the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.
And if you find one man whose an arrow fell on his back, and the wound is sewn up above;
and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change his natural disposition, nor found any harm in any of his natural works.
And if you find another man whose an arrow fell on his face, and the wound is sewn up;
and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many similar ones.
And I pulled out an arrow from one of the prince's king who had it stuck in his side, and was slightly leaning to the right part; and the arrow was entirely stuck
I was called to the treatment after it had been stuck for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I searched through all the subtle threads and did not feel anything; and he felt prickling and pain under his right ear. I thought it was from the point of the arrow
I put on the affected area an ointment that is attractive and digestive, because the swelling did not increase; and the swelling of the arrow appeared.
and the swelling of the arrow appeared. I put on the ointment for many days, and the wound was healed above, and the patient remained well for a long time.
so that he felt the arrow one day inside his bedchamber; and he told me. I put on the wound a medicine that is corrosive by the amount of days until it was open,
and I tried to remove it, and felt the head of the arrow which was stuck at the point. then I pushed it into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
and the edges passed well over a period of three months,
and then the wound healed so much that I put in forceps, and pulled it apart from one side and the other, and it could not come out;
then I did not cease to soften and extract it with the means of instruments, until I pulled it out one day with well-made forceps, according to its shape as it came at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and restored the wound.
And the doctor judged that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for books cannot take everything in;
but wise masters can learn well from a small thing and from what is present and defective, and nine works, and nine instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not come out from the members where they are stuck except by two ways: or through the path where they enter, or from another side;
and that which jumps out on the other side where it enters is an arrow entering fleshy parts and sometimes jumping out now.
And if it doesn't jump out now, then I leave it until the flesh is loosened around it and the exit is widened.
and also if it's stuck in the bone and can't come out, then I leave it like that for some days and gently move it each day.
and then it jumps out, and if it doesn't jump out, I pierce around with a very fine probe until the flesh around is widened, and then I pull it out.
And if the arrow is stuck in the flesh of the body where one cannot see it, then I search for it with all diligence; and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, so that I open it until the wound is large; and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on the arrow to which it holds tight.
and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are ears on the arrow to which it holds tight. so that the flesh that is stuck between two parts comes loose as much as you can. and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so you can pull it.
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so you can pull it. and be careful not to break the arrow, but rather pull it out more gently.
And if you can't pull it out at once, then lay it alongside the wound until it's properly prepared, then pull it out, because the extraction is eased. And if the hemorrhage of blood makes you reluctant, then apply what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and make a plan how you can pull out the arrow without danger.
or soon or late, or firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him. for it is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another side, or if it pierces anything of the patient's body, or the skin is inflamed in that place where one can see or feel it is affected.
cut then above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out: if it jumps forward now.
And if it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out further.
and if the head of the arrow is stuck, then push it all the way through.
and if the head falls off, and you want to administer poulticing, then administer with a hairy instrument. so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then push it further.
and if the arrow is splintered, then use an instrument with a pointed end that goes in first to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is embedded, then it's necessary that you remove all the surrounding flesh where the venom is, if you can. then treat the wound as it should be treated.
And if the arrow falls or lodges in the head, neck, belly, bladder, or ribcage, and it is nearby, and you can cut above, then cut.
and beware of cutting the vein and nerve, and then pull it out, and then dress the wound, if necessary. and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to remove arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and behold the shape:
And there are many types: great, small, and petty, according to the size of the arrow.
of the veins of the body common. Of the veins that one uses for healing are 31, and of which there is or 16 at the head.
it means to know: two jugular veins that are after the ears, which are called the "herbech". and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "aspirers". and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the crown of the head. and the two jugular veins that are in the neck. and the two veins that are on the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich". and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins used for healing commonly are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the head". and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins. and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side. and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the femoral. and it's that one used for healing, which appears manifestly above the pocket.
And the saphena vein is the vein that is between the ulnar and radial veins, and it has two branches.
and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the crease of the right armpit, and the second saphenous vein that is at the ankle of the left side; and the vein called "nessel", which is on the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg are three veins below those.
The healing of the veins that are after the ears helps ancient catarrh and migraine; and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head.
and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head. and wipe the neck or veins with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's collar with a screw. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two small dependent folds from the head: which then go to your throat, and where you feel the pulse beneath your throat, so it will swell.
then take the lancet, and push it underneath the vein until it reaches the bone, then lift your hand to the entire vein above. and cut and open the skin and the vein well on both sides of the traverse, and make blood flow until you see.
then tighten and bind it, until it is healed.
and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples is worth for ancient migraine, and sode, and ophthalmia accustomed, and to the eyes of tears aged in eyes.
and the qualities of the healer are as I say: and it is that the patient tightens their neck, until the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse beneath their throat, and then swells.
then lift the key on top of the vein at your throat's index, and push the lancet underneath. et lieve la voine en haut, and lift the vein upwards
Then loosen the patient, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on.
And then bind it tightly, and let it be until it is healed; and I have spoken of their binding and extraction, at the beginning of this book.
The vein on the forehead is worth just as much as the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face and in migraine and apoplexy.
and the quality is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose shape is:
And put the point on the vein, and strike with your hand or something else, and let blood flow according to the quantity you see. Then loosen the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed, and never work with a wide flame.
However, it is not necessary for the flames to be too thin; and the healing takes place obliquely, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
The vein of the two veins that are in the temples helps with these, and with tinea, and with apoplexy, and with ophthalmia in the eye, and with diseases of the face.
and the quality of their bleeding is that the patient strains his neck by twisting in any way, just as before.
Then bleed, and let the bleeding be from the crosswise cut, about an inch long and a little wide, because there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, by chance they will break; then make the blood flow until you need it, and then put it on cotton, and tie it well.
The vein of the navel is worth in ague, and in sudden fever, and in diseases of the face. as migraine and apoplexy that comes to the face, and indeed when it is ancient;
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient strains his neck, then strains his navel to your left hand. and take a long, subtle flame, and put it inside the upper lip in the space between the two nostrils. because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will start flowing now.
and don't go too far in front, and make the blood flow according to your necessity, then bind it for a night, because it is soon restored.
The veins of the two groins help with the constriction of the womb, and with the beginning of menstruation, and with many diseases, and with impotence, and with corruption, and with herpes, and ulcers.
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient strains his neck above one and the other, as we have said; and let the master stand on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one seat,
then bleed the long vein a little widely, then take out the blood temperately, or as much as is needed.
then do the other side in the other vein, then loosen the ligament, and strain around the veins moderately. so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
Of the bleeding of the liver The bleeding of the veins above the lips helps with hemorrhage in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and splits of lips, and around.
And the quality of the bleeding is to make the patient sit before you, and strain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. and you can recognize them by what they are black, and by what there are small black veins around them. then take hold of one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
then take hold of one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then take hold of the thicker one on each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
Of the bleeding under the tongue The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is for constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth.
and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts up their tongue, and looks under each side one black vein:
then bleed one and the other, and don't go too far in front, because underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the shoulder that are commonly bled are bled according to two manners:
or in piercing all one flame mirror wide, or olive subtle as coteau trenching, and is called "anesil". and they are wide and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins. The shape of the flame mirror is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth and full of thick blood, which contains much blood and turmoil. and that's the shape of the olive flame:
and it is more subtle and pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
The bleeding of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and on the neck, and on the chest, and on the stomach;
and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed moderately, and be wary of the artery that is underneath. And if he cuts the artery, and a great deal of blood comes forth, then it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and one must not pierce the flame, but cut it like a mirror.
And if the basilic vein does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you exert pressure on it, and change to another. or you want some part of it, or you bleed in place of it the vein inside the arm: it opens manifestly; and cut at the flame mirror, as we have said.
And if you want to know the place of the bleeding, then it is necessary that you strain the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulsation. Then mark the place of the shoulder, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the armpit in vain.
and beware that you do not strike at the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is of the artery: then avoid.
And if you see it protruding upward like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood of the artery: Hurry then, and put your thumb on top for a long time, then take away your thumb if the blood stops, which often happens;
then tie the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient's arm; and be above fear, and do not move until they are healed.
And if the blood is not stopped, and it flows, and the remedy is not present to you, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head will retreat; and stop the blood.
And take a wrapping of linen, and cut it, and take one half and tie it well just to the other day;
if the blood is stopped, it's good; if not, then heal it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
and the stopping is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound and the power of the ligament of the arm.
The bloodletting from the vein in a mixture helps so much that it takes away blood from the head above and from the body below. because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic [veins], as we have said;
and it is fitting for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply, and he finds the nerve. and it swells and the wound is grievous, and by chance cannot heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then it is fitting that you cut the wound with an instrument vainly; and avoid cutting the nerve as far as possible.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
The bloodletting from the cephalic [vein] helps so much that it takes away blood from the head and helps the eyes.
and it is fitting to bleed at the olive or myrtle vein, for it is the most safe of all veins, because there is no nerve or artery below.
However, it is fitting to seek the lighter place, and do not harm anything if one must try again, and start over. and by chance some people's veins swell when one tries for the first time, but it does not harm anything. The quality of the bloodletting is according to your thinking.
The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it is not done except for preserving health.
and to avoid impending illnesses; and let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are cut: namely, the cephalic, the facial, and the basilic; and one should bleed in the beginning of primes, that is to say, when a person is young, and in autumn and winter after meals, when the sign of repletion appears.
and one should bleed either on the first or third day, after 2 or 3 hours of the day.
The bloodletting that is administered for illnesses has no fixed determined time, but when need arises by day or night, in all hours and at all times;
and it is not fitting to bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying more than four months' gestation until the seventh month. Nor should elderly people who have passed 60 years not be bled.
And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever way it may be, it is fitting that they first cleanse their bowels with a light enema. if he has many phlegms retained, so that the veins do not remove from the intestines the superfluities which are harmful to the principal members.
nor should one bleed someone who is too full of meat, or who is drunk, until the excess has been purged away, nor those who are dropsical.
and beware of bleeding after colic passion, and vomiting, and purging of the belly, and frequent visits to a woman, and hard labor, watching late at night, and rising early, and all that pertains to bodily vigor, or by some wound or bodily hurt.
then subtlety the humors, if the blood is thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
then enter or bathe, if nothing hinders it, to subtlety the blood.
and take the blood from the vein around the third [ribs], as we have said;
and keep that day free of work, and strife, and lust, and similar things;
and be laid up and joyful, and let the bloodletting be higher than that which one is bleeding from, and stroke the arm two or three times.
then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow.
and then stroke the place with your hands, until the veins swell and can be felt.
then moisten the bloodletting place with a little old oil, and then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein below the place where he wants to bleed. so that the vein does not break or burst when cut. For there are veins that flow like strings at the time of bleeding, and some that are full of windiness. so that when you put your thumb on the vein, it withdraws and cannot be opened, and thus one is among those.
and if the vein has opened too much, it is the wound too tight, therefore one should be aware of these things.
And if the vein opens at first time, that's good; but if not, then start again a little below or above that place in haste, unless the veins are swollen.
And if the vein is swollen and the patient is frightened, let it rest for a day or two, and do not bind the arm: perhaps an abscess will come forth; do not enter into bathing, then start again with bleeding if it pleases.
and if the opening is small or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it will not flow as much as you see, then trust in that very opening for all the right blood flow.
and work somewhat hastily, so that the parts are swollen; for it often happens, when the wound is small.
If you see the part swollen, do not start stitching again, and put a little bit of oil on it, for it lightens the body from blood, and is good for this part, the oil that brings ease.
and thus administer the oil in each stitching that you close the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and it does the same thing in triple and double folds, when you put it on the part; so subtlety separates and spreads out when it is too thick.
And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not drained except at that time or the opening of the vein is small, so hurry and put on the part a moist sponge in water and wine, slightly warm, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if some blackness or greenish color remains on the part for several days, it does not harm him; and if you see, put on something of aloe or myrrh dissolved in camphor, poultice-like, or similar.
And often an abscess and swelling appear at the stitching of the basilica: then put your hand on it, and if you find the part soft to the pressure of your hand, that is a bad appearance. Therefore, do not put anything on it of what we have said, for by chance there may be a constriction in the artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the part, then care for it with another treatment until it is healed.
And treat each bloodletting according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it thin out; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has need of bloodletting, to make a larger wound, and let the flaps be wide.
and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and let him heal a little at a time, and have him healed by cutting across, not piercing.
and this manner of healing is safe from the evacuation of blood and the compression of nerves, and is more effective than stitching the long or the wide.
And to the one whose body is too weak for stitching, it is necessary to give a moist poultice made from grape juice; if he is overheated, let him bleed three or four times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, before the stitching, give him a moist poultice in a honeyed syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-odored syrup.
And if he vomits after the bleeding, after a good flow of blood, it is necessary that he drinks broth made from beef and a subtle, well-odored syrup.
and follow the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wants to vent his arm and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue, continuously.
And if he wants to vent his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he heals in seven hours after the first bleeding, or after nine hours.
And if he wants to heal from another side, then he should heal on the second day or the third.
For there is a great deal of blood inside the body that is already overheated and brings on fever; so it is necessary to let out a large quantity, and dilate the aperture as much as possible. then that you fulfill all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on the parts when they heal, so that death may not come in place of convalescence. and this often happens when the surgeon is negligent;
and it does not happen when you see the arm untied and the blood flowing out the second time, and the aperture is closed, unless you press firmly on it; nor if he is bent, let him straighten his arm quickly, for this would be bad.
but let it stay until it heals the second time; or you should pierce to the tip of the flap, until the blood that is frozen at the opening of the vein issues forth. and put on a little bit of wine soaked in water, and press down gently.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not bind it tightly, until the abscess is calmed down.
And if necessity demands the bleeding of blood the second time, then let him bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein within the arm is stitched instead of the head vein because it is compounded.
And the manner of stitching is that the patient dips their hand in hot water until the blister is red.
then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then let him heal across, not lengthwise or widthwise.
and the aperture should be wide, and it should be stitched well near the joint of the hand, and if the blood cannot issue, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it's in summer, then don't put the hand in hot water again, because one puts it more in winter than in summer;
and the stitching of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve.
The stitching of the wrist on the right hand is worth to all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
strain the hand, and dip it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, so that one can see it. and if the stitching is across, and you cut all around it, then nothing will hurt.
and don't go too far inward, because the nerves are underneath all these layers of flesh,
and then put the hand in hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot issue.
And when you have let out the blood as far as necessary, then put oil and silk on the vein to cauterize it quickly, and do this for each vein.
The surgery of the right hand is equal to the illness of the left mouse, and does the same as I told you on the right side.
The surgery of the Sophen [sciatic nerve] is equal to all diseases that are under the body, such as illnesses of the kidneys, and retention of urine, and disease of the loins, and old hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his surgery is that the patient puts their foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it bleeds. and he presses above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot many urines go.
he then opens up either a larger wound or one at the ankle that is worth more.
And if you make the incision on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below, and make the incision also as when cutting; and let the flames be evenly placed.
And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
And if the bleeding fails at first, then start again the second time above a little bit, because the flesh is salty; nor be afraid of nerves, as we have said, and thus do the same surgery on the other foot equally.
The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of force, and its surgery is worth the pain of the haunch when it's for hot blood.
And the quality of his surgery is that the patient goes into a bath and stretches above the ankle four fingers while twisting.
because otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then cut it in all ways you can, and crossing. and it's worth more than you cut it, because the flesh is salted, and it's very well received by many people.
and it's worth more than you cut it, because the flesh is salted, and it's very well received by many people. And if you don't find it, then make an incision in any vein that opens at the back of the foot or towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves.
and make so much flow of blood as you see, and then loosen the ligament, and put on cotton and tighten it; it is now healed.
The surgery of the poultice
Poultices are made of horns, or tin, or glass; and poulticing is done in two ways: either by wounding and attracting blood, or without wounding.
And this poulticing that is done without wounding is done in two ways: either it is with heat, or without heat;
and two others in the two sides of the neck; and the poultice under the chin; and the poultice on the two shoulders; and the poultice above the hips; and the poultices in the two arms; and the poultices of the two legs; and the poultices of the two ankles; and the poulticing does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and therefore one is not weakened by it, as with surgery of a vein; and it is not necessary that she be administered, neither with heat nor without heat, in any disease that comes from repletion, until all the body is emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to poultice, or for habituations, then we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and every time.
because there are some who, when they have need to poultice, then have a heavy head;
and there are some who find repletion and redness on their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and there are some who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and redden with blood; and there are some who see visions, and behold by night blood and wounded and dead and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order them to poultice after three hours of the day.
The surgery of the mouth helps with the giddiness of the head... which comes to them, and it is not necessary that this be done after the evacuation of all the body;
and this poulticing is in place of the surgery of the cerebral.
and it is not necessary for someone who has a cold complexion to use it, or who has catarrh, because this would cause them great harm;
and therefore it is not necessary for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And those who often cure themselves with it, then become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to put the poultice a little lower down because of the fear of forgetfulness.
The poulticing in the neck is in place of the surgery of the head and the brain, and therefore it is worth it for the constriction of the chest. and for breaking of the channel of the womb, and for all, and for repletion;
and it is necessary to apply it a little more strongly, because if it holds too tightly, it will induce forgetfulness or obstruction of the stomach and heart.
The poulticings on the two sides of the neck are worth it for the pains of the head, and obtalmia and migraine, and for strangulation, and for the pain in the roots of the teeth.
and it is in place of the surgery of the brain; and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to extend their hand when applying, so that they do not cut the artery, and do not cause excessive bleeding.
The poulticings under the chin are worth it for mouth diseases, and for the corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in place of the surgeries of the two lips.
The poulticings on the shoulders are worth it for the disease that comes from heat and repletion.
The poulticings on the sides are worth as much as the three veins of the arm, because it drains blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply in front, because the skin is thin and lies over nerves and arteries.
The suction cup that is on the rump is worth to hemorrhoids of the foundation, and to diseases below, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and be made of earth, so that it may well draw out; and by chance, if they were subtle, they would break; and it would cause great wounds.
The suction cups of the legs so heal manifestly, for they draw out blood from all the body, and are worth to ancient pains of the kidneys, bladder, and urine, and restore flowers; and they are located on the two Sophene regions, and the two ankles, although they weaken the body after long use, and bring forth numbness in many dispositions.
The way to put on the suction cup is that you first put it empty, and suck in a timely manner, and then place it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the red and swollen area, and appear the redness of the blood; then cease, and remove the suction cups, and take heed to the condition of the body, for there are some who have hard flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and somewhat deep ones; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to subtlety the way of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out some little by little, we suffice only once.
And if we wish to draw out a lot of blood, we repeat often; and if the blood is thick, we strike in deep, and the end is that the veins are pierced suddenly.
and it is necessary for one who has thick skin and hard flesh, and who have large pores, that you anoint the places of the suction cups with oil that is appetizing and dissolving. if it is in summer, with purple oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil.
and if it is in winter, with oil of cress, or lily, or chamomile, or another similar one.
And if the superfluities are thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balm oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
And if one is cured with soft flesh and large pores, there is no need to put any oil.
but it is necessary to wash afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of pear, or another similar one.
And one who has a lot of moisture, should get up with ease, or with water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
And those who have thick superfluities should get up with old wine, or water of sycamore, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar ones.
and one does not need to be cured with a suction cup before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one does not sleep after the suction.
and it is necessary that he washes himself when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned. And take heed if one who is being cured is choleric, and the blood is too abundant and inflamed. so it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as ripe grapes, and endive, and lettuce at ease, and similar things;
and young pigeons, and kid's flesh, and moist meats.
And one who has a cold complexion, should take honey syrup, and moderately aromatic wine, which is between old and new, and young pigeons, and small birds, and partridges.
and the day he will be suctioned, he should drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men sometimes treacle or muscade before the suctioning, or after, to comfort the main members; and let the blood be subtlety drawn out, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink this.
The suction cups that are placed without striking are those that are placed on the liver, and on the kidneys, and podagra, and on the belly and the bowels and the kidneys and the genitals, because those members do not endure being struck elsewhere.
and one does this only to draw blood from member to member. such as we put on the nipples when the child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, such as we put suction cups on the belly and on the bowels to reduce the member.
and it removes pain when there is inflammation or abscess; and by its attractive virtue, it happens that the inflammation subsides, or dislodges the abscess from its place.
and thus it does when one puts it on the liver and on the kidneys when there is retained suction.
and these suction cups are administered empty in order to suck as much as possible; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
such as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with warm water only, or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been cooked.
The shape of the suction cup administered by fire is thus:
And it has two inches of width and half a palm in depth, and it has on the edge around the middle one small pit, just as to receive an awl.
and it is of earth, soft before use so that it does not hurt the patient when putting it on the member;
and it has in the middle a bar of transverse earth or iron, to put a candle holder.
and they are great and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
for the suction cups for children are different from those for old people, and for thin ones than for fat ones.
And one must thus put this suction cup on the member:
take the candle holder of wax or one lining, and put it inside the suction cup across the bar that is inside the suction cup. so that the light may be at the bottom of the suction cup, so that it does not burn the patient;
and then put it on the member, and let the two ends be on the pit that we have said, so that when one wants to, the vapor goes out, and one removes the suction cup.
and one takes the lining again, just as before, and renews it often if necessary.
In the cupping glass then which is administered in the disease of pleurisy, at all ages, there is no rod nor puncture, and it is not applied except when it is full of water, and it is placed on the member so only.
and it's like that:
Cups are not applied except in members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in bare bones, such as toes or nails, and other similar ones;
and the quality of the user is that when you find cups that are in sweet and clear waters without perturbation, then take them;
and put one in sweet water, as long as they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be cleansed with wine and cupping glass, then rub the member until it is red, and put the cups on;
and when they are full and burst, then if it is a place where one can put cupping glasses, he puts them, for this is very good afterwards.
If not, then take the place away from air and then from water, well, and then stretch it;
and if the place is still sore after the cups' contact with the body, then soak one linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the cupping glass is contracted;
and if the cupping glass is multiplied, then put on crushed vitriol, or gall, and similar things, until it is contracted;
or you put half a handful of peeled fava beans on the place and leave them until they are cooked at the place, then it will be stanch now;
and if you need more, take other cups.
And if the cups don't want to be taken, then wipe the place with fresh blood or insert a needle until some blood flows, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will be absorbed;
and when you see that they are bursting, then powder on a little bit of aloes and burnt silk or ashes, so they will burst now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a treatment for fracture and desolation.
Know, dear son, that the foolish eye will not gaze upon this chapter, for they have never seen any of the old books nor read them.
and because of this, the art is estranged in our land, for I never found any good one;
and I know nothing about it, except by the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the art, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have abridged it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of instruments that are applied, just as I did in these two chapters before.
It is therefore fitting that we say the prologue to this book, which contains the summaries of words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, unless something else entirely prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or young children, or the elderly.
or if the weather is not very cold or too hot; and besides, cold humors are bad, that is to say, cold chills, and the flesh of hare and of goat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any greasy foods, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about hot abscess or spreading of matter in the member; then revive the patient under their former government which they had used.
And when the broken bones begin to restore, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or if they have viscosity, such as boiled wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and peas, and pork belly, and eel, and fresh fish, and rich wine, and similar things. For with great nourishment the bones are restored more quickly and the fracture is healed sooner.
And know that the bones of old men and those who are decrepit cannot be well restored or united according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as children's bones.
but take no care, reset the broken bone with one big splint that sets and joins the member together, until it is as strong as before; and do not cease from your work, and for this reason you must nourish with rich meats, just as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is one thing and the fracture of the belly or leg is another, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fractures. For there are fractures that occur by being struck, and others by being crushed, such as the cutting of a feather to write.
For there are fractures that occur by being struck, and others by being crushed, such as the cutting of a feather to write. And then there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture in a small split or crack.
And each manner has its own design, and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings forth in its place;
and it is known that the fracture of the bone is by twisting the place, and it becomes apparent by deviation, and sounds under the pressure of the hand.
and when there is no twisting or crunching, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no fracture;
but it may well have a twist, or split, or small fracture. So you must not move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come next, and then gently restrain it now.
And know that the fractures that occur by being struck, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary to put them back together in equal points, lest hot abscesses come into being.
and if hot abscesses come into being, then leave it alone for a day, until the abscess is appeased; then put it back together in equal parts as you can do lightly and skillfully, and know that the restoration of one bone is easier than the restorations of those who have pieces; then restrain it, just as it should be done next.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, and it is stretched to two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or at your hand if it is small members, or to two cords, or to one cord and your hand;
and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, then reset by all means the addictions in their places as much as you can, and take care that through your work there is no injury or pain to the patient.
and join well the two joints of the bone according to the best forms.
And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well: so straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press it as those who cause by their work abscessed heat and contraction in the member, as we have often seen.
And when the member is set, then chastise well the patient so that he does not move it, nor in waking nor in sleeping, nor in turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it must be put in such a disposition that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it must be put in such a disposition that he feels no pain; and take care that it is set correctly, so that there may not come twisting when he is restored.
and the qualities of the broken member are as I tell you.
Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar: so it is necessary to envelop them in cloths of soft and subtle linen.
and those that are large, such as thighs and leg: so it is necessary to envelop them in a wide and sturdy bandage, for the broad bandages encompass all the great member, and restrain it evenly from all parts, so that there may be no crevice.
then tie around light cloths, three turns or four according to the member, and strain your hand a little on all the bandage, then go above the break and restrain it less, so that the break may shift slightly away from the break.
and soften the bandage a little and a little, until you take up a great part of the healthy flesh, then take another bandage, and wrap it around again above the broken bone.
then go back to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, not too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first lesson above.
then put between the bandages cloths of linen or drapes, as long as it is all equal, then tie everything above one binding, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something soothing to the abscess hot, and which removes the swelling, and let it be thus for some days.
then set upon your splints, and be made of half a well-cured cane, or of fir from which one makes cleaves, or of palm bark, and be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint which one puts on the break is a little larger and wider than the others.
and be as long as it is needed for the member of smallness or greatness;
then set upon the splints as you did in the first lesson, then tie above with a thread in a way, as in the first lesson on the break.
and the tighter it is above, the looser below; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen.
for if the threads are thick, like I have seen in the works of fools who do their bandages with cords of linen twisted in a knot, and that is great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not need to have less than two fingers' width between each splint.
And if the patient is wounded by the edges of the splints after the straining in their healthy parts, then put under them cloths of linen or felted wool, so that he does not bleed.
When the wound is with the breakage, and the ligaments are broken, I will speak of its treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not necessary to set splints on all the broken members the first day. For when the members are large, it is not necessary to put splints on them until after five or six days, or more according to your security against abscesses happening.
and see here the manner of ancient plasters to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that remains at the sides of the mill, and mix it with a great many eggs, and put this concoction, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the breakage in various conditions, and indeed for women and small children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring breakage, dislocation, and twisting: take aloes and ladani and inula and assefeitide and gum arabic and mugat, each 10; myrrh and aloe, each 5; alechil 8; and make powder, and mix it with many eggs; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is valuable to many men.
Another manner of plaster that is good for twisting: take mugat and vismalve, each 10; myrrh and aloe, each 8; acaice 6; Armenian bolic 10, and grind well, and mix it with water or many eggs, and administer.
Another manner of plaster for joints and bones that are separated from their places, and soothes the pain that follows, and the use of the bone, and the breakage: take new wool, and soak it in vinegar and hot oil, and put it on the place. These plasters do not restore, but they are good for soothing abscesses hot, and remove properly the pains.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and leaves of terrestrial papyrus, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of plaster for the restoration of bone breakage and to soften the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, camomile, violet flowers, farina of vetch, each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the member is inflamed, mix with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another way to plaster more strongly than the first one, when an abscess persists to the restoration of the member. Take roots of vervain, and seeds of flax, balsam, melilot, and sassafras, and flowers of violets and chamomile, from each take a part; and grind, and mix with saltwater, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the warmth of the member, and its rest.
Hippocrates writes in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with a cerot made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says that it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member to restore it with things dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way to plaster that is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and horsehair of sheared men or bird feathers, and vervain, in equal parts, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it.
And then remove the plaster a little later, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor does their bone move out of its place; if not, do not remove it by hands.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, you hasten and remove it, and take off the plaster now; and take light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and plunge into water, and lift up the area, until the itching ceases, and the pain is alleviated. Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a knot, until you are sure of warm abscess.
And let the inflammation of the member rest, and let the pain be removed, then start again with gentle binding, and a little plaster, and do not strain it so hard as before; and bind gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is gone and red and painful and swollen are all removed from it, and you need to plaster and bind, then start again in the same way as before.
And if none of what we have said comes to the member, then do not remove it until after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it twenty days, according to what is seen, until the broken part is set and approaches the bone's contact with it.
Then restrain it more than before, and let the flesh grow its own fat, as I said before; and if you see the area drying out more than is necessary, know that no nourishment can come. Then rise the member with warm water twice a day, every time you remove it, and gently loosen the binding.
Through this work then cut off the nourishment to the member, and hasten what fools do, that leave the member twisted: it is bad, and it is a laborious and woeful thing, and I see nothing else but languor and right working.
The various ways of breaking [injuries] There are many kinds of breakages and diverse forms, and the causes are assigned.
For there are breakages that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the arm takes away all the bone down to the sacrum which is below the bone, as does a hatchet or a club; and for this reason it is called "hachuring".
Or the sword cuts through the bone above without piercing, and is called this kind of breakage "absolute"; and the wound from these two breakages is great or small.
And if it is an embedded percussion, or a splitting, or a blow from the fist of stone, or from falling on stone, or other similar things.
And if it is a persistent breakage which approaches just to the membrane that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound is reunited in the bone as fine as a hair, and it is a small splitting, and for this reason it is called this breakage "capillary".
and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by something similar, and causes the bone piece to go down, and it is like the holes that blacksmiths make when they hammer on the cauldrons; then the stone goes inside.
And this happens more to those who have or had moist bones, like the heads of infants.
and it happens to all these kinds of breakages where small pieces are torn off, as they are; and I will speak of this in its place.
And we know all kinds of breakages by their subtraction above them, and the inquiry into their tents, and through the corrupt flesh that is above.
The capillary appearance is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it gently above, then opens up the black breakage.
In the treatment of the breakage, take care to note the accidents of the patient, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of blood, loss of intellect, swelling, palpitation, fever ague, and the flesh issuing forth and turning red, and other similar things in many dispositions, then it cannot heal without a doubt.
And if you do not see an unbearable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the 14th day at the latest that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the 7th day, so that the membrane below the bone is corrupted, and come the accidents that we have said.
And if the breakage of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the split part thus: and this is that you take hold of the wounded patient's head, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and above the shape of the wound as gently as you can.
and if bleeding comes to uncover the bone or abscess appears hot, then provide what is needed, and this is that you fill the area with damp cloths in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the hot abscess is calmed and you are assured of no more bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done in two ways: one way is that you cut at the narrow cutting before, and this is the form:
And then put another shape larger than the first one.
And the second manner is that you have diverse shapes, some being narrow and others wide, and pointed, and made of untempered iron; and work lightly, lest you wound the head.
And if the bone is hard and rough, then you must pierce around it, so that you give shapes with rasps, not too deep lest they go beyond the bone of the skull, and it should have above the point a margin or one circle, so that the point does not go beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each becomes its place in the shape of the bone, so that you have rasps for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of rasps:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one rasp on the bone and turn it in your hands until you know the bone has been pierced; then place the rasp elsewhere a little further, and do this all around, then file away the incisors of the bone which is between the ridges, and make it more subtly than you can, lightly, as we have said, so that you bring the bone to your hand or to one of your tools like pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the spine.
And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you rasp off the roughness that remains on the bone to all one another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more tempered and subtler than the other incisor;
and if there remains nothing of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with one of your instruments; then care for the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which the Gauls say, which is more sound; and they love it very much, and this is their word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lenticular incisor, and this is the form:
And do not cut from one side, and the piece is laid in two parts, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you file lightly all around the bone, and take good care of the skin that is beneath.
If it is stuck to the bone, then file lightly, for one files well without harm or fear.
And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the skin, and the bone is filed away only on top, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to remove scales with a subtle scraper which you should have in various quantities, so as to administer in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the break.
So start with large scrapers, and then move on to more subtle ones, and do not stop until it is well.
In each of the other hair-like and subtle breakages, it is necessary that you administer according to its direction; and this is something that is not known to him who has put his study into this art.
And if the spine is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take one linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another doubled cloth in two or three layers, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not injure the spine, then administer above one more layer of linen, and do not stretch it too much as long as it covers only the wound.
and leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is appeased, then untie it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, incense powder, aristology, and similar things; and make powder of these things, and put it on the wound, and administer medicines again without mordication.
and take care that the wound is soon clean, so that you do not leave any ointment there, nor let it assemble bowels, for when bowels assemble on the skin of the brain, they will corrode and burst forth, and bring great harm to the patient; for when something mordant is put on the spine, it will necrotize above.
Therefore take care then, if any bad accidents befall the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if there is no further evil that comes from the medicine you have put on, but it has such virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and glue one cloth, and place it on the spine; then apply the treatment in ways that are necessary until he is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one on its own, because these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only bends or twists, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your small finger or perturbation into the neck, and place this breakage inside your index finger and at the back, as long as the neck returns to its natural shape. and do it lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the neck and cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it equal at the head of a rod slightly large.
And if the break is in two parts, then do it likewise, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can.
if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is appeased, then put a cloth on the head of the neck, with linen cloths, if the break is in one part.
Or you put another on the other side, if there is a break there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the perturbations of the neck.
And some restorers say that the tents should be moistened with butter and changed each day. It does not seem to me that this is well, but it is necessary that they be moistened in a concoction of egg whites, and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage is toughened.
And sometimes one places a bottle or eggshell instead of tents, and if it has a single soft draping around, and holds the breeze, and blows on the patient among them; or does what you see.
And if an abscess forms nearby while you are working there, then put a poultice or damp cotton cloth in oil of rosins, or in one pot of aquilone.
And if the abscess does not form, then put an embrocation by the door, of barley meal and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then put it on light steaming, and do not bind the nearby area.
and if the break of the near area is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for that, then sew the wound, and care for things that are rough, hard, or swelling, as suitable plasters and unguents are.
and if there is no wound inside the near area, then care for tents, and put linseed seeds in it, until he is healed.
of the fracture of the jaw
When the jawbone is broken below, and there is no wound outside, and the break is just so, and is not split in two, only that it is known slightly inside, one recognizes it.
It is necessary, if the break is in the right part of the jawbone, that you put your two index fingers in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is in the left side of the mandible, then put your two index fingers from the right hand, and press the break slightly inside, and bind it with equal force.
And if the break of the jawbone is split in two, then it is necessary that you administer an extension of three parts, until it becomes equal.
And if movements of the teeth occur, or fracture, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put a poultice on the broken jawbone, and put a double drapery on it; and put a great iron plate, well made, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and bind it as tight as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and give him light victuals.
And if you see that the shape is changing, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and put a poultice on it, of mill powder with egg white or barley meal, after you have removed the previous poultice; and put a light woolen cloth on top, and if the poultices harden, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it so until he is healed; many times he is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess forms, then apply what we have said many times.
And if there is a break and wound together, take care that no part of the bone is left; if subtlety to extract with suitable instruments for that.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is none left, then sew the wound if it is large, and put suitable poultices on top to bring forth flesh, until he is healed.
of the fracture The fracture is broken multiple times in front of the shoulder, and the break is such that it is divided into three manners: or it is broken and split in two, with pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
And the work is such when the break has no wound that you have two assistants, so one holds the assistant's tool that feels the fractured forcele; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor unevenness.
And if you need to extend further, then place under the shoulder of the patient a rounded spear of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your need; and strain and lift the forcele, and hold the spear in your hand, so that you put the break in its proper position.
And if you cannot pull the head of the forcele forward because it comes from behind, then it is necessary that the patient lies sovining on his hatedil, and puts a medium-sized pillow under the shoulder; and instructs the assistants to bring down the shoulder, until the bone of the forcele is lifted.
And then bring the break to your hands, and if you find it disjointed, then it is necessary that you split it open; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, then file it with one of the incisors that you have; but put this instrument under the forcele to protect the sac.
and resembles a spoon, and is not uneven, and be as large as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, just as you see, and one handle be wide, and the other handle be narrow, just as is the fracture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then sew the wound, and if the fracture is small, or you doubt it may be a hot abscess, then pack the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
And if an abscess comes, then soak a cloth in oil of rosins, and vinegar, and put it on.
The treatment of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put a poultice on the bone made of mill powder and egg white, and put light steam on top, and put a spear under the armpit, if you need to. Then take a very wide band of palm leaves, about 3 fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the poultice and steam; then take a fine plate of 3 fingers in width and length, and enwrap it around that band, so that the head of the band is pendant. and put the plate on top of the break, and turn the band around the neck, and under the armpit healthy, and under the armpit sick; and straighten each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the break well, and you clearly see that the plate does not move above the broken bone, then rewrap it each day, and when the ligaments relax, restrain it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos,
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, and let it be restored thus, until it is restored; and it is restored in the most at .xxviij. days, and in less to some men.
of the breaking of the shoulder
It often happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes loose, and it does not seem to be inflamed except by touch; so one should dress according to the figure of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all ways you can; then put powder from the mill with a great deal of egg white on the joint, and light bandages, and put on 1 double cloth; then put on a wide and subtle bandage, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there are any threads under the bandage anywhere on the shoulder, take that thread of linen, so that the bandage stays evenly; and then bind it tightly with a large strap, so that the bandage does not move from its place, and watch over each day; and every time it swells, bind it again, and put the bandage back in its place if it gets out of joint, and let the patient sit on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25. And when this number is completed, then release it, and be sure, for it is not bone that becomes inflamed lightly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes before and points under the skin, then fill it with, and remove the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the humerus to calm down an inflamed abscess.
of the breaking of the rib
The rib is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the end. And when it is broken inside, it inclines downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks air, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the cracks in the broken bone, and one senses it well.
And the restoration is that the patient sits up on his back, and puts 1 cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and brings together the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and makes it even in all ways you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put emplaustres and bandages above the subtle bandage of salt, or another light one, and wraps it in 1 cloth, and ties it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the binding back around to the back, and bind it gently, and reward each hour by loosening, and if it swells again, bind it again; and if it is necessary to unbind due to corrosion or pruritus that comes at the joint, or pain or abscess, then hasten and unbind, and remove the emplaustre, and address what has come forth in ways of cures; then reset the emplaustre, and bind it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs does not come forth except in thick places after the back, and at the top inside, and do not bend forth except because they are slippery; and one senses it well by probing the back.
And the restoration is that you put the break even as it should be. And then put an emplaustre and bind with a bandage if you need to.
And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels extremely great pain and piercing, as if from pleurisy, for the bone pierces the skin; and breathes with difficulty, and all, and vomits a great amount of blood, and this is grievous sickness, and the ancients have placed great importance on it.
And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that inflate the belly to push the breakage away from the inside.
We do not do this, unless an inflamed abscess has come before it. And if it has come, then heal it.
And some of us say that one should put poultices on the joint to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the poultice might attract unnecessary substances to the joint due to the condition of weakness.
And some of us say that one should cover the joint with moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the breath around, then take care of the treatment for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure through the bone that pierces the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut open above the joint of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to keep the syphac from happening; and then one must cut the bone, and pull it lightly, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and cure with emplaustres until he is healed. And if inflamed abscesses come, then put wet cloths in rose oil on top of the joint; and cure the joint for as long as necessary to treat the abscess, and be cautious as you can sit on the side where it should be, until he is healed.
of the breaking of the neck
Rarely does the breakage come to the bone of the neck, and it does not often bend forth; and similarly with the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you see that he will not be healed or not, then take heed if you see his hands softening and swelling and dead, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, it does not feel. Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they become numb and feel well when one tightens and pricks them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, if one puts care into it.
And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you see that he will not be healed or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if there is a swelling on the hands, and on top of the back there is windiness and evacuation without will; and when one has soothed him on his stomach, there is evacuation without will. And when he is soothed on his back and wants to belch, but cannot. Know that it is mortal: if one does not labor in his cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, then the thing is more easy.
And the treatment is that you reward him if there is an inflamed abscess, by putting rose oil or egg yolk oil on top of the spine, until he is calmed; then put a soothing and drying emplaustre on it, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed. Et if some bone is severed, so cover on the wound; and take away the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is great, with a suture, then anoint with ointment, extracting flesh, until it is healed; and if the skull of the bone is broken, which is called the "bone of the cow", so put your pouch in your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the poultice and plaster on, if you need it; then strain it, and if there is a severed bone, do that, and take away the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the hip bone
It often happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does, there follows a little diminution at the head; and do long and decline by degrees, and comes to the patient in pain at the spot, and punctures, and swells up what breaks.
And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, until you are above the breakage; and know what kind of breakage it is and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the head, so set equal to that breakage, until it is in natural figure.
And if the breakage is of the length, or it declines inwardly, so make the patient lie on their belly, until the restoration of that breakage appears to you. And when you have set it equal, so put on the poultice, then put on a plaster of wood or horn, and hold the breakage still, so that it does not move; and apply the place below the ribs, until the sides are equal.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if an abscess forms there, do not touch it, until the abscess is calmed down, and put on what we have said before; then come back to the restoration, and hold it still as is necessary, if there is no bad accident; and that is the way.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
The adjutoires is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the arm, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: one of which is that you take one piece of plain wood, about the size of this shape:
And tie the two ends with two strings, and bend them up high, and make the patient sit on one chair; then throw their broken arm onto the wood, until it comes to the desired position, and has about half a covering of wood, then bend it over some heavy thing or let the attendants stretch it down below; then put the mallet on the breakage equal to your hands together, until the breakage returns as is necessary.
And the other manner is that you make the patient sit on their haunches, and tie their hand to their neck; then instruct two attendants to have one hold what is above the breakage in their hands, and the other hold below all one string, and stretch each one to his part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold one string below the breakage and above the breakage, and have each attendant stretch to his part. And if the breakage is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one string in the middle under the seat, and another towards the arm pit, under the breakage; and similarly if the breakage is towards the arm pit, there is a need to put one string lightly, without labor, until the breakage is equal on both the head and the arm pit; then set the breakage equal as necessary, and hold it, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess forms there, do not hold it at all for seven days, and put on a moist poultice in a warm place and with rose oil, until the abscess is calmed down; then hold it, and the manner of holding it is that you put the poultice on the breakage, then bring the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and put the bandage, and hold it on the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is in a steady state, unless something hinders it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use plasters, and put on the breakage a larger and stronger plaster than the others, with about two inches of space between each one, and so that each plaster is as large as it passes over the breakage three inches from each side; then hold on to the plasters, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, stronger and less distant.
And if you see the setting of the plasters and the binding, just as we said, in the work that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, let it be left to bind for seven days, just as we said; then look at each three days the bandage, that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If this happens, do as we said.
And if no such accidents come, do not remove the bandage for more than three days or so, and let the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; and put a cushion made of linen under the shoulder equally, and look at each hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken member does not change, or the bonds do not loosen; if it is directed by the virtue of medicine, and give the food we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is for the first subtleties; and when it begins to recover, let it be thick. And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be recovered in forty days entirely; and then one must remove the bandage and administer baths and medicines of ointments to direct the place. And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, one should wait until it is removed for one day or two months.
Of the breaking of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", of which one is small, and that is the one that supports the pouch; and the other is large, and that is the one that is below, towards the little finger. By chance, break only the large foscile alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
When the small fosciles are broken, the restoration is easy and healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more painful than when both are broken together. If it's the small foscile that's broken alone, it should be slightly extended and made equal.
And if it is the great fissure, then it must be strained more strongly; and extend on one cushion, and hold the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross-legged in front of himself, so that he does not suffer any labor; then extend the attendants' arms to the part below his hand, or to a strap, and another attendant to one above. And then place the patient evenly, according to his best form.
And if the break has fragments, then place each one in its place, and if there is any fragment that holds the key, and you cannot restore it to its place, then proceed with force and osteum, as we have said before.
And if there is a wound with the break, I have spoken of it in a single chapter; then take care.
And if in the beginning of the setting right there come abscesses, then make a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the poultice on top subtly, until the abscesses are calmed. Then remove the poultice, and put in the plaster of mill powder with abundant egg yolk, then place the stitches, and let the stitch be of the break more strong, and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have 7 stitches or arms in multiple dispositions: whether the break is in one bone or two; and strain more on the break than elsewhere, and always less in advancing, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the drapes that are above the break be soft and moist, and not hard nor harsh; and let the thread, with which it is strained, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And reward the member and the strap after some days. And if some bad accident happens to the member, such as pruritus which comes to the member, then it is necessary that you bathe the member with hot water, until those pruritus are calmed; and let the member not at all rest tightly. And then resume the straining, and if the strap is worn out and the bone dislocated, and similar things, then address them.
And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you soften it a little bit, and let it be thus for some days, until the swelling comes, and then strain.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not loosen it until 20 days or so, then bind his hands to his neck, and let his necks be even, and beware of movement and contortion, and sleep on his back; and know that this break is restored in 30 days or so, and by chance in 25 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
(None)
Know that in the back of the hand and among the fingers, there are many breakages, and but few abscesses come.
And when the finger of the hand is broken or bent, then it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged and sit straight in front of him evenly; then place his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the attendants' fingers, and set them even with the mire, until they are well joined; and put a plaster and poultices, if abscesses do not come, then put a stitch according to the quality of the linen; and be wrapped in one poultice of linen.
And if the break is around the knuckle of the finger, then make a sphere of drapes, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken finger; and then strain with a long drape, and let the stitch be as soft as the flesh of the hand, and strain, as it is necessary.
And if the break is at the end, then it is necessary that you put a stitch on top, and another one below in the finger, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind everything around the hand, and stop the strap between the fingers.
And if the break comes to any of our fingers, except for the thumb, then set it even, as is necessary; and bind with the finger, and see if you put a straight small stitch to lift the break, and does not move; and if the break is in other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, then set it even, and bind with the healthy finger that comes after; or you bind them all together, just holding what's worth it, or you put a stitch on top, like on the thumb; and take care in the restoration and disposition of abscesses hot, and address what comes, as I said.
(None)
The bone of the ankle is often broken, and one can see when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that you tie one strap above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then each attendant stretches his strap to his part evenly; and that is when the break is in the bone.
And if the break is close to the root of the ankle, then one of the straps goes towards the elbow, and the other strap below the break. And also if it is close to the knee, and then the strap is placed below the knee, and the extension is downward; then put the mire on the bone evenly with both hands, until it is according to its natural shape, and then put a plaster, and bind, if abscesses hot do not come.
And if there is an abscess hot, then let it be calmed and then return to your work and your care; the binding is done in this manner. It is necessary that you wrap the break with a bandage of double thickness in two or three layers, and remove any superfluous parts; then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the knee, and put a long thread between the ankle and the leg, below the knee, and let the ends of the thread come up; then turn the bandage over the leg and ankle, then put stitches on the break, and put one stitch above the bone of the leg; then apply the leech between the leg and ankle with soft drapes to equalize the binding, then begin to bind firmly in three or four turns around the break; and as you go higher up the break, and less you strain; then attend to the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and ankle, and tie three stitches that are above, then return down to the bottom of the thread, until you come to the foot; and bind, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, unless there comes an abscess or swelling or any other similar thing.
And if there is, then dislodge it and set straight what comes forth, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pinch, then one must split it open, if possible; and if not, then one must cut through the ligament, and pull forward; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And any time the case is broken, one puts in splints, as in an arm or leg; nonetheless, in this restoration made it does not harm the patient.
And know that the case is restored in one day, or perhaps less or more, according to the diversity of temperaments.
of the hollow of the knee
Know that in the hollow of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, then it's just a split or a perforation, and it has to be treated for every wound, and without a wound, and this one knows well.
And the restoration is such that one sets equal those things which are torn to their joints, as long as it can be assembled; then put an ointment, and put in a rounded splint, if you need it, and strain it as it should be, then reward all the dispositions we have said for other breaks, just like aposteme heat and similar things; and put what is needed to each accident, until it is healed.
of the break of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "malleolus" and the other "fibula"; and it has all the same breakage as it comes to the arm, and therefore the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the work is all done.
And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg from all sides.
And if the thin bone is broken, then it turns forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, then one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns below. Then apply an extension, and set it equal, and tie the splints evenly; but nonetheless, it's necessary if the break is ugly and there are more pieces, that the extension be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your strength.
And when you have completed all your work, take two pieces of split wood that correspond to the length of the leg from one end to the other, and wrap them around the leg with bandages on top and bottom, and tie it in the middle as well; and so the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and some people wrap a wooden splint along the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and one puts the leg to prevent movement, and properly does what is needed for the break or wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is aposteme heat or another accident; and cure it until it is healed.
of the break of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no breakage, but sometimes the bones of the foot do break and the toes are a little bent, and it's nothing more than some slight movement.
And if the bones of the foot break and you see those bones overlapping each other, then set the patient's foot on the ground, as if it were going to walk; and then put your own foot on top of his, at the place where the bones are lifted up; then press down so they return to their places; then apply an ointment and cover with a cloth on top, and put underneath the belly of the foot a small tablet with two full cheeks; then tighten it to the foot accordingly; and when you have wrapped bandages around, and other things that you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, then loosen the binding, for you will find the bones equalized, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are some broken toes, then restore them, as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken toe a splint according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place underneath the foot that tablet which I mentioned, and strain it accordingly; and if there are three or four or more broken toes, then put a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and strain the tablet underneath the foot; and let it be so that the ventral part of the foot is held firmly.
And it's necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breaks, as we have said; and treat each accident as it should be.
of the break of the thumb bone
When the natural bone of a woman is broken, make her sit with legs apart, then bend her towards the back part, and hold her steady from behind; then fill the opening with cotton, and put in as big as one stone; then lift the woman up, and slowly lift the back part, and then the cotton will jump out until it reaches the entrance of the natural bone, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, take away the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back on, and do this for seven days or so: then the break will be restored, and if you see that it is, take a bladder of herbs, and tie a string around the perforation, and pour all the bladder into the natural opening; then blow into the string strongly until the bladder is emptied inside: the natural bone will return to its place; then fill with cotton, and leave it like this for some days, until it is healed.
And when the thumb bone of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said for the hip bone; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and practice into it, and intends to read my book. For the break indicates the right path of restoration in many dispositions: then heed this.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and pour it into the penis; then wrap bandages around it, and let it be for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
of breaks with wounds
It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, and the wounds that we have said testify to this.
And if the wound heals, then keep it moist with vinegar, if you have nothing else; then begin again to restore the break in that same hour or day, lest apostemes come.
And if an abscess forms there, then let the restoration wait until the ninth day, so that the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is appearing above the skin's surface, then it is necessary that you set it slightly to your hands, at a small extension.
And if the extension is not suited to set equal with your hands, then reamend this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the surgeon to take 3 or 4, according to what he needs in each breaking treatment; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend much under compression on the limb at your work, and be sharp before, and thick from halfway forward thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which reason it is necessary that the curved bone be placed on top of the apparent bone; and tie it once, until it recovers, and be equal one against the other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you trim the top of the bone, until the instruments have possession.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, or chisel or saw, to your ability; then ream out what remains in the bone of roughness and small scraps.
And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do as much as necessary to put it back in its place, then soak one cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly dress it; and do not put anything on the wound except oil until you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and trim the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the breakage; and many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, and they have brought suffering or death or corruption upon the patient at times; and the bandages should be softer and more gentle than those for other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that evil events may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not necessary to put on bandages; but wrap around, instead of bandages, hard cloths, and tie them. And when you see after one or two days a bow-like shape forming on the wound, then remove what you have placed on top with all wine, and apply ointment for healing wounds, such as ointment tetrafarmac and similar things.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb two times a day, morning and evening, until it is bound up and healed.
And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bow-like shape runs down slowly.
And if many days pass and it cannot heal but instead returns to being bowed, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which reason it is necessary that you cleanse the wound with a tent, and remove all these devitalized pieces that bring about that pain.
And if a fistula comes to the site, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in its chapter before this. And when the bone is broken and appears on the limb, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder, and other similar ones from the great limbs, do not remove it, for many times death comes, but let it be until it has purged; by chance it will come out after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of bruises that come on the swelling
We often see this after the healing of a break, especially when it is near the jointure, and it is a sad thing to behold the shape of the limb; and by chance the limb cannot perform its natural actions.
Take care then if we are fresh: administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarsaparilla, acaica, and similar others, in such a way that you take some of these things or all together, and mix them with black wine or with abundant urine or with oil; and put it on the boil at night in cauldrons, and strain it well, and do not remove it for several days; then remove it, and begin another one, until the swelling is gone; or you can bind it with a piece of cloth well made; for the properties of cloth are such that they remove all swellings from the limbs; and if the nodulation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, then cut it away, and make the superfluity apparent; or have it done by any razor, until it is removed, and cure it as long as it remains unhealed.
When the bone break is restored and the limb remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not allow the nourishment to reach the limb; or because of excessive swelling; or because of great movements, but not at its proper time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and give their body nourishment until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths to them, and give them joy and ease; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the swelling often subsides with warm water, until the nourishment flows to the limb; and return to its natural shape.
of the twisted limb after healing
When the limb is twisted after healing, and the broken bone appears, and the shape of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those foolish people who say that one must break the limb all over again; many foolish doctors have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great evils come from it, and by chance death itself; however, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, then it is necessary to rise them with warm water, or cook soft herbs such as vervain leaves, roots, and melilotus, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, such as one made with dyaquilon well done, and take the mucilage of vervain and mix it with goose fat or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top; or take figs that are fatty, and grind them with flax seed, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
And sometimes the swelling is removed by constant and continuous friction with moist hands. And it should be massaged gently every hour.
And if the twisting is inflamed and hardened like stone, and it needs to be cut with iron, then it must be covered just to the bone, slightly incising finely; and put sense and study into the treatment.
There is no sentence to translate in this case, as "Ci encomence li livres des dislocations" appears to be the title or heading of a section within the text, rather than a sentence to be translated.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to someone, then one must immediately restore it.
For if one delays, the swelling increases, and by chance, if one puts pressure on the swelling; therefore it is not good to move it until it has subsided: many times this brings on shame and other pains.
However, when this happens, one should cause the patient to be healed, then leave it alone, until the swelling has been alleviated; then arise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head down to the feet.
of the jawbone
It often happens that the jawbones are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: or they are slightly removed from their place, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot be held, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in a few positions.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must immediately reset it, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and place the mirror's pouch from one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is two-thirds; and the other two hands be free, to make equal; and instruct the patient to relax his jawbones, and move them from all sides.
And the mirror places it evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if it is difficult to return, even if they are the two jawbones together, then raise them with warm water and oil, until you gently reset them; nor delay in returning, as we have said.
And when they are returned evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well with some softening, then place wet cloths on it, made of rose oil and wax, and tie it gently with moist ligatures.
and the patient sleeps on his back, and his joints being between two cushions, so that he does not move or strain to the right or left, nor does he exert himself to eat much, but takes light food, until the pains are removed, and the jawbones are relaxed.
and then moderate what he eats lightly, and does not trouble himself to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jawbone is well relaxed and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be returned to their place within an hour, and are not converted back to their position, then fever and usual habit come to pass, and by chance, solution of the belly, and by chance, vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and often the person who has it dies within eight days.
of the shoulder
The shoulder cannot dislocate from the front into its continuity and towards the chest, and is dislocated at times to the back, and it is well felt.
And the restoration is that the patient lies sovain on his back, and stretches out his arms; then presses the dislocated place firmly against your palm, and it will return; then apply the ointment and bind it tight.
and the bone that is towards the shoulder cannot dislocate; if not, and if it does dislocate at times, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply the ointment and bind it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
and similarly is reset the bone of the spine, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: one of which is that it dislocates at the part below the armpit; and the second is at the part towards the chest; and by chance it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely.
and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times dislocates below towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, because then it jumps forth quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps with a thud, and returns with a thud.
And by chance it happens to some men that there is a blow or crushing, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it has dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary that you inspect it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it goes down towards the armpit, and makes a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity. and you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and below the armpit towards the toucher the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an os; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move any movements.
and also, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the toucher.
and this manner of dislocation is not other than to be reset when it is new or if the child is sick.
And the method is that the attendants lift the patient's hand up high, then place their fingers below the armpit, and lift the jointure with force to its place; and the attendants lift the hand, and stretch it out high, then put it back down; so it will come quickly.
And if it doesn't come as we said within three days after, then it's necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the attendant should use gentle and soothing remedies, such as a decoction of alecost, fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and apply them.
Then instruct the patient to sit on their back, and place underneath the pillow a sheet of wool equal in thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the mirror under the patient's heel on the sheet, and lift the shoulder joint correctly, and guide the patient's hand.
and another assistant holds the patient's head, so that it does not move downward; now the shoulder comes back to its place, and if you see that it is reset in this way:
and that you make sure there is a person present, one who is greater than the patient; and be standing on the side, and push the shoulder under the pillow of the patient, and lift the pillow high, so that the patient hangs in the air. and another assistant guides the patient's hand downward towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, then let him carry something heavy with him, and the dislocation will come back now.
And reset it also in another way: and that is, to stick one long iron rod into the ground, so that its head is as level as a piston, and neither too big nor too small. Then place it under the patient, but so that there is a soft cloth above, and the patient's arm be extended downward from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not return by all these things we have said, then do this treatment: take one iron rod two arms thick and three fists wide, which has the head rounded so that it can enter easily into the depth under the pillow, according to this form:
then tie it on top of the wooden beam with a soft cloth, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then place it under the pillow of the patient; and stretch your arm over the long rod, and tie the assistant on top of the rod, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on one shoulder of an easel wide, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is done, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that you place under the pillow a sphere of equal wool, then put the poultice wrapped with powder from the mill, with incense and an egg yolk, on all the shoulder and around, then strain the poultice under the pillow comfortably, and turn the cloth over the poultice, and enfold the hand in its own neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he rest a little, until the members are comforted, for he will heal more quickly; and then let him rest again after five days or seven, and move him; and if he is firm and has not been softened, then he is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come in, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as described before in the chapter on cauterization.
And if you do all this and after seven days he still does not hold, and the joint will not lift his arm up, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation which is near the chest or breast or behind, is caused by impulse and stretching of hands, and another method is administered; and treat until it is healed.
And if after healing comes swelling in the member and tardiness of movement, then have the patient take many baths until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder joint is displaced at points, and returns at points; and if it is displaced from all sides, and especially before and behind, and the dislocation is not corrected, for one can see it well and feel it well; and displace according to each figure. And when you join the diseased shoulder with the healthy one, then it can be seen clearly. For the joint is deformed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the abscesses do not come to life again, for if the abscesses were to form again, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance it cannot be fully reset from all sides, especially when it is behind; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance it brings death.
And the restoration is such when it can be reset that you stretch his hand to your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around, above, and below, and push the joint to its crevices together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and pushes the shoulder which is displaced from its place at the root of the palm.
And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension; and have two ministers extend the arm, and hold it in place with their hands, so that it does not move at all from the extension; then turn the arm of each side, after you have wrapped a double-layered cloth long and wide.
and when the nurse has joined the joint to her hand, she anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then pushes the joint gently, until it returns.
and when it is at its place, then put on a poultice with egg yolk and hold it gently, and bend the arm to the neck of the patient, and let him rest for some days, then release.
And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the bandage and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the poultice and the bandage, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then release.
And if he feels swelling after the setting of the joint, and it becomes inflamed, then bathe him and gently rub him, and press until it is alleviated; or you put a sheep's fat snow on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make it enter into the bath. and when he sweats, then gently rub the joint, then put the snow back on, and then enter into the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see, then put hay of moist vetch warmed with butter, and hold it there; and it will return to its natural state.
Hand dislocation
The jointure of the hand dislocated, and the return is light, more than the other joints Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place promptly, in the same time that it is dislocated, so long as the swelling remains or an abscess forms hotly.
And the return is that you place the ailing hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers of the hand, and the fingers put it even, so that it places its palm on the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it recovers.
Nevertheless, you should look to see if it is well in place; then have the patient put the back of his hand on a table for stretching and returning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient put the back of his hand on the table, and the fingers put their hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
If not, then strain ointments soothing abscesses hotly, and leave it thus without recurring.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it in place after some days, the joint remains twisted;
and nothing is worse for the patient than until the hand is softened, and he cannot strain any thing at all: then know that the nerves are strained, or the arteries; so there is no other remedy worse than to strain by fire cautery in this case, and perhaps it is not worth anything.
And when the hand is in place, put on the ointment that we have said, then strain and leave it five days, then release and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, then soak the water hot, and rub it until he is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At times the fingers of the hand are dislocated at each part, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the wrist;
Then the fingers are straightened, and hold the dislocation in your hands until it recovers, then support the tip of the finger, and guide it towards the part where it is separated;
and leave it for two days, then put it even on that day; and tie the nut, as we have said, and release it from day to day, and make it move, and tie the nut again; and do this often until it is straight.
and do the same thing if it is dislocated in the wrist of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same thing when it is dislocated on the other side.
of the dislocation of the hip of the back
When the hip of the back or of the neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, then there is no remedy, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations jump forth without will, nor can he hold it, and many times some member is softened, or both legs or one arm or two.
And many times the hip moves into four parts; that which moves at the back is called "giltosis":
The remedy is that you restore it if the giltosis has come from childhood: if there is no remedy nor healing for all.
And that which comes from falling or beatings or similar things, the ancient manner of cures say by big words, but there is no great benefit in all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the giltosis which comes at the front of the belly, there is no remedy nor health;
and also that which comes directly in two sides, and one cannot cure anything except for that which comes at the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched on his back in one place even, and have a strain underneath him, so he does not get hurt.
then drive one iron stake into the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage around the patient's hips, and thighs, and knees, and ankles;
and two ministers know the bandages, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes;
and be well closed, the stake as we have said, and the fingers put their palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
And if it does not recover by this cure, then take a board three arms long, and carve a hole underneath the appearance, and have the patient lie on their side, and put the head of the board under the appearance, then place the middle of the board on the spine; and have the fingers put their feet on the other head of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, then do it with the turning wheel that turns at the hand.
And it is that you drive two stakes at the head of the patient's arm, one long and another short, and have between each stake, outside and underneath, a palm of space about an arm's length;
and have in each stake one hole, where the turning wheel runs, and be the stakes firmly in the ground, so that they do not move; and between each two stakes be a turning stick, upon which the turning band turns, and have in each two turnings two small sticks of an arm's length, to turn the turning wheel;
and then tie the band that is between the hips to the turning wheel towards the head, and the other band towards the feet to the other turning wheel, and each of the ministers turns his wheel around all the band, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, then put on drying ointment with plenty of oil, and then the bandages, and then an ester of a tablet three fingers long that will establish the place of the giltosis and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use gentle massage on the patient, until he is healed.
and if nothing comes at the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer soothing and softening medicines, with the ester that we have said before; and sometimes administer one piece of linen.
and sometimes the appearance comes at the back of the spine in the back, and it seems to be dislocation; and it is the bone that opens up, therefore one should not have any presumption about it: by chance it might bring death.
dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come to dislocations, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiii. parts: inward and outward, and before and behind; and more inward than outward, and less dislocated before and behind.
And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and shows more clearly the diseased knee than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot bend their knee at the fire; and it is the lump that is below the swelling of aposteme hot, because the head of the hip comes away.
And the sign of him to whom it happens outward is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of him to whom it happens before is that he is well in his leg according to fulfillment; however, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells with anger, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind is that he cannot straighten his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and the head of the hip is at the level below the ribs.
The remedies for this likeness of dislocation are that you restore whether the dislocation is old and it remains according to its disposition, if there is no care; and it is not necessary that he have presumption.
And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the three kinds of dislocation, you hasten to return the joint, and stretch it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it will come back, and there is no need for another care.
And if it does not come back in this manner, then it is necessary that you find one strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one bandage tied above the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in the same manner that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens a soft bandage above the hip; and another ties the end of the bandage.
and they stretch up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of stretching is common to the three likenesses, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then it is necessary to apply a cure to its likeness. When the dislocation is in the parting, you must soothe the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage on the root of the hip, and the end which is below the anger, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the anger, and towards the forehead;
then take another minister's arms, and encircle the thick part of the diseased hip, and stretch it outward strongly: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage on the two heels, and on the two knees, and be the diseased leg stretched two fingers more than the others;
then be hung up on the head of a tree, and be above ground two arms long; then command one minister to encircle the head of the hip, and let another minister hang with the patient, who will encircle strongly the hip, for the jointure returns now hastily.
And when the dislocation is outward, the patient lies down, as we have said in that one with gilbosity, and stretches a bandage properly over the diseased leg, and also over the belly.
then place two hot irons, one at the head and another at the feet, then stick one iron between the patient's hips in the middle form; and let there be placed damp cloths around, so that the patient does not get hurt, then each minister stretches towards him, and the physician puts equal pressure on their hand to the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, put them on a table, and press them thus as we have said in gilbosity, and let the patient lie down on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is before, it is necessary to stretch the diseased leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the physician's hand on the angry diseased hip, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is outward, it does not need to be stretched down or lifted up to the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated outward, as we have said about lying on two hips. and be on their face, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table.
and it will be so when the patient stretches their legs and they are equal; then bring together the hips, put the plaster, and stretch with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
and if it rests three or four days, then loosen it, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are equal, then stretch, just as before, and leave it. Three days; then loosen it, and make them walk well, until the limbs are comforted.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward; and does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend their leg to their hip, and if it does not bend to its hip, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and stretch their leg if they can, and put your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet.
then take their knee in your palms, and bring it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee strongly; and another minister stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that they bend their leg gently to their hip.
et put the poultice on, and make the leg bend at the knee, and bind it together strongly for .iii. days or .iiii., then release it; and do not trouble the patient to walk until the members are comforted.
And if the member is not set, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of gout, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heel is sometimes swollen and sometimes completely dislocated and in the back and forward.
And the signs are that the ankle is inflamed, and tends towards the part where it is dislocated:
the return of movement is slower, and one must stretch it slightly by hand when it is swollen only.
And when it is fully dislocated, then you must have the patient sit upright and hold him with one minister outside by the leg, above the ankle;
then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left .ii. times, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot nicely up high;
and do this .ii. times, as we have said, pushing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, then repeat the work, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then have the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix one strap firmly to the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around so that he does not harm himself;
then hold the thigh with one minister, and another minister stretch out the foot to their hands or to a cord which they tie on the ankle of the foot; then stretch each minister equally, and the straps be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when one is stretching him;
then place the mirrors equally on the dislocation in their hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is in place, then put the poultice and bandages on top, and strain strongly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the cord is not too tight.
then leave it .ii. days or .iij., and if the bandages loosen, then strain; then release it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for .iiii. days; and if he walks before that term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses arise from this, then it is necessary to treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
knees
When the knees are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them gently without effort, and that is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in some knot of the back of the foot, then it is necessary to have the patient sit on one level or on .i. table entirely straight, and put your foot on what appears from these joints, then press with your foot strongly, until it returns;
and when it is even, and there appears nothing, then put beneath the sole of the foot a table at two knees, then strain strongly, and leave it for .iij. days, then release it; and make him rest, until he is healed.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times happen that the patient dies:
so do not be presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, nor hasty;
and use at the beginning gentle things to appease the abscess hotly, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, so that the abscess hotly may come;
and when the member is at its place, then administer things to appease the abscess hotly, and treat the wound, as it is necessary, with drying ointments.
and if there is breaking with the dislocation, and small bones separated, then extract them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth doing so according to thy Creator, and by the knowledge of thy arm and thy body. Amen
