O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the final part of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have reached the end through its explanations and clarifications.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 And because the work of hands is rejected in our region and is foreign in every way, thus the science is lost and diminished, and nothing remains of it except for small descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 And from this come errors and vanities, and intentions are closed off and science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 Or it seems to me that I want to enliven this treatise together with its arrangement according to the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the shapes of the cautery irons and other tools of the work with the joining of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 And for this reason that no good masters of the art are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of them, and their movements and rests, and the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	 Et pour cela dit Hippocrate que le nom avec le nom est beaucoup, et avec l'œuvre est peu; et de même dans l'art de la main.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 And we tell you in the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above should guard against falling into error and harming people; as I have often seen many who engage in this science and abandon their own knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 Because I saw a foolish physician who cut into an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he cut into the arteries of the neck; because of which so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 And I saw another physician who removed a stone from a man with water, and the stone was large; so he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew that if it was cut out, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 And saw another doctor who took care of the Duke of our land, whose leg was broken and with the break came a wound; and the doctor, full of ignorance, reset the break over the wound at the bones with great force, leaving no space for air in the wound, and left it thus for a time; and commanded that it should not be unbound; and so remained until the leg became completely swollen and the foot, and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come and unbind the leg; and when I unbound it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 But all the same, the corruption was already established in the limb and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 And thus another doctor who opened an abscess caused it to fester, and then set it on fire by the evil of his mastery.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 For a cancer, when it is purged of black bile, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove what is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, the work where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 For this reason, it is necessary that you protect yourself, so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you. Therefore, take your arms in confidence, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the terrible diseases of serious illnesses; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galen said in one of his admonitions: "Do not take on a serious illness, lest you be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 The first chapter is about fire cautery and cold medicine cautery, and the chapter is arranged from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the iron tools for cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is arranged and the forms of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is arranged from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 Just as we recall the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of the help and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest speech and most subtle science and secret response; and many of the wise have spoken about this and agreed upon it; but their words suffice me little, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 I say that fire cautery universally helps all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 In hot and dry complexion together with matter, some have debated and said that fire is of great help; and others said the opposite: that fire is of no use against diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 For the nature of fire is hot and should not be used to treat hot diseases by heat nor by dryness; and he who said the opposite said that fire is of great help against hot and dry diseases in the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 When you examine the body of the man and his moisture in relation to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 For I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 Yet nonetheless, let no one interfere with this except for those who have experienced it, and who know through long practice the art of cauterization, and the diversity of men's complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the outcomes and the duration of time; we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 And all the physicians gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 And know, son, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than cautery with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 Because fire is simple and does not spread beyond the member that is burned, unless it can be prevented.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Burning medicines spread from one member to another and bring serious illnesses to the members; and by chance they kill the patient. Fire, because of its intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is excessiveness.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	 And thus I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into this art, based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me to take away the secret that is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 And know, son, that they agreed upon what time the cauteries should be done, and chose patients.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 And I say that cautery is suitable in all seasons, because the harm that occurs is remedied by the aid of cautery; and likewise if the cautery is necessary for pain, it must be done quickly and urgently, before greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 And do not ever think of it this way, dear son, as the foolish physicians do; for a disease that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cautery is nothing more than medicine which moves the complexion, dries the humors that cause pain, and is more effective than medicine due to its speed of action, and the power of its work and dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	 And it is possible that the illness comes at times according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the illness and its power; and superfluities are gathered in him through the consumption of food and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in the place where there is little superfluousness and moisture, such as tooth cauterizations for pain, and similar things. And such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cautery is worthwhile after medicine, but their intention is false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any illness and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 The ancients said that cautery with gold instruments is more effective than iron, and they said this not foolishly but because of the quality of gold and the excellence of its substance; and they said that the place of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true for I have proven it, and I have found that it is true in some cases; and cautery with gold is more effective than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 However, when you heat a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot enough by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly; and if it is heated too much, it melts in the fire; and thus there are many obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 Et pour cela nous utilisons la cautérisation au fer que nous avons préparé pour notre travail.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 And I have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, so that it may be easier to find the vein.
dou cautere olivaire	 of the cautery for the eye
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 This cautery is used for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two reasons for it: one is due to an illness called "soda," and the other is due to various humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and because of numerous dreams and toothaches and throat pain, and especially for all illnesses that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a solvent medicine cleansing the head III or IV times, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can bear; and then make the back of the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on a heavy weight; afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your fingers will meet, let it bleed from there, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place it on the marked spot, and in descending and pressing your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand immediately, and check the spot if you see the bone I inch; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a pinch of salt, and put inside soft cotton, and place on the spot, and leave it for III days; then place a moistened cloth in butter; and leave it on until the burn is gone; afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	 And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges; and therefore, it helps to move (the body).
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 And some of them said that one must let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burnt, and then scrape off what has been burnt from the bone, and it should be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 And others say that one must let the cautery burn until it removes part of the bone, and press so hard that one removes a piece of bone as large as a spindle, which women use in their distaffs, so that the humors are moved out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, one should cure and suture it.  />
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 And these two types of cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is fear; and I think that I should leave it; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we prove in other members; and likewise when the patient's head is naturally weak, and the first appearance of cautery seems safer and more beneficial to me, I use this work together with salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 Of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 When chronic pain comes to the whole head and lasts long, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and of purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes him the cautery that we have said before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Take care if the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize under this cautery a little that we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 Afterwards, make a cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place that is called "vasselz"; and this place is where one puts cupping glasses; and lighten your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be finer than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	 Of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the eye is purged with purging medicines, and other treatments have been done as I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then make cauteries in two ways, that is, with cold medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 The cautery with cold medicine is such that you take a clove of garlic and remove the skin and place it on both eyes, then make an incision in the temple where the pain is located in such a way that you can put the clove of garlic under the skin; and when it is placed, tie and bind it well and leave it thus for XII hours; and then untie it and draw strongly over the clove of garlic, and leave the wound thus for II days or III; then apply a poultice soaked in butter as much as possible.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 Après le cure d'ognement, tant qu'il soit sanez; et se tu veus si fai ceu d'aucunes medicines comburantes que j'ai escripes en un dosme de traitier des medicines comburans.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 Prens le bout del fer qui fu dez ove et en chaufler a grans flammes.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 Por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta man que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 After put cotton in vinegar water, and place it on the spot for III days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then cure the spot of inflammation until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare," do so at the tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	 of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 When you cure migraine as we have said before in the division of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery mentioned earlier in medicine and iron does not suit him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and then place it on the painful spot for about a line and a half long, and remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not cut the artery and do not reach the bone; and beware of the jawbone that moves when one chews, and let the nerve only move as much as it moves, and let spasm not come to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, where there is great fear both for the one who knows nothing about it and who is not a student or experienced; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in place in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And if you see that this cautery does not suit the disease, and the patient is tolerant, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 of the ear pain from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When ear pain comes from cold, and one has worked on it with medicines that dissolve and other treatments as we have said in the section, and the pain does not change, then heat this cautery which is called "point", of which here is the shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Après that you have punctured all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and you move away a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place; and there should be ten points around each ear; then treat the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	 Of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 Torture that should be cured by cautery is nothing other than those caused by phlegm, as we have said in the division of illnesses; and do not make any cautery on similar cases that come from dryness or paralysis.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 When you treat this type of torture that comes from the phlegm of idres and purges of the head and gargle, and if it does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery on the healthy part, and make the cautery at the top of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as one finger; and leave the cautery until half the curd is burned; this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And it resembles the cuirass we mentioned earlier, but it is a bit more subtle and the blade should be slightly larger; afterwards, treat the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, one in the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	 from lead
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large doses and purifying pills for the brain; afterwards, wash the entire head of the patient, and apply on the occiput the mustard plaster that is written in the treatise on plasters; and this is the method of cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 If he is healthy thus, good; and if not, let him receive III cauteries in the middle of the head descending to the neck, and let there be between each cautery II fingers' width; and treat as with the others, and if you see it gather, and the patient is enduring, give I cautery in the middle; and if necessary, II more on the two temples, and treat until it is healthy; and let the cautery be called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	 of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 The head should be cleansed of hair and what we have said before; then wash the patient's head, then give him a cautery in the middle of the head and on each temple, and I behind, and III on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is advanced, give IV cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; then treat until he is healthy, and let the cautery be called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	 of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 The epileptic should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and willing to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if it is a child who cannot endure it, give him gargles and chew treatments to modify the brain often with good foods; after that wash his head in the middle, and there make a cautery as we have said before, and a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and willing, make cauteries as I have said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If the patient is a child, perform the subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 When because of melancholy there are superfluidities or corrupt moists and thick phlegm, then use the caustic cautery as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And if because of melancholy the superfluities tend towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will purify their brain, as described in the previous section.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After washing the patient's head, make a linen bandage well-shaped like a circle, and place it on their head; and the patient sits cross-legged, and is held securely from all sides; then present the liniment, made with old ewe's butter, and warm it moderately by fire so that two fingers can touch it without burning; then empty the circle into the head, and leave it to cool; and do this for each patient once a week with good management until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Where you see cauterization done by making several points throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This manner of cautery softens the scalp equally; and then apply a piece of cotton soaked in butter and goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	 of the eye socket
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 When it first comes to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to cleanse the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 Then command him to shave his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent is into both eyes together, or one if it is into one; and cut through all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then staunch it with as much power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des artères et à l’incision la prudence dont tu te serviras; et parfois on cautérise ou incise sous les deux os de derrière.
dou cors des larmes	 of the body's tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 When the tears of the eyes are old and customary and are on the veins or near the arteries that appear on the surface of the head; and it is seen that this comes from cold phlegmatic excess, then he should do the cautery as I said at the beginning: one cautery descending towards the eyes, one cautery in the middle of the forehead, two cauteries on each temple, and two cauteries in the hollow beneath the two bones; and if there is further need, then cauterize wisely above the hairline with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 of the body tears inside the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient to drink three nights of cochies; after that, anoint his head and make a cautery in the middle of the temples; and make two cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, one a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the tissue of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 because here is the shape:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if you see this, make two cauteries on the two sore places as long as the sores are; and do not leave your hand until the third part of the skin is burnt, according to what I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	 the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes is converted to the eyelid, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries in two ways: that is, by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 When they are born and are equal, then put the patient in your health; afterwards, trace on the papery of the eyes a figure that is similar to the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then place moistened cotton with egg white and musk on the eye, then heat the cauterizing iron which has this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterwards, cauterize over the figure that you have traced little by little many times, so that the hair is burned in that place; and the sign of the healthiness of the work is that you see the papery retracted, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then remove your hand, and leave it thus for III days, then place moistened cotton with butter until the scalding is gone; afterwards, continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And if the hairs come after that, and the skin is softened then recommence the cautery on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize it so that the skin is raised to its natural place, and be even, and let not the hairs prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and vive chalz, each one .З., and grind them well together; and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the skin of the eyes; and if the disease is in one eye only, then work in one, and if in both equally; and put moistened cotton below the eye with egg white; and let the patient's eye be in your hand and place your finger showing on the medicine, and press the bag and the egg white every time the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for he feels the biting as if by fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the bite has passed, lift the area of pain, and observe if you see the skin raised as if it had been raised by the constriction of fire or by an incision; and if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If not, then apply more medicine to the area where the medicine has not worked until your actions are equal and your eyes are focused; then place moistened cotton in butter until the burning heart falls, then treat the ointment site which is called «dyafenis» and others, until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you need to guard yourself well in your work with great caution that no medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the treatment again on the place that has been softened by the paper properly, as you did before; afterwards, cure it until it is healed; and this is the shape of the leaf of the myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not answer the straight way for him who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 On the treatment of fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When you treat a fistula as we have said in the classification of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to it in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 Command the patient to place his head on your hand; and the minister should hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does he lower his head; afterwards, put dampened cotton wool in vinegar or juice of parsley on the eye; afterwards, heat the cautery which is thus: and it is shaped at the top like the quill of a goose feather, along with the cautery; if you wish, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, let it be like a tent; but nonetheless, this one which is shaped is worth more for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 Afterwards, press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then open it, and draw forth the pus; afterwards, place a very hot cautery upon it, and hold your hand at the cautery near the tip above the eye, so that your hand does not burn; and put the cautery into the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you come at the beginning of the cautery to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, then restart the cautery again one more time, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; afterwards apply a cotton cloth soaked in butter, and continue the dry treatment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Take for a fistula, and open the place; afterwards put in the opening one subtle thread as follows:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 And they make it in the quantity of one .З. of lead; and hold your hand firmly on the camahan, and let the patient not move at all, until the melted lead runs to his eye; and one must put on the patient's eye a piece of cotton moistened in egg white or vinegar: the lead is thus placed at the site of the fistula, and heals wonderfully.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula has been healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then a hole must be made in the nose, and the fistula should be brought back into the body of the nose, as is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	 cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 Often occur ruptures in lips called "hair", and likewise in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 When you heal these ruptures as we have said in divisions, and the healing does not benefit, then heat a small cautery knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And put it quickly into those ruptures until it reaches the base; afterwards, treat the place with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 of the throat abscess
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, afterwards it putrefies and rots and is inflamed and becomes a fistula; and you heal it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is necessary that you have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards burn into the hole or opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the fire reaches the base of it, and in the surrounding area; and do this once or twice, afterwards treat it as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	 of the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then place the patient's head in your lap; afterwards heat the cautery in such a manner that you put a reed on the tooth; and put hot cautery inside quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards remove your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards have the patient rinse their mouth with salt water, and keep it for an hour and spit out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 And in this manner the tooth that was moving is made firm, and the softened gum is restrained, and the moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	 of tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 When tooth pain comes from cold, whether it is cold or true, and medicinal remedies are of no value, then there is need for cautery in two ways: with the cautery of butter and with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 Cautery with butter is such that you take cow butter and put the end in an iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and moisten it in boiled butter, and place it quickly on the aching tooth and hold until it cools; and thus do often until its power reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see moist wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and place a hot iron on it so that the heat reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The cautery with fire is such that you take a tube of iron or copper and it should be thick enough so that the smoke does not reach the patient's mouth. After heating the cautery, as its shape will come later, place it on the tooth and keep your hand steady until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then rinses vigorously; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	 And make a cautery from whatever head you wish, according to what you have the power to do; and this is the shape of the tube:
des scrophules	 of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 when the scrofula are from cold and damp phlegm, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery handle as described below, and let it have two openings for the smoke to exit; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it there for three days; and then put on a cloth soaked in butter until the burn is gone; afterwards, cure the place with ointments and dressings until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the hound:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When the moistures rise to the passages of the brain, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be voided with purging medicines; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not go as far as the throat, but only burn for a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterwards, make another cautery at the junction of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cautery which is called "clavicle" be of the form we have previously mentioned; and treat the place as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	 of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 When cough and brain disease are due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is chronic, let him make two cauteries on the breastbone in close places; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery which is called "clavicle" be according to the form previously mentioned. ️
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see, perform cautery by pricking all the cautery that is called "point" of which the form is thus described in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or thereabouts.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After treating the place according to what has been said before, and let the cautery be for three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 And because these cauteries are lighter, therefore you should do them in three quick strokes.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 of the shoulder's dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reduce the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 Après soit soigné le patient sur son dos et sur sa poitrine; ensuite lève le cœur qui est dedans le tissu avec les doigts de ta main gauche; et si la jointure est disloquée en dedans, alors chauffe le cautère qui a deux nerfs à cet endroit-là.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the chest, and three figures of the cautery will come together with four cauteries; and because of this, the cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, which is why the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the fineness of a silk thread, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 And sometimes it is adjusted onto this nerve, which is why there are eight cauteries for it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 Then place the cautery on and crush with silk; then have the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the shoulder joint, or in many places by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach there are coldness and much moisture to such an extent that it strains his constitution, and he has many catarrhs, and the usual treatments do not help at all, then the patient must be turned onto his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 Of this after he makes three cauteries, one below the scapula of the foot through the quantity of a finger, at all the cautery clavicle, and two cauteries on the two sides so that the shape of the cauteries is in three angles, and there is such space between them that they are not joined together when they emit pus; and let the cauteries be so deep that they reach the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without deviation:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cautery, prick and burn on the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you wish of incense; then cauterize the entire cautery which is called "point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the treatment we have had before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When there is pain in the liver due to cold, moisture, and large flatulence, which is greatly moved from its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is treated for this as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him at all, then the patient must be cupped on his haemorrhois; and place three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, near the hypochondria, where the ribs of a man come; and there should be the thickness of a finger between each cautery; and the cauteries should be long along the body, and do not press too much with your hand throughout the cautery; and only half the head should be burnt, and the patient should be upright on his feet; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, and stretch out his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if you wish to cauterize these cauteries of the cutaneous area, if you are skillful and wise in this art, be careful not to burn the entire heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and do not let it reach boiling, for the heart is very delicate in that place, as you know well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too intense; and if it is in the membrane, he feels intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And then, when this treatment should be done by the physicians, it is necessary that the patient lie on his back; and then they prick around the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a grape, like this is its form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And cauterize with the iron until the heart is burnt, and it reaches to the spleen, so that all the inflammation is expelled; after the cure according to the cure of fevers until he is healed; and it is not necessary that for this cautery anyone should use the iron except one who has studied long in the art of medicine, and by whom few of these diseases have ever been suffered.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can work boldly, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave him.
dou cautere de pleuresin	 of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 The ancients said that for pleurisy one should make cauteries with roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers; and moisten it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize I cautery between the breastbone and the neck, and II small cauteries a little below in the part which is under the beard; and II cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, slanting backwards a little; and I cautery in the navel, and I other on the stomach, and I between the two shoulders, and II on the sides of the navel opposite the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it openly as if you were smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And some ancients say that a man uses a cautery similar to a razor, and heats it and places it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; and if the pain increases, as we have said in the liver's abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, either the patient dies immediately or a fistula forms that cannot be healed.
de la mice	 of the bladder
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 When you cure the bladder disease as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 One of these methods is that you make three or four cauteries, lining according to the length of the bladder, similar to the liver cautery shape that we mentioned before; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back; another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two branches, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation; raise the skin that is near the bladder, where the patient's rib comes towards the left, and let the lifting be according to the skin, according to the length of the body, and let the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After that, he inserts the two inflamed nerves so that they come out from the other side, and then he draws them out through the cautery, and thus there will be four of them. And if you see, then cauterize all the nerves at three points.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment when it has exuded pus for a long time, and this is worth more than other treatments previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	 of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 The cautery is not beneficial to those with dropsy, except in the manner which is called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you treat according to the methods that we have divided into sections, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the bladder, two behind the back on the spine, and one in the breast; and let the cautery be very close to the length of the nerve.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 After leaving the cautery open for a long time to let out pus, do not neglect the patient's care after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 The form of the cautery for the belly should be like the one we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as is indicated above.
de l’enfleure des piez	 of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in a patient with dropsy and are full of yellow bile, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply, for this would draw forth the yellow bile, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 Then make two cauteries on each leg at the ankle bone; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open for a long time without curing, so that the yellow bile issues from it; then cure the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	 of the madness
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 When belly upset comes from cold and moisture, such that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by other treatments; and you see the patient is strong and of great strength, then make one large cautery on the stomach as has been spoken of before, or a circular cautery. And four subtle cauteries around the navel, each cautery subtle, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 And if you see abundant moisture and the patient is suffering, make a cautery on the armpit, and one cautery on each eye, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	 of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and they are old and consist of thick, cold, moist, corrupted humors, and if they have been treated as we said before with incisions and it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, those which are completely outside under the navel, making a triangle bit by bit, and one cautery underneath the buttocks two fingers; and if you think that his stomach is cooled and the food is not cooked, and you see the face swollen, then make one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the bladder with all the cauteries open; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing the place until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 of the flesh that is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 When you cut thelul, heat up the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it completely burning on the cut thelul; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of thelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of beneficial ointments until they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will be more effective.
de plaie mal curee	 of a poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 When the patient cannot tolerate cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, such an illness occurs that it cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When someone has a fistula and it becomes infected and emits foul-smelling pus, you should examine the entire fistula carefully and ensure that you know the entire length of the fistula.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 Then heat the cautery that resembles a razor and insert it into the fistula according to the length that has entered, and repeat the cauterization until the rotten and corrupted flesh is burned, one, two or three times, as needed; and beware of burning the nerves present therein, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 And if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, then avoid these places, and do not perform these cauteries except in fleshy areas, and know that it is not without reason; afterwards treat the place until it is healed, and if the place is healed and the matters have been removed for a long time, then you may know that the place is entirely healed; and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is broken open, and the bone at the root is corrupted; and thus as one of these which we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	 of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and from great flatulence, and it does not take on the nature of a woman, then you must make a cautery on the kidneys on both sides with the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be III cauteries in line, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	 of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a cautery on the part outside over the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on each side, and let each cautery be as long as the thumb of a man; and make one cautery outside the back, if you have need for it; and let the cautery be clavicle-shaped according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	 of the uterus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the periods are corrupt and their terms late; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back; and let the cautery be clavicle-shaped, as we have said.
de la hainche	 Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 When the viscous moistures descend to the pelvis of the hip, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the place of separation is found visible, then you must cauterize the patient on the pelvis of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place around the pelvis as it turns, so that the pelvis is inside the circle; and let the cautery be such as that which has been used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if this cautery is not available to you, then make three cauteries with a large olive, and let the cautery be as deep as all the hearts; and heal it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	 Of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 When pain comes to the hip joint from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 Afterwards, make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is in two ways: that is to say, together with burning medications, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Fire cautery is in many ways, one of which is as follows: you make three triangular cauteries on the hip joint like this, and make each one deep and large, with the distance between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the head of the hip joint, so that there are four like this:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if you see it, then cauterize with the circular cautery that we have previously mentioned for the dislocation of the hip; but do so in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire hip, and all the thickness of the knee is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the way one does in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if it reaches the thigh and the leg, then make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers’ width, slightly on the left side; and let the cautery be sharp, and burn all the thickness of the knee; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes or near them, then cauterize there where they feel the pain with three or four points using the cautery called "point.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if needed, do it more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a circular or knife cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen many who made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the entire leg became swollen, and the foot as well, and all the foot was destroyed and rotted away.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a colic attack which led to his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery in one and in the other, following this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the wise say in the cautery of the hip, this is how it should be done. Make such an iron and let it be at the tip as thick as a dactyl's nail, or slightly less, and let there be barbs between the barbs, and let there be from one barb to another the space of a pea; and let the barbs be covered on two sides, and let them also be like nuts, and there should be a well-made iron handle. And this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then place it on the hip of the sick person, and turn it on the healthy side. And cauterize once for one cautery, and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the care of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery for fear of its gaze, and if we see few who use it; yet this is one of the good cauteries, which can endure it, and there where it is needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The burning medical cautery is such that you make the instrument as a grille in which descends the margin of the door, and let it be of bronze or iron with one long side, and in the height it should have two holes, and between each the size of the thickness of a finger; and they should be open from below and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 Then place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and then put your hand very high on the box of the hip; then throw between the two circles of the cautery which should be heated in the fire one handful, and let it stay there for an hour of time, and let the patient endure the heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Car it finds cauterization just like fire; and when the cauterization has passed, remove your hand with the instrument and gently lift the hip; leave it thus for III days, and apply butter until that which is blackened by the burn is removed; leave it thus for III days so that the putrefaction may be drawn out; and this would be the final help after the treatment of onions until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds water according to what you have done on the hip in the same way; and this is the manner of hot water, and I have written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, then put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 where there is a small hole outside so that the tip of a razor can enter; and put on top of this pot another well-plumbed pot, and pour on top alkali and lime and water as sweet as you can, until there are two hands’ breadths above the powders, which you will have held firmly in your hand; and let it sit like this until the water descends and collects in the plummeted pot, then take all that water, and pour it on top of lime and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And then it will be very watery and is prepared for many works of medicine and other members' cauteries because it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hip well in this way, such as terebinth, honey, anacardium, lime with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a cure by which a man was cured of the pain of the hip and sciatic vein, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other cure was done for him, and that he was cured in one go after this cure was performed, and he bathed as he instructs hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says in this manner that you should take fresh and dry lead, and grind it very well with a little fat, and apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and let it sit; and leave it for III hours, until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make him enter the bath so that his body is slightly warmed up, and put him to bed, and all the pain will go away, and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use such a cautery, unless it is after the evacuation of pus.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with wool of goat, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow that is between the big toe of the foot and the other one called phalanx.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 Afterwards, take dry goat wool and press it into charcoal, and place it on the wool, and let it stay until it is burned; and do this again, and do not stop doing so until you think by sensation that it reaches the hip, and that the pain has ceased; and this manner of cautery is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	 of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 When pain comes to the back, from falling or striking it or from excessive evacuation, or from something like cold matter spreading out, in none of these cases is cautery valuable except for that which comes from the influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 It is necessary that after the patient has been emptied by taking stinking pills or other similar things, one should make on his back where the pain is located three lines of incense, each line with five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cautery be done in the manner of the cautery called "poinçon"; and if you wish, do three or four cauteries of medium-sized cautery in this manner:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 Many times this disease comes to small children, and the sign of its beginning is that they have a narrow groin when rising, and fear; and you find in the lower part of the back a spine that protrudes over the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see this and wish to cure it, then cauterize it with a hot iron according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 So that the iron burns each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed iron that is two or three fingers wide, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, be careful not to administer a cautery in an area of swelling that touches a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	 of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that spreads to every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which doctors call «podagre» properly, and when it is due to cold causes and the treatment of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner: make many cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if you need to puncture the surface of the foot, make a cautery all around called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pain goes up to the knees and other joints, which often happens, make three or four cauteries on each knee from each side, all olive-shaped; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand over it for longer than the length of a arrow.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, then make an incision around the wrist two fingers wide; and if there remains any pain in the arms, then make an incision on each joint and at the base of the hand; and if the pains come down to the ribs or to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and give him medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you take good care of him and you bleed him, he will be healthy with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	 Of the wound of the sinus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 When the wound comes to the anus, and the bowels descend into the kidneys, which is new, it is necessary that when you see it being healed, that he does not eat on that day; and that he uses things that cause the belly to empty itself, so that the feces come out of his belly; afterwards, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm so that the bowels are repaired, and pull them towards you with your fingers, and sign below the wound on the bone of the wrist, and all at once, making a mark similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in this manner:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until he is white and casts seeds.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 until he is healed and throws out pus.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And the cautery of children must be subtle according to their size, and for large people also as large according to their size; after three days, cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is removed; then cure with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it must be that his nourishment is lengthened so that pus does not come out when he wants to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after XL days, when he wishes to rise, if he wears a well-made bandage, and bears it for XL other days; and has good rest, that he labors little and guards against too great repletion of drink and food, and of too loud laughing; and when he follows this teaching, then he is entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter the cure for cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	 of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When ruptures come in other abdomens and are noticeable, and you see that they do not grow more, make I cautery with the cautery according to its size, and let it be burned the third of the heart; after the cure as we have said; and some of the ancients have said one should cauterize it with a III-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the spot with ink and make a line along the width above the wound, and another on the opposite side, then place your hand in the middle of the entire cautery area.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cautery is lighter and softer.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 due to old pain in some limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes to some limb, from falling or striking, and this pain lasts a long time, and medicinal treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poin," and the cautery should be according to the length of the member, its smallness, weakness, strength, location, twisting, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 if it is healed from the first cautery, that's good; but if not, repeat another cautery on top of it, because it is customary for such things to change in the member that is closest, so you must perform as many cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	 of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The mixtures are sometimes helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see her being cauterized? Take care if the illness is in its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither remains nor lingers, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head towards the crown, and the other towards the forehead at the hairline; and two on each temple, and one behind on the occiput; and hold your hand so that the cautery reaches to the bone, and so that the scabs come out such that the vapors of the thick humors can exit; and also cauterize on the nose according to what was said before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 And if the poisoning is spread throughout the body; and it clearly worsens, then you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned earlier, and one cautery on the back of the neck, and two cauteries at the base of the skull, and six cauteries along the spine of the back, and one large one on the buttock and another nearby, and two on each shoulder; and two on each arm, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the lower back, so as not to burn them; sometimes a cautery is made on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more I do of cautery, the more I help him, and it benefits him; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as the healthy ones feel it, because his body is already completely corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it is necessary that the cautery be large or small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the manner of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing, anoint the place with flour of vetch mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When swelling comes to any member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cautery on the member according to the size of the member; and let the cautery be a little into the thickness of the skin; then cure it with onions until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And sometimes the cautery is done on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb; and thus the swelling is removed; nevertheless, let no one interfere with it unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	 of scars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the disease called "albaras" has been awakened, and the physician's remedies are of no value, then cauterize it with a cautery a little deep, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour of peas and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of a pigeon and blood of an almond tree, one part each; and let everything be mixed together, and bound with a cloth, and left in place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 The cure of cancer through cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When the cancer first appears and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 Nevertheless, the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the cancer; however, this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen sometimes; and it is more appropriate that it be cauterized around [it], with the cautery that is called "circular," as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has a disease called "dropsy," and it delays death either due to excess fluid or the thinness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and has little blood, or because of time; and you see that it hastens death: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries, pricking [it]; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you see it burst through the entire cautery, heat the cautery with this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the middle of that illness called "adubelati" until the cautery pierces the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it outside in such a way that the course of the corruption is eased.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment is finished so that it may be perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	 the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another manner of illness there is which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a gnawing of the member, for it gnaws at the members just as fire does dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 Se tu vois cette maladie en un lieu qui puisse supporter le cautère avec du feu, alors chauffe les cautères claviles, tant petits que grands, selon ce qu'il convient au lieu où la maladie est; ensuite, cautérise de toutes parts jusqu'à ce que tu aies brûlé toute la corruption, et qu'il n'en reste rien, afin que tout ce qui est corrompu soit retiré.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days, and put on the places that have been cauterized a poultice with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment of wounds producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if after three days you see that the flesh does not heal, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted place.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this lie is sometimes cured with cold medicine instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already said the remedy for cold medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 From leeks that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 It happens very often that on the soles of the feet, outside, there is a disease called "blister" according to our understanding, and it is a large warty thing that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cautery for this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Fire cautery is done by heating a cautery like a goose quill, made of good iron to the size that it can enclose the wart on all sides, and let there be fine edges; then place it very hot on the wart, and turn your hand completely around the wart until it reaches the bottom of the wart; and leave it like this for three days until it begins to rot; then make a plaster of crushed wild mallows with linen, and let the plaster remain all night, and the wart will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the place of swelling by applying a plaster until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if they are turned outward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must bring a cautery of hot water; and it is done in this manner: take a needle of brass or iron, or a feather of bird-of-prey, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say for common warts; and place the needle so that it pricks all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the needle comes to the root of the nail, and the hot water can find a deep way to the root; and let the patient endure the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave him like this, and it will completely uproot all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 So do one after another, until you have extracted all those that are in the body, then treat the wounds that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	 Cure the shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 When someone shakes from cold of the nerves, or from quartan fever or another cause, you must make four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive-shaped cautery; then the shaking will cease, and the health of the cold disease will hasten.
des pustules puans	 Of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes appear on the outside of the body, or stinking pustules, which come from large corrupted materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 If necessary, as soon as they appear, a cautery should be made on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made from mirte wood, with which the point is grasped by the fire, or a long root of aristolochia, or a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow from then on, but the superfluities from which they come are broken down, and they heal; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	 When the vessel is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 Often there is a great outpouring of blood from the vessel that is cut in the wound that occurs afterwards, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very serious matter to staunch it.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 And yet when this happens to someone, hasten to place your finger on the vein wound, and press very hard until the blood is stilled under your finger, and no drop comes out; then put into the fire several small and large cautery irons until they are all red; then take one, whether large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and place the iron on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the iron there until the blood is congealed.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the iron is extinguished, then take another one hastily from those that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 And do not stop doing one after the other until the blood is clotted; and beware that you do not burn the nerve next to it, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when the blood flows from the artery, it cannot be properly clotted, especially when the artery is large, unless it is done in one of the four ways we have mentioned: by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to clot blood; and let it be bandaged and bound appropriately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 Whoever administers clotting by tightly binding with cloth or applying hot things, or similar things, will not benefit if it is not beneficial.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 And if this happens to anyone and he has neither physician nor present medicine, then he must place his finger on the vein of the wound as we have said, and properly extend it until it is congested over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the finger, but moisten it often with very cold water until the blood is frozen and swollen and congested; and make further inquiries regarding the cautery and medicines he needs.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 Here begins the second book on the treatment of hernias
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 We have told you in the first chapter all the diseases for which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the questions and causes and instruments and forms of cautery; and I have placed this chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed in this chapter in the same way so that those who seek may find more easily what they wish.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 Et avant que je commence, il est nécessaire, cher fils, que vous sachiez que dans ce chapitre, il y a plus de danger et de peur qu'au premier des cautères, et pour cela, il faut faire preuve de grande prudence.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often an evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 Because many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 if it comes from such people who have this with their illness that they die easily because of the madness that they experience from their illness, and because of the great evil of it; and one must fear these things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And there are those who give you their sense, and say: “wait, I am healed”; and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely with regard to what you are certain of, and from which you can take praise; and use prognosis and diagnosis in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored; and this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and a memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 Very dear son, May our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, And if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 Now I have ordered this chapter by discussing in chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cautery, which I have discussed with you from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 full of water from the top
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 Know that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the midwife presses too hard on the child's head; and sometimes it happens for no apparent reason.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 And I have never seen this illness except in children, and in all those that I have seen death was hasty; and for this reason it seems to me that I should leave the work of such cures. ‌
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the skull swelled each day until it could not support him; and the moisture grew so much that he died. And this moisture is collected under the bone above the forehead, between the brain and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a wide incision in the middle of the skull.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 If the moisture is more thick and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, like this:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the seams of the skull open on each side, and the water jumps out strongly when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: then you must make three incisions in the middle of the skull like this:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, draw out all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After drawing out the moisture, apply bandages and powders, then put wine and oil on it, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then unbind it, and treat the wound by tenths and ointments, and allow the head to be evenly bound, and give the patient dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	 And another way of incision is that you look at where the largest part of the abscess appears, and the gathering of pus; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 Cut then the flesh where the abscess opens, and the filling of water, and the wound according to your ability; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from bleeding and moisture evacuation.
de reume	 from the back
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 When it happens to someone that there is a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the bladder, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the final cure is cautery with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you want to cut the veins, let the patient bend his head backward; then rub the place with a rough cloth until the veins appear, then have the patient stretch his neck with all his might; then look where the vein beats, and the places of the one and the other are behind the ears, and they are few in number; then mark the places, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, so that the cut reaches to the bone, and this should be as wide as the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 Et si tu veux, mets le scalpel sous l'artère et coupe dessus, en tranchant ainsi comme il faut en travers.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 And when the vein is cut, the blood spurts out continuously in a strong jet.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And if the artery is not open to touch, then it is necessary that you measure the width of three fingers, and then cut deeply down to the bone; and concerning how much blood must come out, it is six hundredths, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains a point on the bone that syphac, cut it so that these abscesses do not come in, then press the wound and bind, and apply ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	 of headache
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 When an old headache comes and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old foolishness and similar things, and he is treated by various cures of medicine and all that does not benefit him at all, we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 And the manner of extracting them is such that the patient turns his head so that the hair on his temples is out of the way, and he looks for the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and it is little concealed except in some men who are too cold; and if it is hidden, then the patient should extract it with some linen cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and bathe the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which there is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then draw it up to the pincers, and separate it well from the tissues beneath each part; and if the artery is subtle, then turn it with the tip of the hook, then cut that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 For if it is not cut, then the blood will not flow at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 And draw blood from the VI c/ until the III; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread to prevent gangrene before the healing of the wound, and let the bleeding come out gradually; then cut the excess between the two ties at that same hour, and then, if you see fit, use the knife cautery until the bone, so that the fingers are amputated; and this is the best work if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 Because the cautery is used to remove moisture: for this reason, it is of greater help with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 When it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and apply well-made bandages; and when they are removed, they should be treated with dry medicines that promote the growth of flesh, and with bandages, until they are healed; and if there is an exit from the artery as long as you work on it, quickly cover with copper by cautery, or fill the place with vitriol and hold in your hand until the blood is coagulated; and if you do not have this present, then press the place with your finger until the blood is congealed, and wash the place with cold water until the blood ceases, and hold as needed; and it is better and easier for the extraction of the artery to cauterize the vein with a cutting cautery from two parts, but the cuts should be well spaced to retain their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 Because when the instrument is too blunt, it holds its heat less.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And there should be one finger's breadth between the two knives, and then when you have incised in two places, and you place the hot iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let the two heads be far apart because this cautery is not sealed at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	 tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 When tears descend from the veins that are on the temple of the forehead, and medicine applied there is of no use, and you see the patient's face turning red, and feel trembling in the forehead; and the eyes are dull and moist so that the hair falls out, and the temples are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this cure is necessary. ︎
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And the ancients called it «cure for contusions», and it is that you should make on the patient who has this disease, the hairs he has on his forehead, then make III incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as if two fingers wide across the entire forehead, descending downwards to the nose, and the other two at the temples above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting the arteries that are at the temples above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the size of three fingers wide across; and have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping the blood, then apply the sharp spatula in two parts from which the shape is formed:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 From the incision that is above the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the heart that is between the two cuts along with the fat that is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second incision, and then extract strongly this spatula-like object.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 If you place the instrument called "cultellar" in the first cut, it is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 Place the cutting side towards the fat on the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous with what opens onto the heart, and then make another cut in the middle cut to the other side; and then draw out an equal amount of blood, and press the place for the taken blood; then put in each cut a piece of old cotton, and put on moistened cloths in wine and oil and garlic, and ensure that such abscesses do not come; and on the third day remove the bandage, and apply a large amount of warm water, then a basilicum ointment cure with rose oil, and other cures used for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	 of the pain of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 When acute catarrh comes to anyone, and you see the eyes watery and small, and weakening the vision, and the eyelids burning; and the hair falls out, and there is a severe pain in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know by these symptoms that this material and this catarrh do not come from one vein alone, but many, and the cure must be as follows:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one from the hairline down to the eyebrow.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 And begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when chewing; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then insert old cotton wool and linen threads between the two lips of the incision, then bandage on top with cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; once it is removed, you must rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying substances that promote the growth of flesh.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it into these wounds to heal flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 of the suppuration of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grain, beast, stone or similar object such as iron; seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; or flowing substance, such as water and honey and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When something falls into the ear such as stone or other object that does not fit in the ear and cannot grow within the ear, place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, drop some oil of violet or sesame oil into it, then administer extraction; and make him sneeze with condiments, and hold his nostrils when he begins to sneeze, and place cloths or wool around the ear; and stretch the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 When this cure is applied, festering often occurs; and if it does not fester, use subtle tweezers for the extraction.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 If it festers in the tweezers, that is good; if not, use a fine pincer with a small double blade; and if it does not fester from this, make a hollow reed and put the end of the reed strongly into the hole of the ear, and stop up what is around the reed with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the reed; then draw strongly for festering, because it often festers as we have said; and if it does not fester in this manner, take glue as birds use, and put it into some instrument that is suitable for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glue on the stone or whatever it may be, and draw strongly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it does not heal from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before an abscess or spasm comes, and the manner of the cutting is such that you first bleed the patient with a cephalic vein, and draw blood according to the measure of its power. Then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fatty area below; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 And if it is grain that is inside and swells, then administer an extracting ointment; and if it cannot come out, then administer a subtle emollient ointment in this manner.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not do this if you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with subtle tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction may be easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In the case where water falls into the ear, it is necessary that the patient first sneezes forcefully and then fills the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let it lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps through the sky, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If not the sky, then take many stones according to the length of your hand, light and thin, and heat them slightly in the fire; and put one of these stones in the patient's ear where it hurts; then let him jump on his feet from the other side, and strike with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this stone by stone until all the water comes out, and so it jumps all out; and if you see, take a reed, and put one end in the ear, and hold the other end with fire until the longest part of the reed is burned; then repeat with another reed until all the water comes out, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 In the extraction of an insect, if it is small like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, then use extraction by pincers; and this is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 In the extraction of maggots in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in dealing with distillations, and the treatment does not work, then you must look at the ear in the sun: if there appear any maggots, then extract them with fine pincers, and if none appear, take the cane of which this is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And press the most subtle part into the ear according to the intensity of the patient's suffering, then draw out all the wax; do this often until all the wax comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not come out, then plug the ear with cotton as I have said for stones; and if they do not come out easily as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and then distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, whose form is thus as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And whether of silver or copper, put under a small hole, and above a filter to distill; and for pressing inside the distillation, a well-made copper tool for this purpose; and if you wish, take a funnel and wrap around the tip some cotton evenly; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you wish of your medicines in the funnel, and let the funnel be in the ear; then insert the funnel into all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled into the ear's opening; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillation be a little heated over the fire before it is distilled into the ear; and see that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 Of the ear plugging
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 No child is born without any opening in the ears; and this same thing happens to adults by plugging of a wound, or by flesh growing inside the ear, and this plugging sometimes goes deep into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there is not enough opening, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 Therefore, the one that goes deep and cannot be seen is of great difficulty in many situations. And the one that can be seen must have the patient's ear placed in the sun; and look inside: if you see the hairy appearance, then work all this spatula with which it has the shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 And let it be sharp and cutting both in front and behind completely, so that it does not injure the ear; if the incision is of the flesh or body of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers, and cut lightly, until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the incision is deep into the ear, take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then place it in the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the incision where the patient feels pain to touch, pierce lightly, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Do this each day until the wound is healed: take a linen cloth and soak it in rose water, then sprinkle vitriol powder on it. If you see the ear swell, it is necessary to remove the linen cloth and replace it with another soaked in cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling has subsided; then continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge in cold water and place it on the ear; and use other treatments that stop bleeding which are described in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	 from paper skin
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 This althea that comes from paper skin when it is wet and then dried, must be stretched with tongs and tweezers, and scraped with a spatula made of its roots; then place powdered vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 And if it is without skin, cauterize it with the subtle lens-shaped cautery; and let the cauterizer follow after the incision is made; and many times they return when any part remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not come back.
de la gresle	 of goose flesh
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times there come in the eyes things that seem like goose flesh in their shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail," and it is a large assembly of moisture in the upper and lower eyelids; the operation is as follows: watch if the hail moves from one side to the other, and this is an easy thing to know; then make an incision across it, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with tweezers, and cut it off.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot close it without piercing the skin a little, it does not bother the patient; and if the cut is large, join it with a stitch, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not use force, for the ointment restores it quickly and new flesh grows.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And if the boil goes down into the ear towards the upper part, then peel off the skin, and stretch out the boil with tweezers, and close and press it from both sides; and if the skin is separated by the cut, it does not matter; and when the boil is closed, wash it with salt water, and treat the place where new flesh grows until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	 of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Exinach is a fat that is incarcerated in the eyelids above, and this happens more to children than to any other people, and it grieves their eyes greatly, and catarrh comes to them in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason, they always lie on their faces, and sleep on top, and their eyelids below are moist where the inflammation and appearance have been covered by exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the place between your two fingers, you feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And the manner of the work is that the patient places his head in your lap; and then take a cloth of linen, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, then place it on him; and press with both hands on either side, so that the exirnach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp scalpel a cut of sufficient width, and let it not be larger than the wound one makes at the vein of bloodletting; and cut the skin deeply until you reach the exirnach; and in several positions comes exirnach from the incision, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 Extract all at once with a piece of cloth between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is scattered; and beware that you do not enter into the cleft, lest you should reach all the way to the eye and injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 And if the pustule does not open at the beginning of the cleft, widen the cleft slightly until it opens; then extract it as we have said, and moisten cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And there are some men who grind salt and place it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat until he is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if a hot abscess appears, then treat it with soothing poultices until he is healed.
des poilz des papieres	 of the hairs of the paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 When hairs grow on the eyelids other than their natural state and are neglected, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases such as tearing and softening of the lids and pterygium, to the point where it leads to blindness; and the treatment is in four ways: either by cautery with fire, or by medication according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cautery, or by incision and suture, or by canthus, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your hand, then turn the eyelid towards your left hand; if it turns, that's good; if not, insert a needle with all its thread above; and let this be near the edge of the lid where the hair grows near these hairs, and draw the thread above all the lid, and turn it to the razor; then make an incision in the part below the lid, below the adjacent hairs, entirely covering the spatula from the large tear duct to the small one; then pull out the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and linen under the lid, then press on the lid a figure like a myrtle leaf, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount you wish to raise the lid which is called in all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And for one who needs to cut a large amount of paper according to how the paper is softened; then make all the spatula over the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the great tear until small; and let one of the tears be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root; then put the ink into one of the two corners of the heart, then scrape off all the skin; then gather the two lips together with a seam of a needle to all one thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and let the superfluity of the threads dry on the two sorcerers with some gluing things, if you want to do this; and if not, then do not worry about it, then leave the seam and the threads for three days or four; then cure the wound without a seam with dry and binding things, because the paper revives at the healing of the wound and its union, but the seam is harmful (as the ancients say), and this work is without fear; and there is another way: which is to sign the paper with a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have told you, with three dry inks according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 then cut according to those who dominate over the small forces equally, according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 and if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put another thread next to the large tear, and the second thread next to the small one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the leather over which you have sewn, as we have explained, then gather the two lips of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then calm it with cerate and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes it happens that the hair on the skin is turned: then you must use what we have said about the incision; but stitching in one place or another is more artful.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 The cure of the cankers is as follows: and it is that you turn the paper inside out according to what I have said, and then make two cankers by art, and two subtle ligatures as long as the paper and wide as the spatula; and cut off the two ends where you hold the threads; then subtly bring together one and the other on top of that which surmounts the eye's paper, and tightly bind the two cankers in the two parts; and leave it so for some days, and the skin that is bound will die and blacken and rot, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it is delayed, cut it with scissors, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is healed, and the paper has been lifted off, the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the shape of the two cankers that you should make according to this figure, and according to this quantity in length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 the work is such that you take a subtle needle, and into it put a thread of soft and subtle silk; then assemble the heads and knot them both subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then arrange in the sheath another brief and subtle silk thread, and knot the heads of the thread; then let the patient place his head in your hand; and let it be near the sunlight so that the work may be clearly seen, for this is a subtle and small work, then put the needle all into the sheath in the root of the hair close by, and make it pierce quickly through the skin until you draw it above the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the sheath, and put that hair into the sheath, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out entirely through the sheath with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the arrow is removed and the hair does not come out with it, you will draw the arrow down along its entire length that you have prepared, until the arrow comes out through the hole above and you can see it with your eye; then you will draw out the arrow and the string, and close the eye and leave it closed for II or III days, until the hair grows in its place and the flesh rises; and if the hair is small, let there be I long natural hair accompanying it, and let it grow with that one until it is elongated, then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	 of the eye's infection
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease called "alecrati" or the infection comes to the eye, it is of two kinds: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting, or from cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the manner of working on it is that you split that seam, and separate its lips, and place inside linen tents, and bind until it heals; and it is not necessary to use in its care things that dry out and tighten.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and wash it with water or ale and flax seeds cooked together, and melted onions in some oil, and wrap it in a tent, and cure it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 And the treasure of your care is that you guard against it healing according to its previous form; and these works that we have mentioned are nothing other than corrections for this disease, lest it return according to its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 from the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease, which is truly called "axacrati", is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from wound and tear and cautery and similar things; and the way to work it is that you take a needle with a double thread, and prick the fleshy part from the left lacrimal gland to the right, so that the thread passes through two layers of flesh; then stretch the flesh over the entire needle, and cut off a spatula wide at one end.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, take a razor and place it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits on either side within the paper; and let the ends of the two slits be at the two corners of the incision that you have cut, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the name "Greek"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are sharp beneath, from what follows the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew them together with a wool thread; then follow the cure as we have said for softening medicines and compresses, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 Et si la maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, il convient que tu fasses une fendure plainne desoz les poils des papieres, selon ce qui est ci-devant; puis desevre entre les II livres d'une tente, si com j'ai dit; et doit on faire l'ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car ele est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout son pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme naturele; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu'il i covient d'ovraige et d'estrumens en plusors dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	 From the suddenness of the stone
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When this adhesion happens to many men in such a way that the stone above is stuck with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, it is then necessary that you insert the tip of a razor under the stone, and lift it up; and hold it with tweezers, so that you cut off what adheres to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer the too sharp spatula injuring the eye; and let your incision, from which you peel that assembly, be light, so that the stone returns according to its natural form; and all that assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is salt water, and raise it with fresh water, and of collyrium; then place between the stone and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye wet wool abundant in egg yolk; and after three days use collyrium and suturing things until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	 of the thumb of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 You should know that the thumb is of two kinds: one is like a hard sinew and the other is not nerve-like but resembles congealed white moisture, which cannot be grasped with pincers when touched by iron; both begin towards the upper eyelid and grow little by little until they cover the entire eye and its light and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 And the manner of the incision is such that the patient places his head in your hands, then closes his eyes; and you lift the skin with your hand, then twist the thumb with small pincers, and hold it up; then take a needle, and put in it one horse hair, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread; and bend the point of the needle a little and place it in the middle of the thumb, and pierce all the way with the needle, and tie the thumb with a thread and hold it up, and scrape off all the skin on the side of the thumb following the pustule and the thread to the root, then cut off the remaining part in the root of the eyelid with a very fine spatula and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh in the eyelid, so that through the incision does not come the body of tears as usual; and sometimes they are stretched only to the nail bed, and to the thread, as we have said; then you scrape off all the soft tissue from which this form is made:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And ensure that the sputum does not touch the fleshy tissue and break it, and that the plumule is not pierced; and after the incision, cast into the eye a little bit of boiled silk, and made from lead, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so that it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 And if the nail is not fleshy, and you cannot insert the needle, and the cuticle cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicine; and as I have explained in the section on division, and if you see it covered, then work around the patient's eye, and take a little bit of sputum gently according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 And remove the nail from above subtly, and if you see that it is not diminishing and reason presses there, then drip from your mouth into the eye an irritant made of quicksilver and red columbine pounded together, and plug the eye until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same work, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If nothing is contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then let it drain, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 And if the appearance of flesh from the tear ducts troubles the eye greatly, then suspend it with a hook, and cut off part of it but not all, so that the body of tears does not come there; then drip into the eye red columbine made from quicksilver.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 Of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Of the flesh that grows over some men’s eyes, there sometimes appears red flesh, covering the pupil and rising onto the eyelids, and turning them outward, resembling a baluster rose; and the work is such that the patient places his head in your hands, then you operate on the eyes, cutting all that flesh with appropriate scissors for this purpose, supporting it with forceps; then cut off the first layer of flesh, and continue cutting to the root with the scalpel until the end, taking care not to injure the eye during the operation; and let the incision be as we have said in the incision of the nail and in small forces from which the wax is removed, as shown in the following chapter of this treatise; and when the incision is completed and all the flesh has been cut away, fill the eye with cooled egg white to which you have added red colocynth and similar corrosive medicines, and place a compress of cotton soaked in egg white over the eye, ensuring it is secure against heat, and if anything remains and the pus overcomes you, and you doubt the heat, leave the eye and treat the inflammation with soothing remedies; then return to your work until it is healed, and do this whenever flesh grows in the eye by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 But nevertheless, you must alleviate the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural way; and for the accidental way, in ironwork; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is tolerant of such work.
des voines des eulz	 of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Which are red veins that cover the eye, and they prevent the eye from performing its function and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 It is therefore necessary that you first look to see if the eye, in which there are such veins, is sound and has no other disease besides the veins; then treat the eye in this way: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend those veins with a thread according to your skill, and let the thread be thin and doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 And let there be two small ones by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 then, as the forces of those subtle veins are coiled, and wipe away the blood hour after hour, until you see those veins withdraw from the eye; and be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of the spatula, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you only cut those veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye green and red choler to corrupt what remains of the black.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	 And if you cannot coil all of them in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and the abscess is securely warm, then begin again according to this manner which is before, until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	 Of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 The surgeons name it «arissati» fistula: when you cure it by cautery and by burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a swelling in it that you should incise over the abscess, where it must be killed, and draw out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, draw it out with all the instrument as its form is here; and it is called «aspre chief», and let it be made of iron or steel, and let it be pointed like a file as it is in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 And place above the site of the rotten bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption is dried; and do this several times, then apply the site with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the site is healed and flesh grows there, and the body of the wound is healed, and it remains so for forty days, and it does not reopen nor become infected with mischief, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula to the peritoneum according to this form: and it happens that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take an awl as follows, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be tapered to the end as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye socket. Then turn the awl completely until it pierces the bone, which the patient will feel due to the air escaping if he holds his hand over his nose; then restore the place with dry medicines as I have taught you. And when the flesh grows and the place hardens, the material goes towards the nose; this is an easier thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	 of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the eye is completely open in every respect and there is no obstruction or narrowing of the nose, it is necessary to bandage the patient; then heal it, then place cupping glasses without pricking to draw out, then place on the eye a plaster made of alum, aloe, frankincense, and myrrh, and then bind the eye, and cover with plasters and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is such that you take very soft cloths, and double each one four times, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye needs; then bind it tightly on top with a strong bandage, and reapply the cupping glasses to draw out without pricking; then remove the cupping glasses and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the plaster softens, it is necessary to bind it very much; then remove the plaster after one day and one night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then reapply the plaster and the cloths and the plaster and the cupping glasses until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 Of the breaking of a vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 When disruption comes to the vein and it opens, and exudes papers like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see; then if you want to cover it, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below until reaching above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the lip; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cover the place of the double thread and tie a part of the vein around it, and hold it tightly, then withdraw the needle and place a wet cloth soaked in egg on it; and leave it until the thread adheres with the vein, then heal the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restricted by the vein every part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the eye gives off great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes to the bottom of the eye, and let the turbid moisture descend from the eye, and it will enter immediately; then draw it out until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	 from the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease called "alcunnati" is nothing but water that is gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, and this is not water; and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands on two sides, and move it until you see the water come to the surface before your eyes; then let it be pricked, and do not let it descend, and let the light be restored, and let the patient see things as he used to; and if it does not descend, know that it is water, and if the descent of the water is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 if the patient sits between your hands, then take a fine spatula and make an incision on the horny tissue in the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horny tissue and the cornea, until the humour comes out; and when it has come out, instill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or boiled fenugreek water and honey, then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	 of the water of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have the appearances of the waters in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; so work according to the healthiness.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, outside the light for the sun, and tie up the sound eye very tightly; then place the eyelid of the sick eye in your left hand if it is a left eye, or in your right hand if it is a right eye; then take in your right hand, if it is a left eye, the instrument that is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if it is a right eye; then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea by the thickness of a ray into that whiteness of the eye at the lower part of the minor lacrimal duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" vertuously, and turn your hand until it pierces the whiteness of the eye, and feel that the almagda comes to the empty place; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of the almagda be at the fullness of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness; and this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone in that eyelid by the clarity of the horny tissue, and then place the instrument in its place where the water is, then press under a way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If water enters now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting for a little while, and if the water rises again in the second path, put the fire with the instrument, and when it is firmly implanted and it does not rise, gently extract Almagda by turning your hand little by little; then place the eye back into the water for a moment.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then put on the outside of the eye wool or cloth soaked in rose oil and plenty of egg, and bind it with healthy skin.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those of our time, use comfrey with plenty of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if Almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument that is called "alberit," which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And pierce then the conjunctiva alone, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle; then put almagda there, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a comfortable bed, in which he sleeps on his back in a darkened room; and let him be free from all movements, and let him take light food, and let him not move his head to the right or to the left, and let him be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in that same dark room, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you do this, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 if the abscess comes to an eye, release it on the seventh day and apply the remedy that soothes abscesses; and when it is calmed, then release the eye and place a golden ring over its face to cover for some days, and let it always be in that darkened room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And then come out of the house little by little, and let it return to its usual activities; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And one came to us who was from Yrach, who told us that in their country they make almagda, for which they draw water, but nevertheless I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	 Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, pour ceux qui ne les connaissent pas les reconnaissent; et qu'elles soient de bronze pur.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 And the head of these should be of the same subtlety, and the base in three sharp points.
de la char sor le neis	 on the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Sometimes hairs grow on the nose in various arrangements, some of which resemble many-legged scorpions; and there are such that have red hair, and others have soft hair of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In that case, for the soft hair and not the red one, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils and throw the incense onto those hairs and pull them out; then cut with a sharp, thin scalpel what you can support, until you know that all the hair is removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 And if there remains anything that cannot be cut off, open it all with subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without your help, or abscess occurs, then provide assistance as needed; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the blood is staunched and all the flesh removed, then apply neat oil and vinegar in wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If pus forms and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as needed, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, which prevents the instrument from cutting: then you must insert a thread of linen, about a finger's width thick, and knotted by hand, with a distance of a thumb or less between each knot; and let the patient place the end of the thread in his nostril as much as he can, and pull while smelling until it comes through the nose into the mouth; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for those who want to do it; then hold the end that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and tie each knot in turn as shown by us who are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do this so that you know the knots have corrupted that flesh, then draw out the thread, wipe off the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment has dissolved all that remains of the flesh; and then put a lead probe in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if dry medicines are needed, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, into which one distills the oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 And let it be of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp like a probe, and the channel likewise; and if you wish, make a closed probe, and let the instrument be full for purging the head; and have one handle at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	 Of the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 Often a disease called "telul" appears on the tip of the nose and grows large, so much that it is an unsightly thing to behold; and for this reason you must cut it at the beginning and remove all of its strength, then apply cautery or burning medicine onto the spot; and if it is delayed from being cut until it becomes large, beware if it is hard, of a dark color, and with a poor sense: do not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when it is cut even once, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of a dark color, and you see that it can be entirely removed, then the patient should empty themselves and cut without fear, and treat the area with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 when the nose is cut and bruised
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when a solution of continuity comes to one of these cartilages in operation, it profits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore when this happens to anyone, consider if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together in a suture, then treat it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, then you must cauterize all their edges until they heal, then join the two lips together in a suture, and hold them, and put over powder of dragon's blood and pounded incense; and place over the powders a piece of strong emplastrum or other adhesive emplastrum, and leave it until it softens by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 The manner of sewing is that you join the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or by thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	 Of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many men have hard abscesses inside the lips, resembling barley grains, smaller and larger; then you must turn the lip, and cut over each knot, and take it with tweezers and chop in each part; then fill the place after the vitriol incision with broiled lime until the wound is blackened; and then apply honey plaster, and cure the place with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	 Of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 Often arises on the gums a flesh that is close together, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore, you must hold it with pincers, and cut it at its root, and let the wound or blood flow; then place on the spot vitriol powder, or other restraining and desiccating powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it a second time, and cauterize: after the cautery it does not return; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	 from sordid things
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 Sometimes there are scales gathered at the tip of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and rough; sometimes the teeth turn black and yellow and green, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul-smelling; then you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and scrape the teeth or the scales until nothing remains; and do the same with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellow discoloration and other stains, until they are cleaned away; and know that the teeth require different forms of instruments for scraping, according to what the work demands, because the scrapers used on the outside of the teeth have other shapes than those used between the teeth; and these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 It is necessary that when you treat a tooth from its pain, you delay extracting it as long as possible, for one should never do this; for it is a very high substance to the point where there is no excuse for removing it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is forced to extract [the tooth], you must be certain of the aching tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in the healthy tooth, and he has the good tooth extracted; nevertheless the pain does not depart from him until the evil one is removed, for we have already seen this happen with these sages. And when you are certain of the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you burn around the tooth on all sides with a very strong cautery to protect the gum; then move [the tooth] with your fingers or with fine pincers little by little and bit by bit until it is well loosened, then firmly hold the pincers in place. And let the patient’s head be between your knees, and hold him so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out forcefully, then take one of these instruments and gently push it inside each side, and remove it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is decayed and rotten, then you must fill it with cloths where the holes are; and hold it delicately with tweezers so that it does not break while pulling; and you must work very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And be well aware not to break it, and leave a part behind, which would cause the patient greater pain than before due to the root's evil.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And beware not to act as the ignorant lords do, who sometimes out of haste and recklessness break the tooth, and do not bring those that we have mentioned, but sometimes cause great illness due to the remaining roots or the broken tooth, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows from it, which often happens, fill the place with burnt vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	 Les formes des instruments, à quoi l'on arrache d'abord les dents, doivent avoir de longues pointes et de grosses poignées, afin qu'ils ne se plient pas lorsque tu tireras la dent; et voici ces formes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 And they should be of thick members so that they do not bend during the extraction, and they should be made of well-forged iron, and they should have teeth to better grasp [the tooth].
de la racine des dens	 from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains after extraction, you must place cotton moistened in butter on the spot for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 until the spot is softened, then put in the tweezers called "algefri", with which the tooth looks like a bird's beak; and they should be made inside like a file, and this is its shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover all the flesh around the root, and place there the instrument called "althali," which is plainly, of this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 And let it be thick and large so that it does not break, and if the root comes out this way, it is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 And also use this instrument that has two ridges, of which here is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 and other irons that are in front according to the teeth's reasoning, and of this instrument that looks like large pliers, whose form is here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 And let this instrument be such that it cannot break; and know that many dental instruments are; and likewise other instruments that are not counted; and the wise master subtil finds his own instrument by himself, according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are such diseases where the ancients taught no instrument because of the diversity of others; and if one does not break the cartilage or other bones, where he can, he searches for the instruments he needs, which I have told you about, and helps with gestures, as the form here is.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not slip but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, then this instrument removes everything.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 When the teeth appear not according to the natural body, and their shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and it is not in its right place, and one cannot file or grind it: then draw it; and if it is near the tooth, take this instrument whose form is here, and it resembles a small beak, and let it be of very sharp iron at the end.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And the hook little by little in several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can file it, then file it with such a file as this form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 and it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and file the tooth little by little in several days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls out; then plane it at the end with any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, you must file the roughness until it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	 When the teeth dislocate
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the front teeth dislocate, either by impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew what he eats without them falling out, and you have treated them with binding medicines but it does not help; then they must be bound with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the width of the space between the teeth; and if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the thread and fold it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the knot between the dislocated teeth, whether there is one or several, so that you reach wisely up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again until the place where you started, and gently and wisely tighten your hand so that it does not move at all; and let the ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then cut the heads of the wire with a pair of pliers, and assemble them, and insert them between the healthy teeth, and position it so that it does not injure the tongue; and then leave it thus tight as long as it can remain, and if it becomes loose or the wires break, then bind it again with another wire; thus it remains and serves this way throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the appearance of the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and skilled, and sometimes a tooth made from cow bone is fashioned, and placed in the place where there is a gap, and secured as we have said, and it remains and serves this way for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 of copper to bind the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Sometimes this ligament comes under the tongue naturally, in which a person is born that way; or by accident of a healed wound; and the procedure is such that you open the patient's mouth and hold his head against yours, and lift the tongue; then bind the nerve cord thickly until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is due to sudden healing of a wound, then insert the hook and bind the cord widely; and ensure that the incision is not too deep for the artery underneath; and when you have done this, lift the place with rose water and aloes, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen bandage; and let the patient wash the area every night to prevent it from healing.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And if bleeding occurs, place vitriol on the spot to cauterize; and if the wound bleeds profusely, use the cautery with a slow fire, which is good for this purpose; then treat it further until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see the flesh turn black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it turns to pus, and there is moisture, sprinkle with oxide of copper, and pierce it with a fine spatula, and let out the pus from both sides; and if the wound bleeds during your work, place vitriol on it until it stops bleeding, then return to your work until you have drawn out all the force; then lift the flesh with oil and wax, and treat it further until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	 From the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Sometimes there come within the throat pustules called "godath," and they are properly called two almonds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small sense and of red color, then do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also to avoid bleeding; but let it be until it is ripe, and then you can divide it, or it will burst on its own; and if it is of white color again, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument for cutting, but first check if the abscess is warm and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his hands be on your chest, and he opens his mouth and takes the instrument between his hands, and presses the tongue down against the entire instrument, which has this form; and it should be of silver or fine brass like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 When you have pressed the tongue against this entire instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the hook and insert it into the pustule, and draw it out strongly above more than you can; and some substance comes out with it, then cut off [or remove] the instrument, which has this form, that resembles tongs; and nonetheless the ends are curved, and one opposite the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you do not have this tool at hand, then borrow a pair of tongs, of which there is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 And let it be sharp on one side and smooth on the other; and when you have cut off one of the tonsils, then cut off the other in the same manner, and afterwards rinse the patient's mouth with hot water and warm oil, and if blood continues to flow, then rinse the patient's mouth with water in which pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves have been boiled, and similar things, until the wound is healed; and then cure it until it is healthy; and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them off in the same way as the two tonsils equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treated a woman with an abscess in her throat, specifically the abscess of little sense; and it had almost completely closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two veins through the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 I hastened at once and placed one cautery in one nostril, then drew it out, and drained a great deal of pus from it; then I did the same in the other nostril, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I placed the cautery in those abscesses and drained some of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the throat of the woman was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease to cut from that abscess for a long time; and the abscess always grew back and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large again; then I lanced it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing; and I left those parts, and know only what God did with her after me. etti
de l’uve	 of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When the membrane descends to the grape, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below, large and round, it is called "grape".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is cut as we have said in the division, and the incision does not help, and you see that the subcutaneous abscess is quiescent, and it is subtle, then you must cauterize it; and that which is round and gathered together is not long; and it is sanguineous or of dark color or black, then you must avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have said, of its color and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument which we mentioned before; then insert the onion into the grape, draw it down, and cauterize it with one of the two instruments which I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient is afraid of the operation, then you must use skill in cauterizing away his fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of cautery is sharp and keen.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient should place his head in your hand, then press his tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned in the cautery chapter, and pour on it with sharp, living vinegar, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and fill the hollow of this instrument, which has this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And there should be on the head a sort of hair where one puts the medicine, like the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and the patient should lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat and the wound; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press on the eye, for a quantity of half an hour, until you see it darken and the biting of the medicine is calmed; and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument with all the cotton into the canal above, so that the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and it will fall off after four or five days. And if you need to start the cautery of the medicine again, begin it again, and afterwards wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and treat with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 This cure is more effective than incision or cautery; if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamus and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them in a pot, and put ashes in it, and boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot there should be an instrument hung according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And let it be of silver or bronze, and one of the heads should be placed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the nasal cavity, until the eye is inflamed; after that, repeat often, until the eye dries out, and make sure not to do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, because many things happen there; and do not do it unless during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, take a dog and put inside its head an egg shell, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the egg shell does not allow the steam to bother the mouth, and this is a good treatment together with salt.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 Often, a bone or fish spine becomes lodged in the throat, or some other thing. Therefore, you must extract what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with the instrument, so that you can move the object; and whatever does not open and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps the sharp object will come out with the vomiting. Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of apple, or a lettuce root, or a crust of dry bread, then tie a string to the sponge and swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will become lodged, and then you can extract the string. And if it does not come out with what we have said, then take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 And let the instrument be curved at the top so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised upwards; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, for if the tool slips, it will come back, and do not push the bone inside; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows where the hard parts are; thus he pushes downward, or draws it strongly with all the instrument equally, until it is strong.
de la sansue de la gorge	 from the blood of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Sometimes the blood is treated with medicine, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, after you have pressed the tongue against the instrument that I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the bloodletting, draw it entirely with a small hook, or with subtle pliers that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that does not work, take a hollow reed, and insert it into the patient's throat, then insert a hot iron into the reed's tip, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if the patient is thirsty all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a full cup of cold water and pour it into the patient's mouth without them swallowing it, and move their hand over it often; and as soon as the bloodletting feels the water, it will fall.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument I mentioned for eye fumigations; do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And the manner of fumigation is such that you take a pot where there are hot coals, and the top is covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and through that hole is the head of the instrument; then cast your fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape but comes up to the sinus; and the sinus will fall now, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and such, and do not drink water; and then it will be necessary for it to exit through this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	 And the shape of the instrument with which one draws blood is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pincers to enter the throat; and it resembles a bird's beak, and there should be roughness like a file, so that what it takes, it cannot leave behind; and see here its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	 of the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 Very many types of abscess are, according to what is remembered here after from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and it is in two manners, of which one is in its very nature, and of those that contain moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second manner is for the places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 car the abscess on the head is different from that at the base, and the abscess in the fleshy part is different from that which occurs in the joints, and each should be judged accordingly in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And there are abscesses that should not be pierced until the boil is mature according to its development; and there are such that must be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die according to their nature, such as abscesses near the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 For when abscesses come near the joints, and one lets them become rotten around, it may happen that the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contracture in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 In the case of an abscess near the principal member, and if you delay perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; if it is near the fundament, pierce it as soon as it is ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce a ripened abscess before digestion is complete, except for one that is near the fundament, so that it does not putrefy deep inside and become inflamed, causing a fistula; and may not heal quickly.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation for a ripe abscess according to completion, which is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and the debating and ripening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the perforation in the most dependent place of the abscess, where it opens; and let the incision be along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no flexibility.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that bend, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it before this, then the body will be filled with its poison, and it is full of much filth; and perhaps it will harden the lips and depths of it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if there are any abscesses that have been pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And you must bring in small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and there are such abscesses where one must cure the head, and cover when it becomes like linen, and is dead, then you should do as one does with buboes: and there are such that are split into three angles, and there are such that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the anus; and there are such where a round incision is made, and other incisions and similar cutting.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Those who have no head, such as a superficial abscess, you must pierce it thoroughly; and when the abscess is large, and it has collected great pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out some of it; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again; do this many times over several days, until all the pus comes out; similarly if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the spirit sometimes leaps with the exit of pus, so that by chance the patient may die, and you may not notice it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have perceived your abscess, wash the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, bring ten linens or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must put one tent into each so that they come together; and if you have cut into the abscess some part of the skin, and you have removed it, then you must fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it up to the third day; then remove it, and cure it with oil until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs in your work, then prepare cold and clean water, and moisten the cloth, and apply it to the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the bleeding persists, then bring management and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is in winter and the place of the abscess is very sensitive, then you must apply tents and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer and the place is fleshy, then you must apply cloths moistened in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then lance the abscess and dry and treat it, as needed, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 And it must be universally known in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	 Of the sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 Where small abscesses come from the head, and are like pimples that we have on our faces, similar to the down of a chicken.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that are fat and such where there is moisture like a blister; and there are those which are hard and stone-like to cut, and there is no doubt if the surgeon does not act against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of cutting is such that you should try all the instruments which are called "spoons," from which the shape comes as described later, whatever it may contain.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 If it contains moisture, then cut through the top of the tendon.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is removed, scrape off everything without leaving any skin that contains the moisture, for it returns immediately if anything is left there; then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and linen cloth, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day; and this will cure what remains of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then repeat the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, so that you know well that none remains of the night; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the abscess holds any grease, cut it in this manner, lengthwise; and throw away your nails, and scrape from all sides, and put all your care into drawing out the skin where it lies; and if the art of healing opposes you, then do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And likewise do with the abscess if it is hard, and in cutting and cleaning as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And cut above the hard and moist abscess, for it is lighter, because they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if any of these abscesses are at the head where there is no moisture, and of these were the abscesses that I cut at the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken; and if one had struck it, one would have made a wound as well as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other boils that come on the head, except those that come on the heads of children and the roots of the ears, let the opening always be made in the lowest possible place so that the pus may flow out; and treat it as needed.
des scrophules	 from scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often this boil occurs on the neck, under the armpits, in the groin, and sometimes in other parts of the body, and they are many and interconnected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each scrofula is properly within its rib, just like the nut and the boil on the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities to these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In that one which you see of good disposition to touch, and it is similar in color to the body, and moves from each part and is not close to the nerves of the neck nor the artery nor the vessel, and is not deep; then it is necessary that you cut above it, and skin it from each part, and extend the two lips of the heart to the corners, if you have need, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and draw little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula be neither too sharp nor cutting, lest the hand slips, and does not go too far forward, lest you cut something that you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that constrict blood, and constrain the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound becomes softened, and begins to fester.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the blood is constricted, then return to your work until you complete it; then test with your finger if there are any small scabs remaining, and cut them off and clean them away.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, it is not necessary to cut that scab at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it fall away without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you cut all the scrofula, it is necessary to join the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since no surplus remains due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 it is necessary that you attend to cutting the root of it, and pull strongly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulae that have surplus, pierce there where it is visible to the eye; and pierce thus as said before, hanging downwards, then bring in tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, cure it with ointment enveloping flesh, until it is healed.
de squinance	 of scorching
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 The ancients spoke and discussed the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 For those who have scorching, it is necessary that the cleft of the throat called "epiglottis" be cut off; and one should not help by this method, because all the veins and the phlegm of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 When the disease is in the channel of phlegm, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid death from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it below III or IV small transverse slits, between II circles or according to the size of the sinus, not in the cartilage; and those places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis because there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is fearful, then he must extend the skin of the throat to the chin, then cut open the heart until it reaches the jawbone; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut off the liver as we have said; and it is proven by the section of the phlegm from the jaw that jumps with force through the broken place, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the hour has passed during which strangulation is feared, join together the two lips of the heart's wound, and stitch it all up without bandages; then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 Albucasim says that this should not be done until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and lacks breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Therefore, the epiglottis is cut so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the mischief of the disease has passed, which passes in three or four days. And then they commanded to close the wound and cure it until it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I saw that a young woman took a knife and stabbed herself in the throat, cutting part of the cartilage of the larynx; and I was called to treat her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 I uncovered the wound, and found the blood that had come out of it, and although it had not struck a vein or a main artery except for the throat, and the wind was coming out strongly through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healed; and nothing more happened to the maiden except that she became hoarse of voice, and afterwards returned to her usual state; therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	 of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are large abscesses of the color of jet, and they occur often in women; and there are two types: natural and accidental; in the natural type there is no pus.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accident is in two ways, one of which resembles a boil to us, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from our vein; and there is fear, and it is not right to work on making a hole except in that which is small, and test and check all around: if you find it like I know a boil, and it does not touch any vein, then cut it, as one cuts the nose, and draw out all its hair, if there is any; and investigate well quickly, and cure it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	 us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 There are many kinds of us, all of which I will describe the resemblances; and now it is necessary for me to say all the differences that exist between our (thing) and issuing (from a thing).
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 I say that the issue occurs during fever and while holding heat until the inflammation has passed and putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With the new issue, there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and corresponds to the body's color, beginning like a pustule and growing large; and they are of two kinds, either greasy or moist, and many colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 It is necessary that when you come to the care of the pustule, you first prove and inquire with all the instrument called "entromissoire," according to what its form will be in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you take the moistest place you find on the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instrument has reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the intromitter, and be careful that it does not jump out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If the running moisture, what color it has, then cut into it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the intromitter comes more moisture, know that it is greasy, so then cut it in a cross shape, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape from each side and keep the skin where it lies so that you draw it out whole with the knot; and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 Car if anything remains, the nose returns many times; and if a piece remains and the blood irritates, fill the wound with some corrosive, burning powders, constrict the wound, and place soothing things on the hot abscess, and treat with other treatments until healed; and if the nose is large, then stitch the two lips of the wound, and treat those who have flesh torn.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 and if the vein swells against you or otherwise, then hurry and fill the place with crushed vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound becomes gangrenous, and the blood's boiling calms; then return to treat whatever remains of the vein.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Vez ci = Here are the shapes of the inserted instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. And there are three squares that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and they too are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula. And they are like the needles with which one sews the sorceries, and they are made of brass, or iron, or silver; and those that are yellow in color are most valuable, and they are more proven for black pitch to encircle the fistulas' carbuncles. And they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The shapes of the onions are of many kinds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are onions that have two curves of three types; and there are onions that have three curves, and they are also of three types; and there are onions that have two curves, and onions with only one curve, and they are also of three types; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The heads of these which one makes are sharp, and there are some that cut only from one side, with which one scrapes the nails so that one does not cut the vein or the nerve; and among these instruments are the curved scissors held in sheaths, so that the patient is unaware of them when opening abscesses; and they come in three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are used only in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling a lancet, according to this form, with which one lets blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 And one places it sometimes in a place that heals promptly the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes they return according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to be corrupted, to the point that they resemble women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must follow this form from line .b. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 then peel off the fat, and fill the wound with a medicine that encourages flesh growth, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and continue the treatment until it is healed; and if the breast hangs down and is softened by its size as happens in women, then make two incisions above the two similar folds; so that one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.; then peel off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer as we have said in sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely done, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the remainder and the fat, then continue the treatment until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	 of the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 These abscesses that occur under the armpits are hard and resemble scrofulas, which may contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when all the pus in the abscess has been emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and treat it with suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then cut it as we have said for cutting scrofula, and if pus comes out of the wound, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	 of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When the artery is torn, and the skin that is above it is swollen, there often follow abscesses, and the same happens with an inflamed vein and abscess; and one knows this when it is due to the artery, for then the abscess is long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you sense a constriction; and when it is due to the vein, reason is lacking in appearance; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the nails and at the angles and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron cure, and that which is on the head should be avoided as well; and in the case of artery swelling, make an incision above the skin lengthwise; then work the cut along the edges, and neatly separate the artery from the veins, so that it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath it, and make it pierce through to the other side, and constrict the artery with double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples; then bind the place between the two ligatures with a tourniquet so that the blood issuing from there is released, and let the abscess be relieved; then apply the cure that is common to all, until the ligature falls off; then treat it with ointments appropriate to this, until it heals; and if the abscess is due to the cutting of the vein, you should stain your hand with what you can from the abscess over all the skin, then insert the needle under the place that you are holding in your hand, and make it pierce through, and let there be a double thread so that you draw it out on the other side; then bind the abscess, as I have told you, with one end of the thread to two knots at two ends of the thread; and if you doubt that the thread will not come out, then insert another needle all along the one thread underneath all the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and constrict the threads in four places; then cut the abscess until the superfluousness comes out, then cut the superfluity of the skin and leave that which is bound; then put a cloth moistened in wine and oil on top, then apply dressings and ointments appropriate to this until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	 of the abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 Similarly, as abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, so they also come in the nerves when they are struck or by excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows and in all places where there are joints, and it is a serious abscess, and its color resembles that of the flesh, and it has many dispositions without pain; and when it is pressed strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely within the flesh, but below the skin; and it moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor downwards or upwards, and that which is in the joints must not be cut with iron: lest contraction may occur; and that which is in the head or forehead, pierce the skin with a needle.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, hold it with tongs and cut it at its root; if it is large, suspend it with a hook, scrape it, then remove it and close the wound with stitches, and treat until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	 of hanging large abscesses
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Sometimes it happens in the stomach and not in any other place, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its similarity to them; and the root is subtle, and the head large; and there are small ones and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two in his stomach which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were always wet.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I sliced them and found that one weighed XVIII ounces, and the other VI З., and the work in the incision is such that you should check if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist and of subtle root; then cut with a wide spatula, and have the cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 For in cutting often comes too great a flow of blood, and if the wound overwhelms you, then hurry to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made linen thread, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain it, and do not stop pulling the linen thread until it cuts the artery, and each time without difficulty; and if the roots are large, fear also to cut immediately because of the belly, but you can cut half, then cauterize so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and be careful not to cut the vein which is of dark color and poor appearance and milky look.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 Car this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of crusts later.
quant li boude ist fuer	 When the boil is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of the boil comes from the cauterization of a wound or rupture in the intestines, and it is on the abdomen and there are some boils as happens in other ruptures, either from bleeding of veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or from flatulence; and if it is due to rupture of the intestine and exits through the anus, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the body, and it is a minor thing without pain, and exits in various ways.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on both sides it returns, and then comes back, and perhaps it becomes narrowed, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and through great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and it appears well when you press it in your hand, not constraining at all; and if it is due to blood, the abscess appears large and hard, and it is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to wind, it is soft to touch, and the work is such that you should examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 You must leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 Because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bladder, you must command the patient to hold his leg, and be stretched out straight; then sign around all over the belly; then order him to lie quietly between your hands; then go around the place that you have signed with all the spatula; then extend half of the abscess on top of all the great uncine; then bind it around with a strong thread or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the knot of the bond be tight; then work half of the abscess extended on the ligature, and put your index finger in it, and search for the intestine; if you find it caught in the ligature, unfasten it, and push the intestine out of the belly; and if you find the bladder, take it with the uncine, and cut off the superfluity; and if the artery or vein causes resistance, go around well, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross that you make perforate; then press the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it rots, and let the dead flesh rot by itself; or cut it when it is softened and rotten, then cure the abscess as it should be cured, and close the abscess as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as it should be cured, and suture the place.
dou chancre	 of cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 We have said in the division the likenesses of cancer, and how one should work there with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and we say that cancer infects the flesh, and great care is needed in the cure, and the ancients said that when the cancer is in a place where it can be scraped off, such as cancer which is on breasts, and on thighs, and similar places, one must scrape off all of it when it is in the beginning; and when it is large and old, then one should not approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal from it; nor has anyone ever healed from it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile; then make him fast if he has a manifest repletion, then take the patient to a good place to perform the work; then throw your nails into the cancer, and the hair from all sides, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the area with your hand or with something else, and if the bleeding is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is blackened; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	 Of diabetes
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 And we have said in the division the resemblances of diabetes, and in what manner the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure that is done by medicine, and that which is cured by iron: this one is only drained; and one should not touch with iron in these two resemblances: that is to know, tympanites and hydrops, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this resemblance of diabetes which is called "dropsy" by medicines, and the cure does not benefit, look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides diabetes, such as dropsy and similar things; then do not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease but diabetes alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should work thus: lift the patient upright on your hands, and the assistant presses the belly by pushing the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the pointed spatula in this manner:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And it should cut through two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And the point should not be so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted and not injure them; then look to see if the dropsy is towards the intestines: in this case, you must make an incision above the navel, three fingers' width below the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the navel; and if it is due to bladder problems, it should be on the right, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluous fluids do not run to this weak spot; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, remove it, and lift your hand to all the tissue between the skin and the membrane as if scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or thereabouts; then pierce the membrane until the tissue comes to the desired place, which is the place of the water, then draw strongly, and pour into this instrument whose shape is thus:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and it is of light brass or iron, and in the lower part there is a small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on another; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 At the top is the air hole, so that when the instrument comes to water, then it immediately rises on the instrument; empty now half or a third, because if you empty more than necessary at that hour, perhaps the patient will die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls unconscious, or he approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse; then remove the instrument and retain the water, and it is now retained by the cork that stops the hole that is on the syringe, which I have mentioned, that you pierce in this manner; then the instrument begins again the next day, if you see the patient suffering this way, and draw a small quantity of water; do this every day, and be careful not to hurry until there remains only a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you doubt the patient and leave much water in him, cure him with a grave or hot sand, and greatly by sweating, bathing, and sun exposure, and dye him with wine; and cure him with desiccative medicines until he is dried out, and cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	 of the blockage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 It happens sometimes that children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 Then it should be pierced immediately with a very fine needle according to this manner:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 then put in the hole a small plug of pine, and tie it and hold it thus for III days or IV and when he wishes to make urine, let the plug be removed, and make urine, and then replace it; and perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out will not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 If the hole is small, let him be treated with the pine plug, as we have said, so that it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have the hole in its proper place are injured, for some are born with the hole at the tip of the penis, so that they cannot urinate forward unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the glans, and this is a serious disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the manner of the work is such that the patient often lies on his back, then extend the head of the verge and the cup as wide as a feather's shaft, so that the hole reaches in the middle, as it should; and beware of bleeding that often occurs there, and if it does happen, staunch it with whatever staunches blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	 of the pustules of the verge
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Often these albathes come in the verge, and it is an ugly appearance of foul flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; therefore you must take them at the first subtle sign, and cut and clean all of them, then apply a moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment; then heal with diligent ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the leprosy is malignant, of foul color and stench, then you must apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have cut it off, and if the leprosy is in part within the flesh and in part outside of it, then you must first remove the leprosy that is inside; and when it is healed, then treat the one that is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For when you treat them together, it is not certain that the head of the flesh will not be perforated, and blackness and corruption come into its flesh and the joint; thus one must cut away everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranates and beans, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if blood is flowing out, then use the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cautery helps in two situations together: that is to say, for the flow of blood, and for decay; and if the head of the penis is decayed and retracts, then you must insert into the duct of the penis a cane made of lead, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the hair at the tip of the penis happens to those who have not been circumcised, if it occurs due to injury or abscess, then you should scrape it with a heated instrument until the foreskin is freed, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides; and if it is difficult to discuss this, then you should scrape with a spatula some at the tip of the penis and the skin; then gently cut between two, and put there a fine cloth of linen moistened in cold water, so that it does not adhere again.
de la circoncision	 Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 Circumcision is not the separation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this task by our own will and properly on children, it is necessary to do the best work and the lightest for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children because they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons performing circumcision on Dal, at forces, and on the whole novacula; thus the heart was pierced because there are two membranes, and by chance one cuts the upper one and the lower one remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 Or the patient recovers quickly, and the pain is doubled; at the mundification from the nail, the point of the member is not secure; and at the mundification of the fingernail, sometimes the iron slips away, ruining the work, and often it turns out that no mundification was needed, which I have experienced.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 From the mundification done with forceps on all the parts of the limb, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forceps cut equally well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Because when you press your hand and cut equally in all directions as long as you hold the limb; but let the thread be well tightened around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child, if it understands, think that you are only tying the thread around the member, and then make him happy in every way you can; then hold it straight between your hands, and return the forceps between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the instruments; then press your hand to the member and blow into the heart, and draw it up until the head of the member is inside; then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then bind the place tightly with a double thread, then bind it below one finger to another ligature; and hold it by two fingers of the second finger above the little finger and the index finger, and cut between the two ligatures, then lift the heart quickly and draw out the head of the member; then let the blood run drop by drop, for that is the cure; and put powder on it and on top of the powder a piece of cloth soaked in egg white tempered with rose water, confected with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 The heads should be sharp and cutting, and the heads should also be as large as the fingers equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 The error in mundification is when the core inside follows the incision; therefore, you must stretch it to your fingernail before the place forms an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with pincers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 And if it goes on for three days, and what is under the skin is swollen, leave it until that abscess is appeased, and lightly scratch off the scab; then cut as you can move, and be careful of the part of the skin, so that it will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cure then the place of sudden wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatment of powders, and if the heart is cut excessively and it goes above, it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	 of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is caused by the formation of stones, or congealed blood, or a boil, or dead flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is located in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the upper part of the back, and have the patient restrain his breath as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is constricted to force out the stone above, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe," of which here is the form: and let it be made of fine silver, lightly drawn, like the feather of a bird; and let its tube be one and a half palms long, and let it be thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And the manner of the issue of the urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie at the end a bag of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it until the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and wash the bladder and the penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis, as far as it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the scrotum; then push the syringe forward until the bladder, and the patient will feel it coming up to the empty space, and this is not done unless the passage through which it goes is twisted; then draw the thread all with the wool bag little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and let the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	 Of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 When there are scrapes or blood in the bladder, or rotting has gathered there, and you wish to instill water and medicines, you must first make everything with an instrument called "clepsedre," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see. And let the place through which the medicine passes be such that it stops up the tube well without addition, so that it can draw out the moisture and push when necessary; and when you wish to pour your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the enema into the moisture, and pull on the puller that is inside. Thus, you will draw the moisture into the enema bag, then strongly reinsert the puller; thus, the moisture will enter, and will now come to the bladder so that the patient will feel it; this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemaizes the bladder: here it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is of silver or brass, and the head is higher; and below it falls to the chest or the liver; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture with which you wish to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts tightly with a double good thread, and heat the pouch of that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the enema into the pipe, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has entered, so that the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one would assemble a bucket, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	 of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 We have already said in the division the types of stones, and the extraction with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidneys, and all the signs, and in which stone one should work on cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 I say that the stone which is in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that there is water from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and there is urine, and it causes the patient's penis to swell, and he urinates frequently, and then he becomes constipated; and at many of these urinations the base is found; and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, and it is very severe in the elderly, and it is moderate in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes hinders in searching for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the feet and lift and move them downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is fully inclined downwards; then seek it and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut into the stone.  ()
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not fall at the touch of all, moisten your finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent; and push it into its base, and look for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press on top of your finger, and expel it outside where you want to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 And instruct the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand over the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the part where the cut is made; then insert the spatula carefully, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And make between those who are between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the vein; and let it be straight upon the stone, and your two fingers should always be on the anus, and let the cut across be such that it is wide on the outside, and narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large. By chance, the pressure of the finger in the anus makes it come out without effort; and know that there are some stones with angles and edges: they are difficult to remove; and there are some which are below, similar to a glass bead, and round, from which removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 To those with angles and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, then you must apply tongs that are like a file at the end, to squeeze the stone so that it does not escape. Or you insert beneath a subtle instrument curved at the end; and if you cannot trick it this way, widen the pouch where the opening is, and if the urine flows out, then constrict it with vitriol. And if there are more than one stone, first push the largest into the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then draw it out, and afterwards the smaller ones, if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, then it must be cauterized, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine continually flows from there so that the wound cannot close; nevertheless, strive to pull it out, or break it with pincers in pieces; and when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put on top a moistened cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the hot abscess; then let the patient rest on his back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you dislocate it, wash very well the place with oil and water, then treat it with a delicate ointment and a basil ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And if this abscess comes into the wound and there are corrosions, and congelations of blood in the bladder, and the urine is retained because it goes out with the urine: then stick your finger in the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and the skin; then wash the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help it in all ways you know until it is healed; and it is necessary that every time you treat it, you bind the two thighs together and apply the medicines to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra, and stuck, and urine cannot come out; so the treatment of this that I say is, that you cut it many times, and one is freed from the cutting by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 Take an iron tool according to this shape and it should be at three corners fixed in one stake:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 then take a thread and tie it around the rod under the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then push the iron tool into the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron tool in your hand against the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then the urine will come out soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is broken quickly and forced out with the urine, then the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this for some reason that prevents it, tie a thread underneath the stone and another on top, then insert the rod towards the stone between the two threads, then force it out, untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; and continue the treatment until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	 of the female bladder stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 It rarely happens that a woman has a bladder stone, and when it does occur, the treatment is difficult and is hindered by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who will reveal herself to the physicians, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third manner is such that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-versed in this hand art; and the fourth manner is such that the stone of the woman is more embedded than the stone of the man, for which reason it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity demands this, then you must take a midwife well-versed in this, and one scarcely finds her, and if you do not find her, then seek a subtle male doctor; and present him with a wise old woman who is experienced in women's lives, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command that she perform what you instruct concerning the search for the stone; and take great care to see if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the fundament and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she should constrain it under her finger, and recommend that she insert her finger into the vulva of the patient, and seek and press her left hand strongly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If she finds it, then she must move it from side to side from the entry of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the con, where it is more suited, and press on the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the first cut be small; then push the reed into the cut, if you feel the stone so tightly clamp the wound until the stone can come out with force.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 know the similarities to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 And if the blood overcomes you, place vitriol plaster on the spot, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stanched; then return to your work until the stone is weakened, and have the instruments that I told you about for the extraction of the stone in men to help you in your work; and if the blood overcomes you, and it is from the artery that is cut, place the powder on the spot and bandage with cloths and bandages, and do not attempt this again, and leave the stone alone, do not pull it out, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 And when the heat of the blood is soothed, and the place is numb, return to your work until the stone is weakened.
de hernie carnouse	 Of flesh-based hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 Aquatic hernia is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white sack that is below the heart of the testicles, which contains the egg; and it is called "sack," and sometimes it is properly in the cloth of the egg, so one thinks it is another egg; and this is the skin of the testicle between the white sack that we have said; and these do not happen unless there are pockets.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 And the origin of this hernia is from weakness in the testicles, and that substance is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: it is either yellowish, or without red, or black, or white like water, and this happens often; and these are the signs to recognize this collection, for if it is in the white sack that we have mentioned, then the abscess is reasonable, a long pocket like the shape of an egg, and the testicle does not open, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, the abscess is round with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the leather of the thighs and the white flesh, one feels it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, examine all the affected area thoroughly, from which the form comes before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 According to what follows the affected area, judge what is inside it.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we cure it with fire, the patient must be seated according to his ability and the fullness of his body; then have him sit on his back, on something not too high, and place many cloths underneath him; then have him sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the iron rod along one of the two ribs of the curve of the thighs; then take the spatula knife, and cut the skin of the thighs in a straight line from top to bottom until near the groin, and let your cut be entirely straight while dividing the skin of the thighs up to the white flesh, and carefully peel it according to your ability; then puncture the white flesh completely with water through a large hole, and extract all the water, and then apply your fingers, and stretch the white flesh upward; and do not touch the curve of the thighs, but only the white flesh; cut the side of him entirely or in pieces as well, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return; and if the egg jumps out of your work, bring it back into its place when you have completed the work on the white flesh; then sew the two lips of the curve of the thighs with a stitch, then cure him as the other wounds, until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspended, suspecting the flow of blood; then cut the coccyx throughout the suspension, and extract the egg, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if the vein is divided into two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound linen moistened in rose oil; and put on top of the two coccyxes another linen moistened in wine and oil, and put over them double-layered cloths, and bind it all up with a bandage that follows this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two cloths, and fill them with wool according to this pattern and sew them together in the collar of the breeches, and let one of the heads take from the foundation up to the back, and the other at the wrist; and the other two heads on the two ankles, and let all the tightening be in the loop of the breeches; and sometimes this wrap for cautery is used instead of an iron tailoring knife, and it is that you take a subtle surgical knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white part that contains the water is exposed; then take the cautery in this form, and pierce that white part at the corners, and scrape with this hot subtle cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the cut in all the ways that you can, until you excise everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and beware of bleeding or wounds caused by the tailoring work; and if anything goes against you, whether it is an abscess or bleeding or something else, then cure what goes against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this work because of its horror, then use perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain through the indications that we have said that there is aquous humor there, then make the patient sit on a high seat; pierce the abscess in the lower part as wide as possible, and place the perforation along the length of the body; and let the opening be large so that all the water flows out; then put cotton on the spot, and bind it, and leave it to drain the remaining water, then cure until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out at the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument with which one draws water from dropsical patients, whose form has been described above; and enlarge the opening of the wound, and know that the water will return, and it will collect again after six months or thereabouts, and when it is collected as before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 Know that in the cutting of this vein there is fear in many conditions, which is why it seems better to leave it alone; and I will tell you the workings and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	 I say therefore that many abscesses come in the body, and especially in the testicles; and this is in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 This is to say by superfluous acid and acute, which spreads to the testicles, or from blows; and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and it finds no pain, and the abscess is grave; and sometimes an abscess is called dangerous and painful, and of a red color, and sometimes comes from a swollen vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is due to narrowing of an artery, it is known by the hot condition of an abscess, when you press it against your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 That which is done with inflammation of a vein is known by its condition at the expression from the touch of the fingers, and one can well make the cut on this likeness, and on other wounds; and it is that you cut the heart of the coions, then let the egg rise up, and draw out the white thoroughly, and deliver the membrane from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the egg is already hardened with these wounds, then it is necessary that you draw out the egg and cut it; and if it is full of pus or in those which are inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all that matter, and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 And if the birthplace of the flesh is at the back, then you must cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when your work is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess enveloped in a covering similar to a bud, with the softening of the testicles, and if the patient moves greatly when he walks; and the treatment of this disease is almost as dangerous as the previous one, nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then put the scrotal suspension down to your thighs, to all the vessels close to the penis, and hold them firmly; then cut with a sharp scalpel across the vessels until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein has come out, and tie again at the other end; then cut them straight in the middle according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupt humors; then treat the wound as the others where the bone is injured, so that no vessel bursts that nourishes one of the testicles; for by this there is no harm, and if all the vessels become visible, it is necessary to pull the testicles to all the vessels; so that the flesh does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	 of the suturing of the sinus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The occurrences of this hernia are from the section that comes to the sinus, or the extension on the belly in the area of the groin, because the intestines descend from that suture to one of the testicles; and this suture is either in the sinus, or in the extension of it, and these two types come from many causes: from a blow, or from a jump, or from a belch, or from lifting heavy weights, and similar things; and the sign when it is from the extension of the sinus is that it comes little by little, over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; and the abscess is equal to the depth, because the sinus presses against the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 And the sign is that when it is from the section of the synaxis, it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears diverse, under the skin nearby, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body lacking the synaxis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 And sometimes the circles go with the intestine, and they are retained within, causing the patient to suffer great pain, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 And in these treatments by iron, for fear of which it should be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 And the method of treatment is such that you instruct the patient to pull out the intestine with his hand into the wound, if he can reach it; then let him be bound around his neck, between your hands, and lift the thighs; then place the heart above, and cut all the skin from the testicles lengthwise; then insert the liver of the groin inside accordingly as needed to open the wound, so that the eggs may come out; then peel off the synaxis which is under the skin of the testicles, until the hard white synaxis is uncovered on all sides; then insert your index finger in that which follows the testicle, into what is between the white synaxis which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second synaxis, and separate that which is behind the egg, and between the second synaxis; and then move to the right hand inside the heart of the testicles, and raise the white synaxis up to your left hand, and lift the egg with all the synaxis towards the groin; and instruct the assistant to extend the egg upwards, and release that which is tied behind the ligament; and check with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped around the hard white synaxis, and if you find anything, push it down into the belly below; then take a needle with a thread of one hundred threads made from ten threads, and insert it in the back part of the synaxis which is after the skin of the testicles, behind the groin, then cut the knots that appear from the threads until there are four threads; then gather them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the synaxis which we have said is under the skin of the testicles with a strong thread of two parts; then wrap the knots of the threads and tie them firmly with two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them may enter into it, so that an abscess does not form there; and place the ligature again according to the first long ligature, two fingers from that one, and after these two ligatures leave the synaxis which is under the heart of the testicles the width of a finger; and then cut in the part which is under the skin of the testicles until the blood runs, as we have said before; then apply wool moistened with oil to the wounds, and place the ligature which we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 And sometimes we cauterize the white tissue that we have mentioned after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 For this happens often, and let the pus drain by itself; and if it delays in draining, then apply hot water and place on it what we have said, until it drains; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	 of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 In this case, I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is done in the same way as the vessel which is with the bladder, in such a manner that you tie the vessels after cutting them lightly below; then cut through the middle, and treat the abscess with what we have mentioned, until the vessels drain; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed. 
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 When the bowels burst into the anus, as we have said, and open the place; and let none of the intestines protrude into the scrotum, and if they do, it is little, and repair every hour; and nevertheless, if it stays too long in this state, the wound or hernia will grow until the intestines protrude; and this happens because of the extension of the hernia that is in the anus, as we have said, for it is extended, then the place is softened and swollen and open; and the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then cut the inflamed place of the hernia wide according to the width of three fingers; and then extract the hernia that is under the skin like the previous, then take the needle and put it on the visible part of the hernia; and press deeply into the belly, then sew the two visible parts of the hernia onto the head of the needle, and sew one and the other; then extract the head of the needle, and do not cut the hernia or extend the egg or anything else, as I have made you know in the cure of the intestinal entrapment; then cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads, clean and heal the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 The suture is constricting and has no appearance in the stitching, and the cautery is better in this place and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the parts that are inside are softened and it can be seen; and it is necessary that when one wants to heal it, that the patient lies on his back, and cut the softened skin onto the natural skin; then join the two lips with a stitch, and if you wish, sew first the superfluous part of the softened skin with three or four strong stitches; then cut between the stitches, and heal it as the other wounds until it is healed, and let the threads fall.
dou chastrement	 of the cautery
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 Know that cauterization is forbidden in our law, and therefore I would not like to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the physician knows how to answer when asked about it, and knows the treatment; and the other reason is that we often need to use cauterization on some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and dogs and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say therefore that cauterization is done in two ways: by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the one that we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the skin is softened and loose; then take it with your hand, until it is replaced and you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Of castration of the male: you must hold the animal, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the cord, and cut above each testicle one time, when you have well skinned them; and leave some of the fat and the fine fat that is on the vessels; and this manner of castration is better than that done by attraction, because at attraction there may remain accidentally something from the testicles, which causes the animal to desire lust; then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	 Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphroditism occurs in men in two ways: one is that between the two testicles there appears as if by the nature of a woman, where there is hair, and sometimes urine flows from it.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And another manner is for women, and it is placed on the wrist like a rod and two ounces.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment for both men and women is that you should cut the cartilages together, and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	 of the temples
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 Tentigene is a cartilage on the natural part, so that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is necessary that you cut off the superfluity of the tentigene with your hand or scissors, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep, so that blood does not come out, then treat it with another treatment until it heals; and for another cartilage that grows at the mouth of the womb, and fills up, and perhaps protrudes, and is like a cow's udder, and therefore the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary for you to cut it, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	 erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 Erratic is when the woman's nature is not understood, or the opening is small; and it can be natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come upon it; whether it is caused by a narrowing of the hips, or by subtle or thick sperm, and it forms deep in the womb, or on the sides, or below, wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly menstruation; and knowledge of this condition comes from examining the vagina.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the protrusion is apparent near, seek two fingers or a thread.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If the subtle symphysis is near the II livres, hasten and do thus: place your II fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, with her legs spread; then extend the II livres very strongly, so that the subtle symphysis is open, and there is swelling; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman lie down each day, so that it may not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the symphysis is hard and thick, then you should cut it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the swelling is of flesh born, then suspend it with an onion and cut it; and have the blood-stanching medicines, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, abundant in egg white; then apply a wide piece of lead, so that the wound may not heal; and thus for a long time, and let him use a linen tent; then he should be treated with other treatments until he is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when a wound occurs on the head, it should be covered in this manner, unless it is an abscess that has broken open.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For the burst abscess that is on the head, one should not touch or do anything with fire.
des emorroides	 of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that are usually without skin, and when hemorrhoids are old, they turn black; and we have already said in the division their similarities, and their signs, and I will say here those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and blackening, when they are completely protruding from the head and do not protrude to touch, then there is no treatment by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Ceux qui sont à l'entrée de la plaie, que l'on peut sentir, sont ceux que l'on peut traiter.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Those who are at the edge of the wound, which can be felt, are those that can be treated.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it stops bleeding, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If it does not stop, have cupping glasses applied to the back and breasts without cutting; then take wool, soak it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess is quiet, then cauterize the place of the swelling until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp head, so you should cover it as I have said above; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	 of the pustules of the face
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many types of abscesses come to the face, such as cancer and piercing abscesses and herpes and styes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes to the face, which is not one of the abscesses that swell quickly; and if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not hasten to pierce, but let the wound dry until the pain subsides; and then have the patient sit on a chair, and place two small chairs where he can lean back, and support his back and bring his feet together at the outer side of the leg; and let his thighs be spread, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good ligature; then succor give him towards the left side, and bring the instrument used to work the opening of the wound, from which later comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see this instrument being brought, that you first insert a needle to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters into the instrument does not go in deeper than it should, and that it does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is too large, then cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not harm him; and it is necessary that he put the horn of the instrument on top, and that he hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess opens, and one makes an incision with a soft hand, it must be covered at the top with a layer of leek spathe; and when the wound is emptied, it should be placed in the wound moist cloths in rose oil or in dry green oil; and place the cloth outside the wound on the edge of the flesh, and place on top of the flesh and on the arm a clean cloth moistened in water where the mallows are cooked; then cure after two days of ointment fitting to that, as long as it is healed; and sometimes lift the flesh and the wound with an enema of water and honey, and then of water with roots of lily and aristolochia long be cooked; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 Et s'il y a une blessure dans la chair, il faut éviter d'utiliser le fer pour la cautériser, mais traite-la comme nous l'avons décrit dans la section sur les divisions.
de l’enfantement	 du accouchement
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 Quant li fous enfans veut issir par la baise, cil n’a pas en lui la figure de l’enfantement naturel; car il vient mal a point, et est tout contrarie a son naturel. Et tu ne le deves mie aidier fors s’il te requiert, car se il ne te requiert mie, si n’est pas bien fait.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 Because it sometimes happens to his feet, and comes upon the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes upon his belly, or his back, and is turned by chance onto his neck, and in other bad shapes; thus, it is necessary for the nurse that she be wise and skillful in these things, and guard against error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one should help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 If the child comes upon his head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her virtue is weak, then let her sit on a saddle, where women hold her; and arise her nature with oil or cooked fenugreek, and then the nurse puts between his teeth the little spatula whose form is this:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And cut the secondine, and slice towards its nail until the moisture inside flows out; and hold the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman a clister (enema) of fenugreek powder with sesame oil; then make her drink and cough up condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands come out strongly, then you must gently push them back a little at a time; and if they cannot go in, put the woman on a chair and raise her feet high; then tilt the chair to the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall when it is tilted; and if the hands cannot go in and the child dies, cut off the hands with the knife mentioned earlier, and extract the child, and treat them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the child's exit onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes onto its feet, it is necessary to push upwards; and then turn it a little at a time until it is straight; then take it by one of its feet and extend it a little at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 When he jumps up to his knees, command him to cough and let him sneeze as needed; if he jumps further, so be it with God’s will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 And if he does not jump further as we have said, then turn him a little at a time until he is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 For then he will have gone lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if he does not come forth as we have said, then take mullein of altitude, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all together in a mortar; and put this ointment on the woman’s nature inside and outside; then make her sit in hot water up to the ribs; and when she is well moistened below, give her a drink of honey wine, and place it under her, and leave her for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for now the child will jump.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 from the child’s exit onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this form, let the midwife place her hands little by little; then she should be lifted onto his neck, and his feet should hang down, and he should lie on the bed; and bend his hands little by little, and then take his hands above the belly, and remove the pillows from below, until it is prepared to descend; and if the child does not jump, take his feet and move them very well, then move the belly up, then put your hands there; and draw the child little by little; and command the woman to hold on until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 of the child's exit that comes from the side a hand's width wide
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to maneuver to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman rise and walk; if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on a bed, and spread her legs widely; then introduce the instrument that I have described; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then study to bring back the hand; and take the child according to its natural shape, and make it sneeze, and command that she grasp herself until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 of the exit of the child onto its neck, and let its hands be spread, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the midwife take her hand, then turn it little by little, and gently lift it; and when it is equal, put on the natural instrument of height and oil, as we have said, then command that she move little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command that she grasp herself; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 of this same manner to all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it happens in this manner to all the second part, then cut the second part with your fingernail until the moisture is emptied; and if the child presses on its face and on its neck, then cut from the base so that it is not retained, and kill the child; then push the child back inside, as much as you need to place it, and instruct the woman to hold herself some time: then it will come out lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 Two is a strange thing, and they do not live, except rarely; I know that they are multiplied by the sperm that separates them, which is tied to the base; and sometimes they come out as naturally as one alone, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they come out violently, then treat it as we have said, and let the wound be subtle, and make it quickly and lightly, just as she does; and do so that he may move to safety.
de plusors enfans	 of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or many up to XV, and all are perfectly formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one, and it is necessary that the wound know all these things, for perhaps similar things happen; thus do as is proper.
de l’enfant mort	 of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you treat the woman for the dead child in the womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work with your hands; then it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound constitution, and has no accident or fear of death; then the woman should be placed on her back, and her head inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the assistant holds the two parts, where she lies in the bed so that she is not drawn down by the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils with a mixture of althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint your hands with these oils and these mixtures; then gently insert them into the womb, then find one place where she can insert the needles so that they are suitable for this purpose, and take care if the child is well-prepared that it should descend onto its head; then fix the needles in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under his beard or in his forehead or near the ribs, and if the descent is on the feet, then fix it in the heel and in the middle of the ribs; and it is necessary that you hold the needle with your right hand, and place the hook between your fingers of the left hand, and gently insert all your hand, and fix the needle in any of these places that we have said, until you come to the empty space; and this is the shape of the needle:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then insert against the other bone, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal; and then move them equally in one direction and another to make it come out, and let the bones be notched to hold it, as shown here.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if a part remains, then anoint the bail with some of his fingers in oil, and push it into that part, and pull out the other part; and if nothing remains, place this bone higher up, and do this until it all comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to constriction, it is necessary that you wrap it on a cloth until it all comes out; then cut off at the joint of the foot or at the heel, and so must you do with the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's head is large and it is narrow in the birth canal, or if there is a sharp angle at the crown of the head, then you must insert the sharp spatula between your fingers, and split the crown and extract the sharp angle; or use the instrument called "almidach," by which the form comes with the instruments mentioned in the chapter following this one. And do the same if the child has a large head naturally. Then draw out the bones with forceps, and if the head protrudes and is stuck in the birth canal, then it should be cut open until the moisture within the bladder is released; and if it cannot come out, then strike it into pieces with as much force as you can; and if the belly or under the ribs are swollen, then you must pierce them until the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 And if the child is on its feet, then the attraction is light, and the adjustment to the mother's mouth is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And if it is extended at the stomach or the chest, then you must stretch it on a cloth wrapped around your hand; and open the stomach or the chest until the moisture inside is corrected; and if other members are removed and the head remains, then insert your hand into the deepest part of the womb, and pull it up to the mouth of the womb; then put one or two onions in, and pull strongly; and if the mouth of the womb is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, then do not work at it, but rather apply moist and fatty things; and administer poultices, and cook them in softening and moisturizing water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the child is on its side, and you can place it flat, then proceed as we have said with the living child; but if you cannot, then draw out the foetus piece by piece, leaving nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, proceed as we have said in the case of abscesses that come to married women; and if there is bleeding, place her in warm water to restrain it, and administer other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 And I saw a woman whose womb held a dead child, then another grew above it, and the other died as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After a long time, an abscess formed in her belly, and swelled until it burst, and began to fester greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but the wound could not be healed.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I applied a strong drawing plaster, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I was greatly astonished by this, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 So I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I cleaned the wound, and removed many bones until the woman was in better condition; and she lived for a long time thus, and always exuded a little pus from that place; and I have remembered this chapter only because when the master finds something strange, he should know how to apply help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 To bring the bone back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 Here comes the form of the press, which is used for the books; and at two turns are the two heads of the two levers.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 However, let the horns be more subtle than the press, and made of ebony or boxwood; and let the mouth of the wood be two fingers wide, and the edge of the tree one finger, and in length a palm and a half; and between the two levers there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are fitted in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are placed at the mouth of the bone to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 A different form, more subtle and lighter, be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs; and have at the two ends two adjustments, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you wish to open the vulva with all the instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, feet dangling and legs spread, then push the two adjustments together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; then work your hand along the entire instrument, as you have done with the tongs equally, according to the quantity that you wish to open the mouth of the vulva, until the old woman does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 This instrument is all sharpened, and their appearances are diverse; and when the physician has prepared them, the work is faster, and higher for men due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 Do not despise the instrument before it has been prepared, because their needs are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the placenta is retained after childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze forcefully, and press your hands against her mouth and nose; if she expels it in this way, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, then take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cinnamon, and centaury; all these herbs or some of them are cooked in water over the fire; then put a tube from the pot into the hole in the lid, and the other end in the mouth of the woman, and hold it until the steam enters the womb; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 If the second skin (blister) bursts quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if it remains after this treatment and is not broken, then instruct the patient to moisten their left hand in linseed oil or mustard plaster of lupine, then apply it to the blister, and search for the second skin; and when she finds it, she should take hold of it and stretch it little by little evenly, so that the flesh does not tear during removal; but it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pull; thus it will come out and drain.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 And if the mouth of the flesh is narrowly constricted, we have spoken of treatment by sneezing and herb fumigation; and if it does not burst from all that has been said, be careful not to rush when pulling; but you must tie what is at the mouth of the flesh to the thigh of the woman, then administer an enema with four-compound oil; thus it will putrefy and soften, and come out; however, when it putrefies, it brings a bad odor to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 If therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigations for this purpose: some of the ancients have proven fumigations with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The form of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for retaining the flowers and the second stage is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 It is made of glass, similar to a reed, and the fine end is placed in the vagina, while the wider end rests on the fire; and let the fumigation be on hot coals, and continue until it has thoroughly dried out, then begin again with another.
de percier lou fondement	 to pierce the anus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many children are born whose anus is not pierced, but rather closed by a thin membrane: it is therefore necessary for the midwife to pierce this membrane with her finger, and not with a sharp spatula; and she should be careful that she does not touch the child’s genitals. Then she should place a cloth moistened in wine and oil over it, and continue the care of ointment until he is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 And if you doubt that it will not heal, then put a lead weight through the hole, and leave it for fewer days, and remove it when the child wants to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 And sometimes this obstruction comes from a sudden wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that suddenness: and if it is healed, as we have said with the lead weight.
de la fistule dou fondement	 of the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that come from beneath the anus are nodules, and those that come near the anus from below or in the space of the two parts, whether one fistula or several; and when this nodule is old, it works, and it brings with it more moisture, either white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are known by this, that there comes out from them during excretion or wind, and sometimes one bursts.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 And so for fissures that penetrate to the bladder, and halfway through the penis; and they reach to the groin, and even to the testicles.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one knows if the fissure penetrates the anus or not: and it is that you insert your finger into the anus, and push a fine needle of iron or steel into the fissure when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 And if there is curvature, then you push a fine lead tent or a horse hair into it until you feel the tent or the hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and nothing comes out of the opening—neither excrement nor gas nor pus—as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; so hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 And when the fistula reaches to the bladder or to the channel of urine, then the urine leaks out and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is perforated to the hip joint, then the tendon comes to that place; if there is no tortuosity and the pain is around the wound, then it leaks out constantly, and neither medicine nor cauterization by ointment helps; and in these perforating fistulas, there is no cure except labor, and foolish doctors waste their time on them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In the one that is not perforating and is not ancient, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced; and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands; and you raise his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly; then insert a tendon of brass, or of lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tendon comes out.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 Se the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your finger inside, if you feel that the tent has been pierced; and if it is discovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then know that it is perforated; so do not work on it as one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 It is said, however, that one can heal some well, but this happens rarely; and the help that one provides, it is that one heats a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and puts it all hot into the fistula, until it comes near the anus; and does this two or three times, so that you know that these charred hairs are burned, which are similar to a bird’s feather; and then treats the moist tents with butter, until those hairs come out, then treats the wound with greasy ointment and bandages.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If he is thus healed, this is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If it cannot be healed otherwise; and if the tent is not perforated as far as the finger in its base, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or pus, and you see the fistula following this covering from the heart; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and always push the tent forward, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent; and the tent will be delivered and fall out; then wash away those foul flesh pieces that resemble a bird's feather, and let nothing remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 And if the pus overcomes you, and runs between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or caustic medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Because the fire cautery accomplishes two good things: that is to say, the burning of these hairs, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then cure the wounds moistened in butter or crushed substances, until the place gives pus, and then the burned hairs exit with the pus; then treat the wound with adhesive plasters made of hard charred material, and these medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 For when it is restored, it heals and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 And if a fistula extends all the way to the anus, and is distant from the body, then you should insert your finger into the anus, and inquire there.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the wound, and between two there is a membrane or hair or charred material, if it is near bursting, then do not proceed except by way of trust and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can you put in patches and treat it as before; and do not go too deep, lest you cut the tissue that holds the anus, and cause excrement to pass by itself without will; then treat, as we have said; perhaps it will heal, or you remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut near the anus, with a probe or another appropriate instrument; then clean that charred material that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to prevent the fistula from returning to the part beyond the anus: this will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner: and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, which is located on the side of the anus near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 And you insert a twisted thread into it, and insert the tent with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is spreading along the edge of the anus inside, then extract the thread from that hole, as you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread, and bring together the two ends, and press them against each other, and leave it for one or two days; and sometimes restrain it, until the threads cut through those fleshy parts between them, and come out; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 If the fistula does not burst, then make it burst in every way that you can, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it is not necessary to make the covering for the ligation so deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The shape of the sharp thorn used to make the fistula is very pointed and cutting on one side, and not on the other, so that you do not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	 hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Hemorrhoids are in two ways: either they are inside the anus like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and blood always comes out of them, and there is one or several, and they are outside the anus and at the edge of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture, and sometimes come out a little citrine water or a little blood, and have the color of the flesh. And the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain to go into the chambers until the anus protrudes, and the threads are visible; then hurry up and take it with tongs, or hold it with your nail, then cut at its roots; and if the nails cannot hold it because of moisture, take them in a cloth or in cotton, or in a piece of camlet; and pull them towards you with your hands, then cut, and sprinkle some hot powders on top that are suitable for cauterization; or cauterize as said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat with other treatments until they are healed; and if the anus cannot protrude, then give the patient a clyster of biting and harsh clyster to clean what is in the anus, so that it can come out clearly; when the patient strains, and the threads are out of the anus, the treatment is light; and it is that you take them with your nail or tongs, and cut, then treat as we have said, until they are healed, and that the patient fears incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If you must bring the stitch according to this manner: take a thread, pass it through a needle, then draw the thread out from above and make the needle pierce through from the other side; turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide; hold the thread tightly, then knot the thread, pull out the needle, and do this with all the others, leaving one for the superfluous blood to flow out; then place on top a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, place it on top, and instruct the patient to rest; and leave it until they heal, and when they have healed, treat them with ointment and other treatments until they are cured.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 Of dryness of the intestines or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 Often occurs dryness in the intestines, by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine has no effect.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then it is necessary that you scrape the surface with a spatula or your fingernail, so as not to let it moisten; then heal it until it becomes dry as it should; and if it cannot dry, repeat the scraping more strongly than before, so that it bleeds a lot and scabs; then heal it until it is healed.
dou fremit	 of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 Formica is a small furry creature that goes very deep into the body; sometimes coldness finds it, and one feels it like a deathly trembling, and it affects the whole body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the cure is such that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this quill on the trembling part, so that the circle encompasses the trembling entirely; then turn your hand with all the quill until you encircle the trembling completely, and insert it deeply, and pull out the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if you see this, do it with a quill of brass or iron in the same way, and let it be sharp below and smooth above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 nor should it be perceived, to keep at two fingers' width, and press hard. And if you see this, then cauterize the trembling part, as described in the previous chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	 of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 Sometimes one makes an enema of silver or gold, or of melted tin or iron; and sometimes one makes these instruments small and large, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 Therefore, those for whom one prepares in the care of children who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The form of the small and large enema is like this: the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 and let there be an outlet where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and on one side let there be two holes, and on the other one hole; and the belly in which the medicines are placed should be made of a beast’s bladder or parchment, and it should be punctured all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be one finger’s width, then insert into these holes a strong thread twisted into an X or circle shape, and tie the belly together like this: ; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then administer the enema; and that is the form of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And let the enema not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or similar substance, then insert it lightly; then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until it is all emptied, then remove the enema, and lift the patient's legs against the wall, and if the enema wants to exit, then hold it as long as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, then there is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you administer an enema for illness of the belly, and the enema is eager to exit, then repeat it until it is cleaned out.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if there are hemorrhoids or an abscess in the rectum, then let the enema be as thin as through a child's finger; and this is the form of the thin enema that draws the skin tight:
des plaies	 of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will speak about the treatments of hands and of medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things by which wounds are made are by the falling of a stone, and by the cutting of a sword or knife, or by a spear or stick or arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the foot, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you about the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for their treatment will come in its own chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from the fall of a stone or similar things, and the skin is nevertheless torn and the wound is large, and you suspect heated abscess: then make the patient bleed immediately from the cephalic vein itself if there is little blood from the wound, and let the bleeding be opposite the injured part; and the patient should avoid excessive consumption of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he does not want to bleed, then let his food be reduced, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat; and put on the wound, if heated abscesses come there, cotton soaked only in rose oil or in stiptic wine; and if there is no heated abscess, then put on the fresh wound, all its blood not moved by the air, a powder that I will mention shortly; and if the heat has moved it, then apply some ointments until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 And if the wound is large, such as from a sword cut or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tents, then join them by stitching, as I will say for wounds in the belly, about stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed to the bone and gaping, and only holds together by a single point, then shave it; then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as heads and cooked grain, also like chickpeas, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find rottenness in the skin, and it reaches to the bone, then shave all the rot away, and throw it out, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by cutting, and it cannot be stanched with medicines, then seek the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread; and if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put in this powder which seals before the heat has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the manner of the powder is thus: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live coal three parts, and make it into a fine powder, and fill the wound, and bind it strongly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it unbound, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 And sometimes one does this only with coal, when one has neither frankincense nor dragon's blood, but the heat has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the heat has moved the wound, even if it is summer, do not apply this powder to it; but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey, until it casts off pus; then proceed with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if the break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with fine tweezers; and I will tell you later about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	 of a neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is the nerve, there is no other treatment than to leave it alone and not apply anything constricting, for this harms the nerves and causes them to shrink; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member. But let the medicine be warm, like hot water in soft water, mixed with rose oil, and washed similarly in soft water, and other stones of this kind according to this method, and moist compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the wound is large, then stitch it up and bind it with bandages, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wounds are deep and there is swelling and they are full of pus, then pierce them in a lower place; and if an artery is cut and bleeding follows, then desiccate it, and let it flow out, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passage is blocked so that food cannot pass, then sew up the windpipe on the skin of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape; and then bind it firmly, and leave it for some days, and then treat it with drying compresses until it heals; and if there is an impression in the bone, then probe it; and if there are pieces of bone, then draw them out completely if you can, and those that you cannot have, leave them until the wound putrefies, and let it drain and close the opening; and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 Et s'il a en la plaie os et il y a fistule, soignez-la ainsi que j'ai dit dans ce chapitre.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, observe if there are gas bubbles when the patient inhales: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not apply the powder at the first hour, nor bind it tightly for fear of drawing blood in too deeply, which may return to the heart and kill the patient; but apply an astringent ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton into the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three days, or four, or more; this way, there will be no spasms, nor heart tremors, nor difficulty in breathing; and when you see the bones set properly, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Cure it then with poultices and other treatments until it is healed; and if it cannot heal, and works, know that there is a fistula; treat it as needed.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it is simple, either in the breast or back, then treat it as one would treat that which is in front; if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is close to the bone and has splintered pieces, then cleanse the wound, and draw out the fragments if they are accessible; and if they are not accessible, then let the wound suppurate, which will ease extraction; and of other wounds on other limbs the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 Of the belly's dislocation
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The dislocation of the belly is large and medium and small; from a large wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, exit due to which their reinsertion is difficult; and the suture is more troublesome, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because it is more difficult to reinsert the intestines if they are not replaced immediately; for the intestine swells quickly when it feels the cold, so it enters more difficultly, and that is why the medium-sized wound is better, because one removes less of the intestine than in others. And know that the suturing of the belly is according to four manners: two common stitches occur in the suturing of the belly, and the stitching of other wounds of the body, and there are two other specific stitches common to other wounds; however, they are more specific with regard to the suturing of the belly, and I will say each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestines has come out, it is a difficult thing to put back, which is done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten one sponge or one cloth in hot water only, or boil in vinegar and pepper and cloves, and bathe the intestine until the swelling is gone; sometimes this wine is constricting, and it is better to use alone for reducing swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling go away, moisten the intestine in hot water where althea and mallows have been boiled, for by this it is made easier to enter a little; and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first cure is better than cutting, for no one should cut there without great necessity; and this is the instrument for splitting it: cut inside on the curve and not outside, and see here the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, then set them back in place according to their natural form in their proper location, if you have the power, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you must make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, place the head and the feet higher than the lower parts, and likewise if the rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two parts, set your intention so that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus you must administer this for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 For small wounds, use what you have prepared. Then take in your hands the pious minister who can hold all the stitching on his hand, and bring together the lips of the wound; this is the common manner of sutures, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the width of the wound, then leave two fingers' width from the top of the wound, and there insert a needle where there is a good strong thread; pierce through the two heads of the leather with the two points of the syphac, which is under the leather inside, as much as you can make it pierce through that part, and bring together the two heads of the syphac, four together; then strain a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring together the two lips of the wound accordingly, and then leave two fingers' width, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need of needles, until all the wound is contained; let the needles be moderate, between fine and thick, because fine needles cut through all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well: therefore they must be moderate; and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and leather, lest they cut and work the wound before the suture; then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not injure the patient while sleeping, and place caps or bandages on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; and this manner of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because one can use a single needle or two in the second suture, which is common, and it is that you bring together the two heads of the leather and the two heads of the syphac together at a needle where there is a strong moderate thread; and when you have pierced these four heads together, remove the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that one sews cloths; and place between each suture the thickness of a small finger; this suture is known by men, and I stitched a wound that a man had in his belly, which was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and it protruded from the intestines by about two palms in length, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I returned the intestines to him after they had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was closed for fifteen days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching: take the needle and insert it from the outer part to the inner part; when it has pierced the center straight on, leave the end of the silk or thread where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce from the other side from the inner part to the outer part; and the intention of this stitching is that you sew just as furriers sew furs, and that you leave the silk once on one side and take it up again on the other side, until the stitching is entirely complete. etti
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of stitching, which Galen correctly identifies, is done as some do: they naturally join the two parts together and apply one end of the thread to the other end in this manner: take a needle with its tip near the mirror, and make it pierce that place only, leaving the two ends of the thread; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part until the inner part, at the two ends of the thread; then make it pierce one and the other from the outer part until the inner part, in two other places on the mirror which are on either side; and this is the best method of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galiens so said this word, and some attest to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; and one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew straps; and know that when the stitching is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the fire has moved it, put back the intestines and the stitch; then place a powder that is good for flesh, and if the fire has moved it, place some ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and let the threads be drawn out, and the silk and the bandage be bound together; then treat the wound like other wounds, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, as soon as it begins to heal, place old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 Because you do not need any other medicine in many situations when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound may affect the principal members, then it is necessary for you to soak a light linen cloth in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the angles and under the armpits; and if there is pain or putrefaction in the belly, which often happens, then administer an enema of black wine heated, and likewise if the putrefaction reaches the intestines; perforate them from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the thinness of its walls, and the delicacy of the whole body, and its close proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the intestine protrudes from the wound, reset it like an intestine while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned black or dark, then you must tie the black area to prevent blood flow, for there are veins and arteries; then cut that which is between the ligatures, and place the two ends hanging from the lower part of the wound until further relief during the extraction when the intestine falls back into the wound.
de la routure dou boueil	 of the boiling water
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine is broken and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, because I saw a man wounded in the belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became festered and turned into a fistula, from which came excrement and wind; I applied treatment as best I could, and did not cease to refine until he was healed, and the place cured.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it solder, I feared that the patient had an ailment in his belly; and there was no ailment, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such a manner: take large-headed needles, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the needle has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it draws its mouth up; and then cut off the head, and this holds so that it cannot untie, then place another needle after in the same manner as before, until the entire wound is seized; and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 That chief so attaches itself in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner: take the end of this intestinal thread that is very thin, then tie to this thread's end a fine twisted linen thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and bring it back together; and this method of stitching for the intestines is nothing more than according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal veins, there is no cleverness or skill, except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 de fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is generally called a fistula, and similarly when it is cut open and returns to its natural state.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And according to the truth, fistula is defined as a hard and white swelling that is not painful, and it is open like the feathers of a bird; sometimes it flows clearly, and other times thickly; sometimes little, and other times enough; and I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed, and has no flesh, is only cured through one of the nine causes: that is to say, because of the insufficiency of blood or flesh; or due to its bad quality; or because there is hard flesh inside, on the lips, which prevents new flesh from growing; or there is too much moisture; or the place is rotten and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine used for healing is not good; or because the corruption is a form of pestilence; or due to the region's property, digestion is slow, healing is delayed, and it is naturally swollen; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the cures with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 Or it is necessary for me to make you know the cure of fistula which is made by the work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the sinus, or the intestine, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and there is such that comes to the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous sanation, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you want to know it, take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, probe it; and if the fistula is crooked, seek it with a subtle probe of boxwood, for boxwood bends more easily around the curvature; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot probe it well with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses it; then probe it wisely as best you can, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and it is hollow throughout, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels at the pressure of your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, cut according to what I have said, and remove firmly the foulness and corrupt flesh that is inside; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep from a straight place, it is necessary that you cut deeply, as much as you can, then put in wet probes soaked in astringent medicine, and push them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which remains at the bottom; and then put on dressings of fresh flesh, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, burn it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupt from the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If a vein or nerve is injured in the main limb, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then clean it so that all the corruption is removed, then treat the charring flesh until it is healed; and if it does not heal, and returns again as before, know that you are not at the source: uncover and search until you reach the source, remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; then there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature; and if there is a little bone corrupted, and you can pull it with tongs, draw it with an appropriate instrument; and if there are many bones, draw them all, leaving none; and if moisture hinders you, and there is no error or fear, cut and remove the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 Et si tu ne les peux oster à une heure, mets sur la plaie quelque chose qui enflamme la pourriture, et laisse tant que le lieu soit pourri autour des os, et alors les os auront plus facilement; et s’il s’agit d’un gros os, comme de jambe ou de cuisse, il suffit seulement de retirer la corruption jusqu’à ce que toute la noirceur soit enlevée, puis referme la plaie; et s’il y a une grande partie de corrompu, et qu’elle atteigne la moelle de l’os, alors il faut brûler et couper tout jusqu’à la corruption, et ensuite le soigner jusqu’à ce qu’il soit guéri; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui arriva à un homme dans sa jambe, afin que tu en prennes exemple et aide dans ton travail.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 It was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause such that the matter came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason for it to be opened; but the physicians in their foolishness worked on it so much that the abscess burst open, and many matters were flowing out of it, and a fistula formed, and there were many holes from which all threw pus and moisture from the body; and many physicians treated him for about two years, and there was no sage in the art among them, until I was called to see it, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what was flowing through the holes of a large body; and the young man's flesh turned red and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that some come together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 I hastened then and cut into one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone, which I found to be rotten and perforated, with corruption reaching all the way to the inside of the bone; I removed what appeared to me of the rotten bone, thinking that there was no other corruption except what I removed. Then I began to treat the wound with drawing medicines for a long time, but it could not heal. So I started again and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, which I removed, and then I endeavored to heal the place; but I could not do so, because I cut around a palm's width of the bone, drawing it out all the way. Then I treated it with medicines again; and it healed and joined quickly, and I had no need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood he often coughed up, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, which was well-disposed and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be sutured in this manner: take a thread, and tie it to the end of the bone that is exposed; and command someone to extend it upwards; and put another thicker linen thread on top of the flesh above the bone, and stretch the end, so that you draw the rotten flesh below, and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to suture, so that the suture does not hurt the flesh; and place a piece of wood or a board under the bone to better cover the rotten flesh; and one must suture as long as one can see and feel the corruption, and suture again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then place a log underneath, and then saw from one part to the other the corruption, and let the saw be as long as the corruption I said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupt joint, and saw the bone where it contains on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other way than to cut; and if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or in the sole of the foot, then this thing is very strong, but nevertheless you must seek out this corruption, how it opens to you; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, except that the vein or nerve should not hinder you; and know that the instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare for each type of work its instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases; so consider the instrument you need according to what is required.
dou feu	 Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head rots either from within or from without; and when you have treated that rotting with the cure of medicines, and they do not help at all, then you must cut off that limb up to the place where the rotting comes, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater evil, which is the lack of the limb. And the sign of this is that the limb becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, and rots after the blackness; then goes that rot from limb to limb, and spreads throughout the body; so hasten to cut off, and if it is from the sting of some poisonous animals, such as a sea scorpion or snake and similar things, if the rotting is at the top of the arm, cut it off, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 And if it reaches the hand, cut it at the joint, so that the corruption does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, cut it with a knife; and if it passes the knife, it is death, and no healing will help except by the power of God; and do the same when the corruption comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cut after the other joint; and if it reaches the foot, cut the whole foot; and if it climbs the leg, cut at the knee joint; and if it reaches above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die; and the manner of cutting or sawing the limb is such that you bind it above and below, and extend a band downward and another band upward, and you remove the flesh between the two bands to one broad spatula, so that the bone is exposed; then cut or saw, and place on each side a piece of linen, so that the saw does not touch the healthy part, and let the patient suffer other injuries and abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And if blood flows during your work, then cauterize the place quickly, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed; and I will tell you that this happened to a man in our country: he had a blackness that seemed like a burn from fire, and this corruption first came into his foot, so much so that it spread throughout his entire foot; and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cover his foot, and was healed; and a long time after, the corruption returned to his hand, and he came to me, and I put repulsive things on him after cleansing his body, and could not stop the corruption; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, because I hoped to repel the matter; and I also feared that if I cut his hand, he would die, because the man's virtue was weak; and he became completely desperate, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed; and I have only told this story for those who may need it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy place and stays so long that it causes a large gathering of pus; then it bursts and breaks open, and the pus spurts out, and the place remains empty, like an empty vessel; and the skin on top is as delicate as a well-cleaned cloth, and it does not extend to the bone or to the nerve. Such a disease is called "sinus," and it is not called "fistula"; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you can cut all around it, even when it is delicate, like a cloth; and it does not close due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if you believe that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, cure it with an enema in this manner: observe if the breast is large, and the pus that comes out of it is foul-smelling, then enema with Egyptian medicine which is made as follows: take equal parts of aloes, oil, and lead, and cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take some of this according to your need, mix it with water and honey, and enema the breast, plugging the orifice; leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; do this many times until the breast is cleansed, and the pus is removed; sometimes use an enema of ashes-water, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, pour water over them, strain it, and enema until you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ashes-water, then use an enema of water and honey in which there is a little ground lead; or use an enema of honey and wine mixed together, where the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the wound dry; and when you have done this, and you believe that the breast is well cleansed, then enema with that which produces flesh in it, and it is that you take diafinit plaster, mix it with rose oil and wine; or use an enema of some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described in the treatise on ointments; and if the orifice of the breast is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter, then widen it a little with iron, and insert a plug of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment until it is widened; and if the wound is too large, then sew it up, leaving only one place where the enema can enter, and if the orifice from which pus comes out is higher, then cut it lower.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the boil is fully ripe, do not let any flesh enter it; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then prepare in such a manner that the boil runs to the lowest place there is, for when the boil is fully ripe, do not let any flesh enter it. And if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then prepare in this manner: that the boil runs lightly downward and leaves nothing of the boil; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and extend over a linen cloth that covers all the wound; then cut at the edges around the hole of the breast a little wider than the first, then extend an ointment softly over another cloth according to the quantity of the hole, and put it on the hole of the wound to lighten the boil, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once; and that which is on the hole of the breast, remove often to remove the boil, and know what comes out of the boil, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not. And when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see the nature that leaps onto the hole of the wound, know that the breast has already healed, and the health approaches; and then unbind it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 And if the chest throws up undigested food after many days, know that the chest is not healed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poisons are excreted after a long time, do not despair of health, for the healthy state is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 For there are men in whose wounds the meat takes a long time to heal, and of those who do the opposite; and if undigested food comes up from the chest after many days, know that the chest is not healed; and if the chest delays in healing, and it is distant, then apply dry medicines, moist in substance and dry in virtue, as the diaphoretic ointment does, for there is a great deal of vitriol in it, and it is the last medicine to use; take the diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and wash it with old wine equal in substance; then cook it and use it; and this same cooked, thickened thing does better when the diaphoretic ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, and crush them, and powder them on honey as it is over the fire; and then glue a cloth, and place it on the chest; and sometimes they administer long aristolochia and celestial lily roots, which are like vetch flour and centaury; and use of simples or compounds: crush them, and make powder, and put on the honey I have mentioned, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep, and makes an impression on the bone, or in hard members, or in the joints; so cure as for a fistula cure, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 of the fingernail abscess
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 of the finger or toe is an abscess that occurs beneath the nail of the hand or foot, or sometimes in other fingers; and when it is neglected, and no attention is paid to it, a hot abscess develops, which runs and throws pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes it runs the entire length of the nail; and corrosion occurs down to the bone, causing foul-smelling pain, and the end of the finger or toe is swollen, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the section on incisions, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut off with an iron all the overgrowth that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses into the flesh, and begins to prick and wound it, then you must place a red-hot needle under the nail that pricks the flesh, and push it upwards, and carefully and lightly cut away the flesh; and put on top of the remaining flesh medicines that burn and corrode to remove everything; then treat with onion until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if there is corruption in the bone, cut it away and draw out strongly, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal; and if you see the tooth decay, cut it away from one side, as has been said before, then treat until it is healed; and if it is struck and swells and causes great pain, it is necessary that you first cleanse it; then cut the nail diagonally with a sharp spatula, ensuring that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, apply something to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 The pain of the shoulder of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The two thumbs that sometimes grow in the hands of some men are all fleshy, and sometimes there is bone, and occasionally there is a nail, and sometimes they grow from the root of the joint, or the growth is in the middle of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 That which grows in any part of the thumb does not move, and that which grows at the joint of the thumb sometimes moves; the shape of the fleshy one is light, like this: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	 That which grows at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; therefore, use the scoop.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In one who is born or should at the anus, it is necessary that you cut first the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for this, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 The swelling that comes to the fingers together comes by birth, or by wounding, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Then you must cut this swelling, so that the fingers may return to their natural shape; then place between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so they do not swell; or you put between two thin slices of lead, until the place is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 If suddenly one of his hands touches the palm with the hand, then cut that joint as it is needed.
des vils	 from the fingers
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 The veins are large, swollen and full of superfluous melancholic substances that come in many members of the body; and it happens more often in the legs of those who go on foot, work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 Therefore, you should administer purging with cole, and then heal it with the balm of basilicum.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment of iron is according to two methods: one is that you cut them and draw out the black blood with a lance; and the other method is that you lift the vein and pull it all out with force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The cutting is done in this manner: first raise the leg with very hot water until the large vein becomes subtle; then pull the patient's leg from above the thigh down to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one of three places, with a wide incision; then lift and draw out strongly the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the strength of the patient can bear; and then bandage it, and instruct him to feed on dark-colored foods; and repeat the evacuation and cauterization when the veins are full again, which is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The elevation of it is done in this manner: lift the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put him in a bath, and raise his leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins; and if you do not have a bath, heat it at the fire, and then cut towards the vein from the knee to the ankle; then lift the skin with a hook, and scrape the vein on each side, until it appears when touched; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white rope; then push the blood downwards, so that it is raised from the skin, and then bandage it lightly with linen, then cut in another place above or below three times; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with the hook as you have done before, and bandage it with another linen as you did first; then make another incision, or several if you need to, then lift it, and cut towards the toe of the foot, then draw and lift up to the second incision; then draw from incision to incision, until all comes out strongly, then cut; and if you cannot draw and lift it, put a strong double-threaded needle under it, and bandage and draw it, and put it under a linen cloth, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out; and be careful that it does not cut, because if it cuts, it cannot be drawn or lifted, and it is harmful to the patient; and when you have drawn all of it, put moistened wool in wine and rose oil on the place of the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the face is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must split it obliquely, but do not cut it; and draw it out as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The form of the iron with which one cuts the face is curved, and it does not cut deeply lest it cut the vein; and it is thickly curved, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is located in the legs, in hot areas where no grass or tree grows, and in dry earth; and by chance it may be found elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of the putrefaction that comes under the skin, just as serpents and worms are injected between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 Et if the sign of the beginning of this vein is such that it comes in the leg a very great swelling, then changes the place, and begins the vein to come out, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, and amenistre au leu medicines injanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And sometimes at this vein there is less blood, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot or in the foot, and much pus comes out of it, and from which it exudes blood; then treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 Worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This illness is called in our land "cattle disease", because it happens often to cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes through the whole body ascending and descending, and one feels it well when going from member to member, until it tears the skin where it goes, and exudes pus; and it is generated by the putrefaction of some humors, just like come worms, snakes, leeches, and ascarids in the belly; and one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: if you see it being cleaned and drawn out, one cannot do more than when it goes; therefore, you must bind the place above and below with a strong, tight ligature, then cut above and draw it strongly, and if the pus is deep in the flesh and you do not find it, burn it with fire on top until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is that it runs to the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the head of the eye, tightly hold the sorcil beneath it, then cut above, and draw it strongly; and one must use the patient for bodily cleansing with dissolving medicines for evil humors that cause putrefaction, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 Of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called in our land "vakirir," and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from one member to another; and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to a sick woman and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and a little later, I saw it rise up to the shoulder, faster than anything else, like quicksilver when it runs from one place to another; the pain left that spot and pierced the shoulder, and then a little later it ran through the whole body until it came to the other arm; then she told me that it was constantly going around the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 I was greatly amazed at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 Nevertheless, I had seen many who had felt pain move from one place to another, but I had never seen it as I did in the woman; and I thought that it was because women have dry bodies, and open veins, and for this reason these windy constrictions appear; and they are not apparent according to this reasoning in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and filled veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see this illness being treated and the patient feels this pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then bind it quickly above and below, and then cut into it until that constricted wind escapes; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it as one would treat those who dispel winds, such as foul-smelling pills, and pills of serpentaria, and similar others.
des saiettes	 of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 Arrows are varied according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 Their diversity is such that there are some with large tips and small ones, barbed and smooth; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and when one strikes a member, it does so in two ways: in the principal members, as in the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it strikes therefore in any of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you afterwards appear: then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death follows in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the signs of the brain when an arrow hits and pierces the bone, and jumps the siphon which is above the brain, are dizziness, confusion, fainting, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and mixing of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is a discharge from the nose or the ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and from the wound there is white moist matter resembling pus, and also like brains; and if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the cure, and remove the arrow if it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The signs of the arrow when it hits the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and it feels as if it were stuck in a hard object, not empty; and perhaps the arrow moves like the pulse, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: know then without doubt that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 And the signs of the arrow that never leave are when there is no plain foam coming out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and pants heavily and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And if the arrow falls into the covering of the chest, it is near the small ribs; and there is great pain and panting; and all the limbs from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested flesh comes out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 And if the arrow falls into the belly, and some feces come out through the rectum, then there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 Et si la flèche tombe dans la vessie, et l'urine jaillit par à-coups, et le patient ressent une douleur intense : sachez que la blessure est mortelle.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and backbone of the back and collarbone and thighs and legs, and similar members, are safe according to many arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you that happened to me so that you may do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to me that an arrow fell into the cheekbone at the root of the nose. I attempted [to remove it], and pushed it out from the other side under the fat of the ear, and was healed without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And he shot an arrow in a game, which fell into the fat of the eye below the eyelid, and the arrow was blunt, so that he could only reach the point near the shaft, and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, all the iron light without ears; the game was hunted, and no evil accident happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And he shot an arrow from the throat at a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears; I shaved the beard, and maneuvered until I shot it, and the Christian was hunted.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And he shot an arrow at a man, which had fallen in the belly, and I thought that he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, and secured it, and drew it out strongly, and he had no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if you see a man in whom an arrow fell into the back, and the wound was healed over; and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural disposition at all, nor found any harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And you see another man in whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was healed over; and it remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And I drew an arrow from one of the king's princes, which had fallen into his nose and was leaning slightly to the right side; and the arrow was completely encased in pus. I was called to the cure after it had fallen for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 Si trouvai la plaie très étroite.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I found the wound very subtle, and did not feel it at all; but he felt a pricking and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I applied a drawing plaster to prevent swelling; and then the wound made by the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I left the plaster on for less than a day, and the wound closed again, and the patient remained thus for a long time until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for less than a day until it opened up; then I probed it and felt the head of the arrow which was lodged in place; afterwards, I continued to apply the same corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow became visible; and it took about four months for the wound to heal enough that I could insert tongs, but they wouldn't grasp it properly; so I didn't stop trying and devising ways to extract it with various instruments until one day I managed to grasp it firmly with well-made tongs, as will be described at the end of this chapter, and I drew it out and closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; I restored it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 I have told you the method for extracting certain arrows; apply your care to those that I do not mention, for the book cannot contain everything. But a wise master understands well a small thing, and on what is present and defective, he finds new work, and nine instruments, in the treatment of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows should not be extracted from the members in which they are embedded except in two ways: either through the place where they entered, or through another part; and those that come out through the place where they entered are arrows entering fleshy places, and such sometimes nowadays.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if it does not come out now, let it stay until the flesh is rotten around it, and the opening is widened; and similarly if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it thus for some days, moving it each day; and then it comes out, and if it does not come out, pierce all around with a very fine instrument, until the place around is enlarged, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and reaches one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned occur to the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until it is equal after some days, for if the arrow reaches the saphenous vein, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone, and does not reach as far as the marrow, and the patient remains for some days without bad consequences, draw out the arrow.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is deeply lodged in this way and cannot be drawn out, then apply tarres around it, as I have told you; then treat the place until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And if the arrow is turned in the body so that one cannot see it, then search all over the patient; and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then enlarge the wound until it is big enough; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has barbs that hold it in place, then remove the flesh that is impaled on either side as much as you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow so that you can draw it out; and be careful not to break the arrow, for then you would draw it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 And if you cannot do it all at once, leave it until the place around is rotten, then draw it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the flow of blood is unfavorable to you, then use the method we mentioned in the treatment chapter; and beware of cutting into the nerve or vein, and devise a way how you can safely draw out the arrow, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient as he was when the arrow fell into him, for this is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot do so, then position him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrow that comes from another place, where it sticks out or the skin is swollen such that one can see or feel it clearly: then cut around it until the pincers can grasp it, and then draw it out; if it is not drawn now, it will never be.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 And if it is lodged in the bone, then turn your hand smoothly until it enters the bone and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes forth strongly; and if the arrow's shaft is in it, push the whole shaft through; and if the arrowhead has fallen off, and you see that a pushing instrument should be used, apply a falling instrument so that the point of the arrow enters the notch of the instrument; and then push strongly, and if the arrow is hooked, insert the instrument with the point entering in, to lighten the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Et si la saiette tombe dans le pied ou dans l'abdomen ou dans la vessie ou dans les côtes, et elle est proche de la surface, alors tu peux couper dessus. Si tu coupes, fais attention de ne pas couper une veine ou un nerf; puis extrais la flèche, puis couds la plaie si nécessaire; et soigne-la jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit guérie.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 The form of the pincers used to extract arrows resembles a bird’s beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 And there are many types of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape at the end of the pincers is like a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as shown in this form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 The shape of the tongs for pressing and holding is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	 of the common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 There are 31 veins from which one can be bled, of which there are 16 in the head. That is to say: two veins that are behind the ears and are called "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples; and the two veins that are in the two eyebrows of the two eyes and are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two jugulars that are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, which are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that are commonly healed are V in each arm: one is the cephalic and is located on the left side, and common people call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fascium", and is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is also on the right side, and common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the ulnar, and it is that one from which we heal, which clearly appears on the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 The salavatelle is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and the foot there are three veins: one is under the wrist of the left side, and the second saphena which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called "nasse", which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears is beneficial for old cathartics and headaches; and the quality of the bleeder, as I tell you, is that you grasp the patient's head, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then the patient tightens his neck with a screw until two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent places from the head: seek them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, let it go; then take the lancet, and push it beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein, and cut through the skin and the vein very well two fingers wide across, and make the blood come out until you wish; then press and bind it, until it is healed; and I have already spoken of the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is good for an old migraine, and a headache, and a customary blindness, and for the body of tears in the eyes; and the qualities of the bleeder are as I say: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly; and feels the pulse beneath your finger, and then sign with ink; then lifts the heart upon the vein high to your finger's tip, and pushes the lancet underneath, and raises the vein high, and cuts it, as you have done in the other two veins, and makes the blood flow according to your need; then releases the patient, and puts your finger on the vein for an hour, then puts cotton on top; and then bandages it well, and leaves it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose,
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 Deffentement, si li malaides a ceste maladie desous la poine et en dessus et alant sus les oreilles, dont chelui qui a tel maladie fait tantost li voinne, car li saines ne puet mie estre bonnes se le os sont malades.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 And if the flame is subtle, perhaps it breaks; then make blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind with a bandage, and tie well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The bleeding from the vein of the nose is good for fever and madness, and for facial illnesses such as migraine and redness that occurs in the face, and especially when it is chronic; and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient strains his neck, then presses his nose against your left hand, and takes a long, subtle flame, and sticks it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well in itself, and the blood will now begin to flow; and do not go too deep, and make the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for one night, because it is very quickly restored; and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne,
de la sainie des leivres	 Of liver bleeding
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 Liver bleeding on the lips above helps to heal wounds in the mouth, and prevents gum decay, and heals lip cracks, and of the nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 And the qualities of liver bleeding are to have the patient sit before you, and grasp his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two wounds, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which can be recognized because they are black, and around them there are small black veins: therefore cut both of these, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the largest of each side, and do the same for the two wounds that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 Of the wound beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The wounds under the tongue aid after the wound of the cephalic [vein], and this is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the sanguineousness is such that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he raises the tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black wound: therefore, heal one and the other, but not too deeply, because beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The wounds of the knife with which one commonly bleeds are bled according to two manners: either by pricking with all the flame of a wide and broad lancet, or with an olive-shaped sharp [lancet] like cutting knives, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and sharp according to the width and narrowness of the wounds.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 The form of the flame is very renowned, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary for opening the filled veins full of thick and visible blood, which contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the olive-shaped flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 And it is more delicately pointed, and it is for bleeding the delicate veins, where there is delicate citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The bleeding from the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and it is necessary for the bleeder to bleed wisely, and to guard against the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, then it must be cauterized, as I have said; and the flame should not be pointed but cutting like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, then you must restrain it and change another one; or seek any branch of it, or heal in its place the vein in the middle of the arm: it opens clearly; and cut with a knife-like flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you wish to recognize the place of the bleeding, then first restrain the arm so that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then mark the place with ink, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with a knife-like flame; and beware not to strike the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, and ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, and ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	 Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, and il te vaint, and li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’ele apert, car li chefs de li retraient; and estainche li sans.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And take a peel of fig, and cut it, and take one half and bind well up to the next day; if the blood clots, that is good; if not, then cure it as we have said, with powders that clot blood; and clotting is not harmful in many conditions due to the small area of the wound, and the strength of the arm's ligament.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The bleeding from the vein in the middle helps so that it draws blood from above and below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and it is necessary for the bleeder to be careful not to penetrate too deeply into the nerves beneath, and if he finds the nerve, it swells up and the healing may be harmed, and perhaps it cannot heal; and this nerve often appears, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then you should bleed with an insensible instrument; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then incise it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The vein of the cephalic (also known as the great saphenous vein) is helpful because it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and one must incise sharply at the olive branch vein or the myrtle branch vein, for it is the safest of all veins, since beneath it there is neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 However, one must seek the lightest place, and it is not serious if one misses the first time, and one starts again; and perhaps the place swells in some men when one misses the first time, but it is not serious.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of the incision depends on your intention.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it is not practiced except to maintain health and to avoid future illnesses; and the bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins that are known: cephalic, fast, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear; and one should bleed on the first day or the third, two hours or three into the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The bloodletting done for illnesses has no fixed time, but only when necessary, day or night, at all hours and in all seasons; and one should not bleed children under fourteen years of age, nor pregnant women except after the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 They should not be healed, the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 And when someone wants to be healed in whatever manner, it is necessary that he purges the intestines with a light enema if he has retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines the harmful superfluities into the principal members; nor should one heal who is too full of food, or drunk to the point of being weak, or dropsical; and one should not undertake healing after a colic attack, vomiting, purging of the belly, increased intercourse with women, hard work, vigil, fasting, and whatever totally weakens the strength, either by something of the weapon or of the body; then subtilize the humors if the blood is thick, by food and drink and medicines if you have the power; then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtilize the blood, and heal from the vein of the foot around the third hour, as we have said; and guard yourself that day against work, pain, lust, and similar things; and be joyful and glad, and let the healer be higher than he whom you heal, and rub his arm two or three times, then draw the ligament moderately, for if it is too tight or lax, the blood cannot flow well; and then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt; then the healer moistens the flame with a little old oil, then places his right thumb on that vein below the place where he wants to heal, so that the vein does not burn and rupture during healing.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 Because there are veins that flow like cords to the healer, and some that are full of air, so that when one raises the flame, it draws back from the flame, and one cannot open the vein, and thus it is with these; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow. Therefore, the healers must be knowledgeable in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 And if the vein opens on the first attempt, it is good; if not, then one must start again a little below that spot or quickly above, if the spot is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 And if the spot is swollen and the patient is frightened, let him rest for one day or two, and do not tie the arm: perhaps pustules will come; do not bathe in hot water, then resume the bloodletting if he wishes; and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that enough blood will flow as you want, then drive the flame straight into that same opening; and work a little quickly, before the spot swells; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the place swollen, do not begin the bleeding again, and put some lye of oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and it is the lye that is used in this place like oil; and thus administer the lye of oil in each bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same acts as a triple and bow when placed on the site; so subtilizes the blood and separates when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if a large abscess forms, which often happens, especially when it is not strongly bled except for that time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put on the site a sponge moistened in water and salt, a little warm, and hold it for an hour; and you must do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if any blackness or greenness remains at the site after some days, it does not harm; and if you see, put on some aloes or myrrh dissolved in calamint juice, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 And many times an abscess and appearance occur at the wound of the basilica: place your hand upon it, and if you find the spot soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, do not place any of the things we have mentioned upon it, for by chance some blood from an artery may come out; but make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 And draw from each vein according to the quantity of its strength, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And it is necessary for the one who is strong and healthy, if he needs bloodletting, to make a wider wound and let the flame be wide; and for the weak one, do the opposite, and he should be bled little and often, and he must be bled by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from bleeding too much or cutting nerves, and it is better than long or wide bleedings.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 And for the one whose body is lacking in bloodletting, it is necessary to give him moist bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if he is heated, draw blood three or four times. If he has a cold temperament, before bleeding, let him eat moist bread soaked in honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if he faints at the bloodletting, after the loss of much blood, then it is necessary that he drink broth made from meat and a subtle scented syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 And if he wants to bleed from one arm, and bloodlet again later, then it is necessary that when he is weakened by great bloodletting, he should bleed a little at a time, according to the amount of his strength, continually.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 And if he wants to bleed from one arm after the first bloodletting, and he is strong of body, then let him bleed seven hours after the first bloodletting, or in the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 And whoever wants to heal from another place, must do so on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and it causes fever; so one must draw out a great quantity, and widen the opening until it flows in streams; then you check all the conditions of healing, and place your hand on the pulse when he heals, so that death does not come in place of the stream, and this often happens when the healer is negligent; and it should not be done when you see the arm being freed, and blood comes out a second time, and the opening is closed, then you press very firmly; nor if it is curved, let him quickly extend his arm, for that would be bad; but leave it until it heals a second time; or you prick with the point of the flame, until the frozen blood at the vein's mouth comes out in streams, and place a little cloth soaked in water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrain it, until the abscess is calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, heal it in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The vein in the middle of the arm is healed in the place of the head's vein because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the manner of healing is such that the patient places their hand in hot water until the blood vessel becomes red; then it should be tied moderately so that the vein appears clearly, then heal it now across, not broadly or lengthwise; and let the opening be wide, and heal close to the joint of the hand, and if blood does not come out, then put the hand back in hot water, and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer; and the healing of this vein is safer than any other veins, as there are neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The bleeding of the little finger of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is how you do it: grasp the hand, and immerse it in hot water until the vein swells, if you can see it; and if the blood flows crookedly, and you cut all around, it will not cause harm; but do not go too deep, because the nerves are underneath all the bare skin, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 And when you have drawn blood as much as you need, then place oil and silk on the vein to close it quickly, and do this for each time.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 The wound on his left hand is as valuable as the disease of the mice, and does everything just as I told you towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The wound on the sole of the foot is as valuable as all the diseases that are under the body, such as marsh fever, and retention of urine, and disease of the kidneys, and ancient hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the quality of his wound is such that the patient should step in hot water, and rub on the wound until it opens, and bind above the ankle; and the wound is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many veins; then heal where the largest vein is, or at the ankle, for that is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And if you make an incision on the foot, beware of the nerves that are below it, and make the incision crosswise like in cutting; and let the flame be calm.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the wound drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the incision fails the first time, then repeat it a second time above a little bit, because the place is salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the sole of the other foot likewise.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 The place for the incision of sciatic pain is at the ankle of the leg, and its incision relieves the pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 Et les qualités de sa saignée sont telles que le patient entre dans le bain, et il tire quatre doigts au-dessus de la cheville en tordant, car autrement la veine n'ouvre pas; et s'il ouvre, alors il saigne dans toutes les manières possibles, y compris en traversant; et il est préférable que tu le coupes, car l'endroit est sec, et cela fonctionne bien pour de nombreux hommes.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 Et si tu ne trouves pas la veine, alors saigne un membre du patient qui est ouvert sur le dos du pied, vers le petit doigt, en prenant garde aux nerfs; fais couler autant de sang que nécessaire, puis délie le lien et mets un coton dessus, en le serrant; elle est maintenant saignée.
des sainies de ventouse	 of the cupping glass
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 Cupping glasses are made of horn, or brass, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: by striking to draw blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And this cupping which is without striking is done in two ways: with fire or without fire; and the cupping which is done by striking and drawing blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely at the top of the head; and another is in the middle of the neck; and two others on each side of the neck; and a cup under the chin; and a cup on each shoulder; and a cup on the buttocks; and cups in the middle of the two arms; and cups on the two legs; and cups on the two ankles; and cupping does not draw blood, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken anyone, as is done with venesection; and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from excess, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if due to illness it is necessary to bleed, or by habit, we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, and at the end, and in between, and every time; for there are such people that when they need to bleed, their head becomes heavy; and there are those who find swelling and redness on their face, and on their head, and on their neck, and darkness in their eyes; and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and vomit blood; and there are those who dream, and see through the night bleeding and wounded and dead things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order to bleed every three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The flow of the nose also helps to relieve the heaviness in the head ... which affects the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be after the evacuation of the entire body; and this venting is in place of the cephalic vein, and it is not appropriate for those of cold temperament to use it, or those who have catarrh, because it causes them great harm; and therefore, it is not appropriate for the elderly to use it, nor those with cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 And those who frequently blow their nose become oblivious, and because of this, it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The venting in the neck is in place of the sinecure of the head and basilica, and therefore it is good for constriction of the foot, and fissure of the throat passage, and for coughs, and for abdominal distension; and there one should apply it sparingly, because if it stays too firmly, it may cause oblivion in the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 The inflammation below the chin is for diseases of the mouth, and for the decay of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 The inflammation of the shoulders is for diseases caused by heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The inflammation of the ribs is as effective as that of the three main veins of the arm, because it attracts blood from these large veins; and instruct the practitioner not to pierce too deeply into the flesh, because this place is without muscle and lies beneath nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	 The cupping glass placed on the buttocks is for hemorrhoids of the anus and for diseases below, and it must be large and made of copper so that it can draw well; and if by chance it were delicate, it would break and cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 The cupping on the legs is clearly effective, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are valuable for ancient pains of the kidneys, and the womb, and the bladder, and they remove the flowers; and they are placed on the II sophenes, and the II ankles, yet after long use, they weaken the body, and bring about paralysis in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	 The way to apply the cupping is as follows: first, place it empty and quickly suck, and put it on hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and open the blood vessels of the blood; then prick, and reapply the cups, and take care in the condition of the body, for there are such who have dark flesh and clear pores: thus it is necessary to prick only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and deep enough; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 And if the vein is large, one must strike twice: the first time to make the blood flow finer.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And if the vein is very thick, one must strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, it suffices to prick only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we want a lot of blood, we prick often; and if the vein is thick, we strike deeper, and the result is that the heart is suddenly pierced, which is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and whose pores are narrow. One must anoint the places of the cupping glasses with an opening and dissolving oil: in summer, with violet oil or oil of sweet almonds or oil of cucumber seeds; and in winter, with oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 And if the excess is thick and cold, take oil of bitter orange, or balm, or oil of aniseed, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the one whom we are treating has tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied there, but it must be washed afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or water of black nightshade, or water of cucumber, or water of purslane, or other similar ones.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 And if there is much moisture, then it should be raised with alum, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And those who have thick excesses should be raised with old wine, or water of sow thistle, or decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or other similar things; and one must not apply a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and they should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he wash himself, when he wants to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And warn if the person who is healing is of a choleric nature, and if his blood is too hot and inflamed; then he must take cold things, such as crab apples and endives and lettuces in water, and similar things; and he should eat pears, and meat from a goat, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And he who has a cold complexion should take syrup of honey, and wine of medium scent, which is between old and new, and eat pears, and apples, and small birds and thrushes; and on the day that he will be ventosed, he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men sometimes a tranquilizer or musk before ventosing, or after, to strengthen the main members; and the blood should be refined, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The cupping glasses that are placed without pricking are those that are placed on the liver, and on the bladder, and on gout, and on the belly and the vulva and the loins and the hip, because these members do not tolerate being pricked on their eyes, and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, as we place them on the breasts when the milk flows; to remove the thickness that is in the member, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and the vulva to reduce the member; and it removes the pain, when there is a swelling or stone, sometimes it removes the swelling by its attractive power, or it dries out the stone from its place; and so it does when placed on the liver and bladder when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a manner that one fills the cupping glass with heated water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 The form of the cupping vessel administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And let there be two fingers of width and half a palm of depth, and let it have on its circumference around the middle one small hole, like to insert a needle, and let it be of copper, smooth beforehand so that it does not harm the patient when placed upon the limb; and let there be in the middle a rod of copper or iron across which to place a heated cloth, both large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who use them; for the cups of children are different from those of the elderly, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And one should place this cup upon the limb in this manner: take a cloth of wax or linen and insert it into the cup across the rod that is inside the cup, so that the heat is at the bottom of the cup to prevent burning the patient; then place it upon the limb, and let your two fingers be upon the hole we have mentioned, so that when desired, the vapor escapes, and remove the cup; and take another cloth as before, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the cupping therapy, which is prepared in pleurisy illness, there is no rod or hole, and it is only prepared when it is full of water, and it is placed on the member alone; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Sansues are only prepared in members where one cannot place cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in fleshy places without skin, such as fingers or noses, and other similar places; and the quality of use is that when you find leeches that are in fresh clean water without stagnation, take them; and put one in fresh water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their stomachs; and then let it be bloodletting with a vein and a cupping glass, then rub the member until it is red, and place the leeches on it; and when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where one can place a cupping glass, place one there, for this is worth much afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If not, then apply the place of ease, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the place heals too quickly after the leeches, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on until the blood is stopped; and if the blood is multiplied, place vitriol powder, or galls, and similar things, until it is stopped; or place half-peeled beans on the place, and leave them until they dry out at the place, this will stop it now; and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the leeches do not want to be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until the blood comes out, and then place them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they are falling off, sprinkle some powdered aloe and sea salt, or ash, and they will fall now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and it is for the setting of a fracture or dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Know, dear son, that the foolish doctors reject this chapter because they never saw any ancient books or read any letters about it; and for this reason the science is strange in our land, for I have never found a good one here; and I know nothing about it except by the science of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have acquired the knowledge, both through experience and through the practice of my life; and I have already described in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the shapes of the instruments used, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of the words and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who have experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when a fracture, dislocation, sprain, or strain occurs to anyone, you must hasten to treat the patient from both sides, unless something prevents you entirely, such as physical weakness, youth, old age; or if the time is not very hot or too cold; and avoid cold food, that is, cold drinks, and poultry and rabbit meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess or spread of matter to the limb; then let the patient return to his former state of health.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 And when the broken bone begins to mend, it is necessary that the patient be fed with foods that promote thickening, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, heads (of animals), feet (of animals), cow udder, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 For with such nourishment the bones mend more quickly and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that old and frail broken bones cannot mend or heal according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor can those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but pay no heed, reset the broken bone with a strong tenon that straightens and joins the member together, until it is as strong as before; and if not completely healed, then for this reason it must be fed with thick foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 For there is a fracture that goes to the edge, and another by sharpening, as when cutting the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that is completely a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each kind has its own method, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to how it returns to its place; and the fracture of bone is known by the twisting of the place, which appears well from afar, and sounds when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twisting or sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture; but it can be a sprain, or a crack, or a slight fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 If it is not necessary to move the joint with your hand, but apply the following medicines, and then gently restrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the fractures that go in the air, and are the two parts disjointed, you must now put them together equally, before hot abscesses come there; and if hot abscesses come there, let it rest for some days, until the abscess is calmed; then put it together as much as you can easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of this one is lighter than the restoration of that in which there are pieces; then restrain it, as is necessary hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if there are broken pieces in the bone, and it is of two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small member, or with two cords, or with one cord and at your hand; and put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, you restore by all means the additions in their places as much as you can, and be careful not to cause injury or pain to the patient through your work; and join well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 And he feels it well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: then arrange it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press it as those who bring about hot abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning, nor in any other way; and ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For when he feels any pain, it is not in place, and it must be put in such a position that he feels no pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that crookedness does not come to it when it is healed; and the condition of the broken limb is as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 Then know that broken members are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 Et si il y a enflure ou aposteme, mise sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enflure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 Et si il y a enflure ou aposteme, mise sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enflure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 And if the patient is wounded by the ends of the arrows after pulling them out of their wounds, put cotton or wool under them so that he does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will tell its cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 And know that it is not necessary to pull out all the arrows from the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to put in arrows before the fifth or seventh day, or more according to your safety from abscess occurring; and see here the manner of the ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that is kept on the mill walls, and mix it abundantly with egg, and put this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture in many dispositions, and especially for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 Another manner of plaster for healing fractures, dislocations, and twists: take three parts of aloe vera, ladanum, and elecampane; two parts of asafetida and Arabic gum; one part of mastic; five parts of myrrh and aloes; nine parts of garlic. Grind them into powder and mix with the white of an egg. If the man's constitution is warm, use this plaster, for it is well-composed and quickly heals broken bones, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another manner of plaster for twists: take ten parts of mastic and marshmallow; nine parts of myrrh and aloes; six parts of acacia; ten parts of Armenian bole. Grind them well and mix with the white of an egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another way to plaster joints and bones that have moved from their places, and it soothes the resulting pain, and they use the bone for cutting and fractures: take new wool, wet it in vinegar and boiled oil, and place it on the site.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This plaster does not restore [the body], but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and properly removes pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Another way to plaster that restores broken bones: take dry leaves of fig tree and groundsel, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way to plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to soften the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take root of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, chickpea flour, one part each; and grind, and macerate with wine, and if the limb is heated, macerate with moist coriander water or water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another way of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of mallow, flax seed, lupine, melilot, and honeysuckle, and violet and chamomile flowers, one part each; grind, macerate with salty water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the limb, and let it rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb any more than a poultice made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two [things], neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 And it seems that Galen says one should put on a broken limb, to restore it, dry things slightly heated, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Another way to make a poultice that helps with injury and pain: take mallow and the leaves of a plant called “omes” or the feathers of birds, and mallow seeds equally, and grind them, and make a poultice and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then if he is dislocated a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, or the bone has not moved from its place; do not dislocate for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hasten, and dislocate, and remove the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sponge of sea water, and dip in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind on a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is hot; and let the inflammation of the member rest, and the pain be removed, then begin again with the subtle treatment, and a little poultice, and do not press as strongly as before; and treat subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 And if you see that the abscess swells and reddens and hurts and becomes inflamed, take all away, and if you need a plaster and bandage, then begin again as you did first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 And if nothing comes to the limb like what we have said, then do not unbind it until after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the break heals and the flesh grows together; then bind it more tightly than before, and increase its flesh, as I said earlier; and if you see the place drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; therefore, wash it with warm water each time you unbind it, and this should be every three days, and loosen the bandage slightly; through this work, then, the nourishment comes to the limb, and hastily corrects what fool healers do by wrongly twisting the limb: this is bad, and thus is a fearful operation, and I see nothing other than to leave it and to work on it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	 Of the various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many ways of fractures are there, and diverse figures, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures that are made by the striking of a sword, and the bone is cut entirely until the marrow which is under the bone, just as a hatchet or an ax does; and therefore this manner of fracture is called «haichure».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 Or if the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this manner of fracture is called «simple»; and the wound of these two fractures is great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 And if there is an embedded strike, or splitting from a stone's blow, or from falling on a stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 And if there is a piercing fracture, which approaches to the point that is beneath the bone, or it is upon the bone, and this wound is either great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound that is split in the bone as fine as a hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "hairline"; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by something similar, and it causes a piece of the bone to be driven down, and the place is sunken like how blacksmiths do when they hammer on their anvils; then the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this happens more often to those who have soft bones in the head, like a child's skull; and it happens in all these types of fractures that small pieces are separated as if they were stars; and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 And let us recognize all kinds of fractures by detachment from them, and inquiry through tents, and by the corrupt flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 The resemblance of hair is known by this: when the bone is exposed and rubbed upon, it opens up the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 In the treatment of fractures, beware of the patient's accidents, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, heaviness, fever, and eyes coming out forcefully and reddening, and other similar things in many dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 And if you do not see a frightening accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 And when the wounded person first comes to you, and this is in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the injury.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the flesh beneath the bone be corrupt and the incidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 And if the fracture of the bone extends to the skin covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part as follows: and it is that you take the chief of the wounded patient, and reveal on the bone in all manners that you can, and on the appearance of the wound more gently than you can, and if blood flows when revealing the bone or an abscess forms, then assist with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until this abscess is appeased, and you are assured of no bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two manners of work: one manner is thus that you cut with a narrow blade from before, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 And then he makes another incision, larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 And the second way is that you have a variety of incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of Indian steel; and work lightly, so that you do not harm the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 And if the bone is thick and hard, then you must bore it all around before making incisions with trepans, not penetrating so deeply that they go through the bone of the skull, and there should be a margin or circle on top to prevent the point from going through the bone; and you should have several, each corresponding to the thickness of the bone, so that you have trepans for all skulls; and this is the form of the three types of trepans:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 The qualities for perforating around a broken bone are that you place the awl on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then move the awl to another place nearby, and do this all around, then cut the space of the bone between the holes with a knife, and do this more subtly and lightly than you can, as we have said, until you draw out the bone in your hand or with any instruments that you have such as pincers. And be careful not to touch the brain or the membrane.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 When you have perforated and drawn out the bone, then it is necessary that you reset the fragment of bone that remains with all other similar instruments to a knife, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other knives; and if there remain any small bones or scales, remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then cure the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 And another way of working is as Galen said, which is safer; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 First, you must expose a part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have exposed that part, you will place under the head of this lancet-shaped scalpel, which has this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut from one side, and the part is sharp on two sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike gently with a small hammer, so that you cut lightly all around the bone, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath; if it is close to the bone, lift it slightly, for it can be lifted without damage or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the skin, and the bone is broken only on top, and there are small pieces, then you must shave that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine razor of which you should have various quantities, in order to apply the most suitable one in each place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 First use large razors, then finer ones afterwards, and do not stop until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 In each of the other delicate cuts and fine breaks, you must apply treatment according to its nature; and this is something that cannot be taught to one who has studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 And if the wound is exposed, then you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another folded cloth in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not burden the wound, then administer over another ligature, and do not tighten it too much so that it only touches the wound; and leave it thus for a day or two, until the pus is relieved, then remove it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, incense powder, myrrh, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place on the wound, and administer always moistening medicines without mortification; and ensure that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow pus to collect, for when pus collects on the cloth of the brain, it runs and putrefies, and great harm comes to the patient; for when a mortifying substance is placed on the wound, it poisons above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 Take heed therefore, if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, then there is doubt with uncertainty.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if darkness comes upon him except from the medicine that has been applied, which has such power, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and glue it with one bandage, and apply it to the wound; then treat him with various treatments until he is cured.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 Know that sometimes the two upper parts of the nose are broken, or just one of them alone, because they are two bones; and the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, but only makes a swelling or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 Et si l’une des deux parties est brisée, tu dois placer ton petit doigt dans le trou du nez, et égaliser la fracture avec ton index à l'intérieur, et sortir légèrement au bout, jusqu'à ce que le nez revienne selon sa forme naturelle; fais cela délicatement, et veille à ce que le patient ne ressente pas de douleur par ton travail.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 Et si la fracture est dans la partie supérieure du nez et que l'on ne peut pas atteindre l'endroit avec les doigts, alors il faut placer une poche de gros sel au sommet d’une règle.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 Et si la fracture est en deux parties, fais de même, et hâte-toi de restaurer le premier jour si tu peux; sinon, après le septième ou le dixième jour, quand l'œdème a diminué, place au sommet du nez des bandes de lin, si la fracture est dans une seule partie.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 Where you push one against another, if there is a breakage; and let the tents be as thick as they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some say that the tents should be moistened with butter, and changed each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they be moistened with a compound of egg white and flour; then leave the tent in place until the bone is healed, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 And sometimes one puts goose quills in the nose instead of tents, and wraps a soft cloth around it, and thus holds the breakage, and the patient blows through it; now do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 And if such abscesses come to the nose while you work there, put a plaster or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a little of diaculum.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if such abscesses do not come there, put a plaster externally, made of linseed flour and powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then place light dressings, and do not bind the nose; and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into many pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then sew the wound, and treat similar flesh wounds, and bandage, as suitable plasters and ointments for this; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents, and place lead plates until it heals.  (Here, "tentes" likely refers to a type of medical dressing or bandage.)
de la routure de la mandibule	 Of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the jaw is dislocated beneath, and there is no wound other than that, and the fracture is only outside, and it is not broken in two, except for a small depression inside, then one recognizes it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert your right index finger, and push the fracture gently inside, and shape it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 And if the jaw fracture is separated into two parts, then you must apply extension to both parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 Et si le mouvement des dents arrive, ou la rotation, alors les retiens avec un fil d'or ou d'argent ou de soie, puis mets sur la mâchoire cassée du baume, et mets sur la mâchoire une bande double; et mets sur la bande une grande aiguille bien faite, ou un morceau de cuir égal, long et large selon la mâchoire, et attache-le au niveau que tu peux, et commande au malade qu'il se repose, et mange des aliments légers.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 If you see that the shape changes, then unbind it on the third day, and then set in place what was dislocated; and put a poultice on top, of flour from the mill with plenty of egg or saffron flour, after removing the plaster; and put a light linen cloth on top of the poultice. And if the poultice dries out, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it heals; many times it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 And if such abscesses occur, then treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 And if there is a break and wound together, beware that no part of the bone has been removed; then extract it with instruments suitable for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, then close the wound, if it is wide, and place on it suitable plasters to promote the growth of flesh until it heals.
de la forcele	 by the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 The forceps breaks several times in front and toward the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: either it is broken and separated into two parts, with pieces, and this is the lightest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 And the operation is such that when the fracture is without wound, you should have two assistants: one who holds the shoulder of the broken limb; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part; then place the fracture equally between your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, with neither appearance nor deformity.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And if you need to stretch more, place under the patient's shoulder a round piece of cloth or linen, and let it be thick according to your needs; and stretch and lift the broken limb, and press the ball towards your hand, so that you equalize the fracture as is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 And if you cannot draw the head of the bone out due to it coming forth in depth, it is necessary that the patient lie on their back, and place under the shoulder a medium pillow, and the assistant presses the shoulder down until the bone of the fracture is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 And then grasp the fracture between your fingers, and if you find it unstable, it is necessary to cut into it; draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot come together due to any obstacle, strike one of the ends with the incisors you have; but place this instrument under a forceps, to prevent the bone from moving.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 and let it resemble a spoon, and do not bevel it, and let it be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the condition of the work; and let it have two heads, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the opening of the wound that you made when you removed the bones; and when you are sure that there is no abscess, suture the wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt that there is no abscess, then fill the wound with lint and bandages, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 And if abscesses come there, then moisten the cloth in rose oil and in honey and in wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fractures, is that you place on the bone the plaster made from flour of a mill and egg white, and put light wadding on top, and place a sphere under the shoulder blade if needed; then take a very large bandage one palm wide, then place two layers of cloth on top of the wadding, and the plaster; then take a thin strip three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and place the strip on the break, and turn the bandage up over the shoulder blade, and under the sick person's shoulder blade; and tighten each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the break well, and you see clearly that the strip does not move on the broken bone, then loosen it every day, and when the ligature loosens, then tighten it again; and make the sick person lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder blade while sleeping to raise the shoulder blade up; this will lighten the break of the collarbone through the elevation of the shoulder, in which you tie his arm to his neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents occur, for twenty days; then renew the plaster if needed, and tighten and leave it thus until he is restored; and it is usually restored in twenty-eight days, or less in some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	 Of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	  It often happens that the shoulder breaks in a wide place or in the middle, and not outside; then prepare it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the place powder from a mill with plenty of egg, and light wadding, and put on a double cloth; then put on a wide and fine splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if under the splint there is emptiness in any part of the shoulder, fill that void with flax wadding, so that the splint sits evenly; and then bind it firmly all around with a great bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the bandage every day; and each time it softens, bind it again, and set the splint straight if it has moved from its place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is healed in 20 days or 25. And when this number is completed, unbind it, and be sure, because this is not a bone that can easily be dislodged.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and points beneath the heart, pierce it, remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the rib to alleviate an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	 of the foot's fracture
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The foot is sometimes broken in half, but this happens rarely; but it breaks often at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken in half, it slips downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and shortness of breath, and fainting, and possibly vomits blood, and opens the bone at the fracture site, which can be felt clearly.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the healing is such that the patient lies on his back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and bring the ribs from the second rib to your hands, and make it as even as possible in all ways that you can, until the bone figure is as it should be; then apply plasters and bandages over the subtle bed of salt, or other light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it firmly to the fractured bone, so that it does not move; and turn the cord smoothly around the back, and tighten it properly, and check each hour the tightness, and if it loosens, then tighten it; and if it needs to be untied, because of swelling or itching that occurs in the place, or pain or abscess, hurry, and untie it, and remove the plaster, and treat according to the methods of healing; then reapply the plaster, and tighten until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	 Of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 Know that the fracture of the ribs comes only in large places after the back and inside the head, and they bend only because they are slippery; and one feels it well at the two tests.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the restoration is that you place the fracture equally as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply the poultice and bandage it with a bandage if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 And if the rib fracture is inward, the patient feels very great pain and soreness, as with pleurisy, for the bone pricks the flesh; and it heals poorly, and quickly vomits a large amount of blood, and this is of grave illness, and the ancients placed great ingenuity in it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And some say that one must administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture out of place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 We do not do this, lest hot abscesses come to it, if they have not already done so.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 And if they have come, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 And some say that one should place cupping glasses on the site to strongly draw out, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping glass may attract superfluous humors to the site due to the patient's weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 And some say that one should cover the site with wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to evenly distribute the linen around, then treat it with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure due to the bone that protrudes through the skin, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut over the rib where it is broken, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to protect the lungs; and then one must cut the bone, and pull gently, and then stitch the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with poultices until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if such abscesses appear, place moistened cloths in rose oil on them, and put them on the spot; and cure the spot like one would an abscess, and let it lie there on the side where it should be, until healed.
de la brisure dou col	 of the neck fracture
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and it often happens that they bend; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, then take care to see if his hands are softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.  (I've added punctuation for clarity)
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is fatal in many situations, and if he moves them and feels well when they are squeezed and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is taken.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 Et si semblable chose advient à la colonne vertébrale du dos, sachez comment savoir s'il est cassé ou non: regardez si les pieds sont mous, et s'il y a des accidents qui sont dans les mains; sur le dos, il y a ventosité et égestion sans volonté; et quand on le couche sur son ventre, il y a égestion sans volonté.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when he is placed on his back and wants to sit, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Know that it is deadly; do not labor in his care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 And if these symptoms do not occur, then the condition is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And the treatment is that you observe whether there is a hot abscess; then place on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if any bone is broken, you must cover it with the skull; and remove the bone, then close the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then heal it with pig fat until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," insert your thumb of your left hand, and align it with the other hand to your power, then apply the plaster and bandage on top, if you need it; then bind it, and if there is a fracture, it will rise, and remove it, and heal the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 of the break in the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 When the hip bone is broken, if it occurs, then only a small decrease in length at the head; and it splits along its length, and slants to one side, and pain comes to the patient in that place, and swelling, as if broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above until you are on the break; and know what kind of break and shape it is; and if the break is only at the head, then make that break equal, so that it has a natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 And if the break is along its length, or it slants inward, then make the patient lie on his stomach until you are prepared for the restoration of that break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 And when you have set it evenly, place the poultice on top, then place a wooden or hazel splint, and secure the fracture so that it does not move; and fill the place under the ribs, until the limb is straight.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	 And if there are abscesses there, do not touch them until the abscesses have subsided, and then place what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and secure it as needed, if there is no adverse event; and that is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 The adjutory is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the arm, and if it is broken, then it should be restored according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a piece of wood full of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 And tie two ropes at the two ends, and hang them high, and make the patient sit on a seat; then throw the broken arm onto the wood, up to the armpit, with in the middle a curve of wood, then hang some heavy object or let the assistant pull down; then place the healer the fracture equal between his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 And the other manner is that one sits the patient on his haunches, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two assistants: one holds what is above the fracture in his hands, and the other holds below at all I joints, and each extends to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold one joint below the fracture, and one above the fracture, and each assistant extends to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the fracture is near the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one joint in the middle under the armpit, and the other towards the elbow, under the fracture; and similarly if the fracture is towards the elbow, then it is necessary to place one joint lightly, without effort, until the fracture is equal on both sides; then set the fracture equally as needed, and hold it, in case an abscess forms there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 And if such an abscess comes about, do not restrain it for seven days, and place a wet cloth on the pillow and in rose oil until the abscess is appeased; then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you place the compress on the break, then bring the arm up to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the bandage, and restrain on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place on the break a wider and stronger splint than the others, and let there be two fingers' width between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes three fingers' width beyond the break on either side; then restrain on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the break, more strongly and less widely apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see the seat of the stars, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, then let it bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then check every three days the bond, so that itching or swelling does not come to the place, where the nourishment cannot come to the member because it is too narrow.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 Receive it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such accidents happen, do not unbind it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder one pillow full of wool equally, and check every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken member does not change, or that the bandage is not loosened; receive it by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the first course is subtle; and when he begins to improve, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset within forty days in total; and then one should unbind and administer a bath and ointment medicines to straighten the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, it takes one day or two months to unbind.
de la brisure du bras	 of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "two ulnae", one of which is small, and that is the one that follows the elbow; and the other is large, and that is the one below, towards the little finger; perhaps only the large ulna breaks, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small bone is broken, the restoration is easy, and so is the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more serious than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is only the small bone that is broken, then you should extend it slightly and set it straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the large bone, then you must pull it more firmly; and extend it on a pillow, and hold the little finger of the hand higher than the others, and the small toe lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the pillow in front of him higher, so that the patient feels no labor. Then the attendant should extend his arm to the part below his hand or the wrist, and another attendant above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then let the physician set it equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if in the break there are pieces, then place each one in its proper place; and if any of them is dislocated so that it touches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut above it and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	 And if there is a wound with the break, I have spoken about this in a separate chapter; thus take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And if in the beginning of the restoration there appear such abscesses, then place a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth above delicately, until these abscesses are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And then remove the bandage, and put the plaster of mill powder with plenty of egg on it, then put on the splints, and let the splint of the break be always stronger, and a little wider than the others; and know that there should be VI splints on the arm in several positions: whether the break is in one of the bones, or in two; and bind more tightly over the break than elsewhere, and always less in distance, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are over the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread, with which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And bandage the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any evil occurrence happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wash the limb with hot water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the binding, and if the ligament is weakened and the bone dislocated, or similar thing, treat it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 And if you fear that nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you should soften it with a poultice, and leave it thus for some days until the nourishment flows, and then bind it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things happens to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And if he is in a state where his hands are on his neck and they are even, and he guards against movement and dislocation, and sleeps on his back; know that this breakage will be restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the strengths and temperaments of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	 of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 Know that on the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers, breakages occur rarely, and only bending happens frequently.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And when the base of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary for the patient to sit in a cross-legged position and sit upright facing forward evenly; then he places his hand on an extended table, and the servant extends the broken bones, and the doctor makes them even until they are well joined; and applies a poultice and bandages, if there are no abscesses, then place a splint according to the size of the location; and it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 And if the break is around the stomach near the sole of the foot, make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to tie it to their broken foot; and then tie with a long cloth, and let the knot be as large as the palm of the hand, and tie it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you place a bandage above, and another below on the foot, so that the hand is open and straight; then bind the whole hand, and secure the knot between the two fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And if the break occurs in any of the fingers, if it is a fracture, set it straight as needed; and bind with the foot, and if you see it, place a small straight bandage to lift the break, and do not move it; and if the break is in other fingers, such as the thumb or others, set it straight, and tie with the healthy finger that follows; either tie all together at once, whatever works best, or place a bandage above, as with the thumb; and take care in restoring and treating the abscess, and support those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	 Of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it is clearly seen when it turns forward or backward; and the restoration is done by tying one ligament above the break, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 And the patient lies on his back, then each assistant stretches his ligament equally to his side; and this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the base of the thigh, then one of the ligaments should be toward the knee, and the other ligament below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And so if it is near the knee, then the ligament should be next to the knee, and the extension downward; then let the doctor place the bone equally in his two hands, until it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the poultice, and bandage it, unless pus comes out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 And if there is a hot abscess, leave it to heal before returning to your work and care; the bandage is made in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 It is necessary that you wrap around the break II or III layers of thick bandages, leaving excess material, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the knee, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg, near the knee below, and bring the ends of the thread above; then turn the bandage over the leg and the thigh, then place splints on the break, and place a splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make the compression even, then begin to bind strongly III or IV turns around the break; and as you go higher from the break, it tightens less; then take II ends of the thread that you have passed between the leg and the thigh, and tie III splints that are above, then return below to the end of the thread, so that you come near the foot; and tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, since neither abscess nor swelling nor other similar thing occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes there, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then one must remove them, if possible; and if not possible, then one must split the place, and draw strongly; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that stakes are put into it, as in the shoulder and in the arm; nevertheless, in this restoration the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 And know that the thigh is restored in five days, or a little less or more, according to the diversity of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	 from the tendon of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the knee hollow, there is little fracture, but it often bends.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is only a split or hole, and this happens in any wound, and without wound, and everyone feels it well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the healing is such that one puts equal what is round to its two [parts], as long as they can be assembled; then apply the poultice, and put on a round bandage if you need it, and bind it as necessary, then follow all the procedures we have said in other fractures, just like an abscess or similar things; for each incident, apply what is needed until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	 Of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are II bones, of which one is rightly called "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and every fracture happens as it does in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as for the arm, and the workings are all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 And if the subtle bone is broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it is easily seen; and it turns below.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then apply traction, and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly; but nonetheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several fragments, then the traction should be less and lighter; and align according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
de la brisure des os dou piet	 Of the breakage of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 At the ankle there is no breakage, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and at two places, and it happens more often with fractures in several parts.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 And if there is breakage of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground as if they were about to walk, and now place your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their place; then apply a plaster and wool on top, and place under the sole of the foot a small flat plate with two full holes, then bind the foot properly, after you have wrapped bandages around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 And when three days or four have passed, then unbind the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 And if there are any broken fingers, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and it should be a little wider, then place under the foot this board that I have mentioned, and secure it tightly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken fingers, place on each finger a splint according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen cloth, and secure the board under the foot; and let it stand at the head of the board outside the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and treat each case accordingly.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 of the bone in the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of the female’s natural passage is broken, let her sit enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the natural passage of the female with cotton, putting in as much as a finger's length; then raise the woman and lift up the back little by little, and then the cotton jumps until it comes to the entrance of the natural passage, and the bone returns with the finger; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or so: thus the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and tie a reed through its opening, then blow into the bladder until it is inflated inside; thus the natural passage will return to normal; then fill it with cotton and leave it that way for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bones of the fist of a man are broken, or of a woman, restore them as we have said concerning the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from those who put their study and practice into it, and pay attention to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For the fracture signifies in several ways the right way of restoration; understand this well.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose quill and put the penis into it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it there for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	 of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 It is necessary for someone with a fracture and wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, that he be bled now, just like the wounds we have mentioned testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the wound is healthy, then close it with vitriol, if you have nothing else. Then begin again to restore the fracture in that same hour, or that day, if pus does not develop there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 And if pus develops there, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring on evil results.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 And if the broken bone is visible under the skin, then it is necessary that you place your hands lightly on either side of it with slight pressure.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 And if you are not prepared to place it equally with your hands, then reset it with this iron instrument which has seven or eight inches in length, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary that the surgeon have three or four, according to what he needs for each fracture cure; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the end, and thicker towards the middle, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palainche," because the curved head must be placed on top of the visible bone; and push it back once, until it returns, and let them be equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone, so that the instrument may have power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument for this purpose, either a knife or a saw; then scrape away the roughness and small splinters that remain in the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If it is done so that it is in its place, then moisten the bandage in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is in summer; and do not put on the wound any cerote or other oily substance, lest it bring forth putrefaction and corruption; then administer stars when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constrained with the fracture; and many times have foolish physicians done this, and have brought death or corruption upon the patient sometimes; and let the constraint be gentler and softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is large or great, and you doubt that evil accident may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to apply bandages; but wrap around, instead of bandages, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one day or two days the wound swelling up, remove everything that you have put on it at all times, and apply a healing salve for wounds, such as tetrapharmakon salve and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 And it is necessary that you unbind the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the swelling flows down gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 And if many days pass and it cannot heal but returns again bowed, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must search the wound with a probe, and remove all these loose pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, you must cure it according to what is said in the previous chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the thighbone or shoulder blade, and other similar large bones, do not pull it out, for many times death results from this, but leave it until it rots; by chance it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 On bruises that come upon a sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 We often see this after the health of the bruising, especially when it is near the joint, and seeing the limb’s appearance is unpleasant; and by chance, the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Take heed therefore if the nose is fresh: then administer stiptic medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others; so that you take one of these things or all together, and boil them with stiptic wine or with plenty of egg or with honey; and place it on the nose in bandages, and bind it well, and do not unbind for many days; then unbind, and begin another, until the swelling is gone; or you bind over a well-made piece of lead; for the properties of lead are such that they remove all the swellings from the members; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, cut off the top, and bring out the apparent superfluity; or have it scraped by some rasping instrument until it is removed, and treat until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 of the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 When the fracture of the bone is healed, and afterwards the limb remains weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons: one of which is because it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or from too great movements, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, hence it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 And the cure is to make the patient eat, and make his body soft, until the blood increases in him; and administer baths, and give him joy and gladness; then apply pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws great nourishment to it, and frequently wash it with warm water, until the nourishment reaches the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 Of a twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are exposed, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb all over again; and many foolish doctors have done this in our land; and these works are blamed, and great evils come from them, and sometimes death; however, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, then they must be softened with hot water, or softening herbs must be boiled, such as leaves of vismalva, and roots, and mellilot, and similar things; and you make a softening plaster, such as well-made diquilon, and you take the muscillaige of vismalva, and you cook it with goose grease or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or you take ripe figs, and grind them with colon flour, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes the dislocation is removed by continually and lengthily rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And there should be gentle movement of the limb each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And if the distortion is hardened and made hard like stone, and it needs to be removed with an iron tool, then it must be cut down to the bone, with a delicate incision gently; and put effort and study into the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 When dislocation happens to someone, it must be immediately brought back without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Because if one delays, the place swells, and perhaps one barely puts it back in its place; therefore, one should not move it when it is swollen: many times this brings on spasm and other pains; however, when this happens, have the patient bleed, then leave them until the abscess subsides; then wash the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as it comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	 of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 It often happens that the jawbones are dislocated together, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: either they are slightly removed from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang downwards towards the chest, and saliva flows from the mouth which it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and its tongue is wrapped with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 When a dislocation is small, it returns to its original place through various means.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 And if it is whole and complete, it is necessary that you quickly reset it, and do not hesitate; and in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head, and the doctor places his finger in one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and let the other two hands be free, to make it equal; and instruct the patient to soften their jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 And the doctor should place it evenly until it returns to its proper place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 And if it is difficult to return, whether it is the two jaws together, then raise them with hot water and oil, until you reset them lightly; do not hesitate in returning as we have said. xspace
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are returned equally, and the patient's mouth is closed well without softening, place wet bandages on a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft ligatures; and let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two cushions so that it does not move to the right or left, nor should they strain to speak, but let them eat light food until the pain is gone, and the jaws are bound; and then let them chew lightly what they want, and do not struggle to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well bound and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 And if the two jaws cannot be set right in one hour and are not returned to their places, then fever and hot fits ensue, and perhaps bellyache, and perhaps they will vomit pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and many times he who experiences it dies within IX days.
de la forcelle	 of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 The fork cannot dislocate from the side inside the continuation of it and from the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated by force, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press strongly on the place with your palm, and it will return; then apply the poultice and bandage, and bind it; and the head toward the side cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates sometimes, reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply the poultice and the bandage, and bind it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus also is returned the shoulder blade when it is removed from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Know that the shoulder is only dislocated in three ways: one way is that it dislocates towards the lower part of the armpit; and the second way is towards the ribs; and sometimes it dislocates upwards, which happens rarely; and it does not dislocate backwards due to the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inward due to the nerves; and many times it dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for in them it quickly jumps; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 And it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and he thinks it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	 It is therefore necessary for you to test it, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And know the dislocation when it is downward towards the scapula, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear diversity; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and under the scapula at the shoulder bone, just as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move any part of him; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly on the shoulder blade; and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	 And the manner is that the attendant takes the hand of the patient up high, then places his thumb under it, and lifts the joint with force upward to its place; and the attendant takes the hand, stretches it out high, then places it underneath; thus, it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in several days after, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the attendant should apply softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be applied; then let the patient sit upright on his back, and place under the armpit a cloth of linen equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then let the physician place his heel on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder firmly, and pull the hand of the patient; and another attendant holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; thus, the shoulder comes back immediately, and if you see it this way, you should reset it according to this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is larger than the patient; and he stands upright beside the patient's side, and places his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lifts the armpit high, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another attendant pulls the hand of the patient downward toward the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too weak, have something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And it is set back in another way: and this is how one drives a long log into the ground, so that its head is as round as a fist, neither too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but he should have soft blankets on top, and the patient should be standing along the length of the log; then his hand should be extended down from the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then perform this cure: take a log of two arms in length and four fingers in width, which has a round head so that it can easily enter deep under the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 Then take the patient and place him on top of a board, wrapped in cloth so that the board does not hurt the patient. Then place it under the patient's bed; extend the arm along the length of the board, tie the shoulder to the board, and the arm at the wrist. Then place the arm on the rung of a wide ladder, with the hand hanging down, and let the body hang freely on the other side: now the joint will return into its place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 And when it is in place, in whatever manner, you must put under the bed a flat piece of wool, then apply the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with frankincense and egg white, over all the shoulder and around it. Then tightly bind it under the bed, turn the bandage over the plaster, encircle the hand around the neck, and let the hand remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 And it is necessary that he rest a little, until the member is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then let him rest more afterwards, one day or two, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply three cauteries with holes, as it is stated in the chapter on cauteries before this one.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and he cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The dislocation that is towards the foot and buttocks, or backside, is caused by a push and stretching of the hands, and another instrument is administered; treat it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 And if after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and delay in movement, let the patient take many baths, until that stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	 of the dislocation of the hip
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 Know that the hip joint is dislocated by degrees, and returns by degrees; and if it has dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not obvious, because one can see and feel it well; and it dislocates according to each form.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the sick cut with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 Because the joint is separated and the arm cannot bend nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 And it is necessary that you reset it before an abscess forms there, because if an abscess forms there, the resetting will be difficult; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; this is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and death may occur.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 And the resetting is such that when it can be reset, you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arm be spread out, and hold his hand according to the cut around, above and below, and push the joint together at its base, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and strikes with the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension; and it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it with two assistants, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it; and when the patient joins the joint to his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint very strongly, until it returns; and when it is in place, put on a dry poultice with egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm around the patient's neck, and leave it for some days, then unbind.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	 And if the joint is firm in its place, then untie the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then tie the bandage again and leave it this way for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if he feels stiffness after the return of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub him well, and press until he is relieved; or place on the joint a greasy piece of mutton, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it and make him enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then replace the mutton, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see, place a moist cow dung heated with butter on it, and bind it up; thus it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	 The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is slight, more than other joints However, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, lest the place become swollen or an abscess form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And the return is such that you place the sick hand on a table, and the assistant extends his hand, and the doctor places it evenly, so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns However, it must be seen if it is well in its place; then let the patient place the back of his hand on the table at the extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and the healer places their hand on that part of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, that is good; if not, then restrain it with soothing plasters for those abscesses, and leave it thus without recurrence.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and nothing hurts the patient except that as long as the hand is wet, it cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to cauterize near the case, and perhaps nothing else will help. 》
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he cannot move it well, and there is some hardness, then moisten it with hot water, and rub until it softens.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated at each joint, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the hollow; then straighten the finger, and push the dislocation towards yourself until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and turn it toward the side where it is dislocated; and leave it for two days, and then set it equal on that day; and bind it with a nut, as we have said, and unbind after one day, and make it move, and rebind with a nut; and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and do the same when it is dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 When the shoulder blade or neck is dislocated, and there are several dislocations, there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the sign of this is that the exhalations jump out involuntarily, and he cannot hold them back, and often some members are softened, either both thighs or both arms or one, and often the shoulder blade moves in four parts; the part that moves to the rear is called "gibbosity": the cure for this is that you return it if the gibbosity is from childhood: there is no cure or healing for the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And the one that comes from a fall or a blow or similar things, the ancients spoke of cures with great words, where there is not always great benefit; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele qui vient droitement en II costez, and neither has any benefit nor health; and similarly that which comes straight to the two sides, cannot be cured except by that which comes specifically to the back, as I say; and it is necessary for the patient to be stretched on his face in an equal place, and have support under him so that he does not hurt himself. Then drive a stake into the ground at the head, and another at the feet, and tie one cord around the ankles of the patient, and another at the hips, and the knees, and the ankles; and two assistants should know the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes; and they should be well secured, the stakes as we have said, and the doctor should place his palms on the spine firmly, until it heals.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if it does not return with this cure, then take a board of three spans in length, and place it beneath the patient, who should be lying on their side, and push the head of the board under the patient, then place the middle of the board over the spine; and let the physician put his feet on the other end of the board, and press well until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do so for the shoulder that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And you should place two stakes at the head of the patient, one forearm's length apart, and towards the feet another two, with each stake separated by the width of a hand both above and below; and let there be a hole in each stake where the shoulder fits, and let the stakes be firmly planted in the ground so that they do not move. And between each pair of stakes, let there be a turning stake on which the rope turns, and between the two turning stakes let there be two small stakes one hand's length long, to turn the shoulder; then tie the rope that is among the ashes to the shoulder towards the head, and the other rope to the other shoulder towards the feet, and each of the assistants turns his stake all the way along the rope, and the master aligns the spine as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it is equalized, place an absorbent dressing with plenty of egg, then the bandages, and then a pad of three fingers' length, which should cover the area of jaundice and the healthy part of the vertebrae, then bind it with a ligature, as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until healed; and if anything happens at the end of the healing, then administer softening and soothing medicines, with the pad that we mentioned before; and sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes it appears in the lower vertebrae of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and this is the bone that opens, which is why one should not have presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	 Of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 Know that in the joints of the hip and the shoulder, only dislocations occur, not as in other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and it is more commonly dislocated inside than elsewhere, and rarely in front or behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 The sign of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the injured knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee; and the place next to it swells with an abscess because the head of the femur goes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 And the sign of this is that these accidents are contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 And the sign of this is that he stretches his leg according to its length; however, do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot go forward, and he retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when he walks, he walks on his heels.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 And the sign of this is that he cannot spread his knee, or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hipbone is in the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 The treatment for this type of dislocation is that you wait if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, then there is no need for treatment; and it is not necessary for him to be impatient.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, which is one of the four kinds of dislocations, hurry to turn the joint, and pull it within and without, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is necessary.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return this way, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and pull the leg strongly with two hands, or bind a rope around the knee; and another assistant should place their hand above in such a manner that they push their hands under their armpits, then pull gently on the thigh with a soft rope; and another holds the end of the rope; and all stretch up and down at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 This manner of extension is common in four ways, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, that is good. If not, then one must care for its likeness. When the dislocation is on the outer side, you should place the patient on his healthy side, then put the ligature on the root of the thigh, and the place which is below the angle; then extend the ligature upwards towards the angle, and towards the groin. Then another assistant should take the arms of the patient, and embrace the thick part of the sick thigh, and stretch it firmly: thus it will return to its place now, and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 And if you cannot secure it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, soft cord around the two ankles, and around the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other; then let him hang from the top of a pole, and let it be two arms' length above the ground; then instruct one assistant to embrace the thigh's head, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who embraces the thigh strongly, for the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocation is reduced, the patient lies down as we have said for someone with gout, and tighten the cord on the sick leg properly, and on the foot as well; then place two splints, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert a splint between the thighs of the patient in the middle; and let there be planted moist cloths around, that it may not hurt the patient, then each assistant extends towards him, and the surgeon sets the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place it on the table, and press it as we have said in the treatment of a dislocation, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to quickly extend the injured leg, as I have said; and let the healer put his weight on the injured ankle, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is behind, one should not extend the injured leg downwards or lift it off the ground, but rather let it be as if the hip were dislocated behind, as we have said about lying on both hips; and he should be face up, and the ligament should be extended as we have said before, and someone should press on the joint at the table; and it will be ready when the patient extends his legs, and they are equal; then bring the thighs together, and apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three days or four, then unbind him, and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are equal, then bind as before, and leave it for three days; then unbind him, and let him walk well, until the limb is healed.  >
de la dislocation dou genoil	 Of the knee dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	 The knee is dislocated in three ways: inside and outside, and backward; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not touch his thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your teeth, then strongly bend the two sides of the knee; and another assistant extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it touches his thigh lightly; and apply a plaster, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and keep them together firmly for three days or four, then unbind; and the patient should not try to walk until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not at all, then apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed
de la dislocation dou talon	 of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 The ankles are sometimes swollen and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the sign is that the ankle is swollen and projects forward to the part where it is dislocated; the reduction is gentle, and one should extend it gently with their hands when it is only swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely dislocated, you should make the patient sit up straight, and have two assistants hold onto the leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then towards the left two times, then raise it up high, and gently push the foot back up; and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; but if not, begin the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly stick a peg in the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around, so as not to hurt the patient; then let two assistants hold onto the thigh, and another assistant should support the foot with their hands or with a rope, which they tie around the ankle; then each assistant should pull equally, and the peg should always be between the patient’s thighs to keep the patient from moving when it is being pulled; then the physician should reset the dislocation with their own hands, and another assistant should hold onto the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it is ready, apply the plaster and bandages on top, and bind very tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and protect the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligament is not too tight; then leave it for two days or three, and if the ligament softens, bind again; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess forms there, then you must calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	 of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 When the two are dislocated, they must be properly extended without strain, and this is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the dislocation is in any knot of the back of the foot, then you must make the patient sit on a flat place or on a table completely straight, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns; and when it is equal, and nothing appears there, then put under the sole of the foot a board with two legs, then hold it tightly, and leave it for three days, then unbind it; and make it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation, and you want to restore it, it often happens that the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in this art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and cautious, but bold; and at the beginning, use things to calm the abscess heat, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health there; and when you see hope, then reset the limb now, before the abscess comes there; and when the limb is set, then administer things to calm the abscess heat, and treat the wound as it should be with dry onions; and if with dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones have come out, then remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and beware of entering into a way of fear, according to what I have said, for this will help you according to your Creator, and because of the wisdom of your arms and body.
Amen	 Amen
