O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its clarifications.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the manual work, namely "surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 And because the manual work is foreign to our region and is alien in every way, thus the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it except for a few descriptions in ancient books that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and the science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 Or it seems to me that I want to revive it together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And I will bring together the forms of the cautery irons and other tools for the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 And because no skilled hand masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of them, and their course and the moving and resting veins, and the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 And because Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, but with the work it is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	 and likewise in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned should guard against falling into error and harming people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 in such a way that I have often seen many of these who involve themselves in this science and so abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 Because I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 which is why so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 And I saw another doctor who extracted a stone from an old man, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 and he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if one cut him he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 And I saw another doctor who took into his care a duke of our land whose leg was broken and with the fracture had an open wound; 》
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 and the doctor, full of ignorance, pulled on the fracture over the wound with strong forceps, leaving no gauze on the wound, and left it so for one night;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 And he commanded him not to dislocate it at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 And so it remained until the leg was completely swollen and the foot came to gangrene.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I was called to go to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 And when I dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But nevertheless the corruption had already taken hold in the limb, and could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 And the corruption did not stop spreading through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 And I saw another doctor who opened an abscess, and then ignited it with his evil will.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 For a cancer, when it is purged of black bile, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corruption can be completely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 And therefore, dear son, you must know that manual work is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 That is to say, work in which there is danger in many situations;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 For which reason it is necessary that you guard against it, so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 Therefore take up your weapons in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to safety and be praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 And leave behind the fearful diseases with great certainty;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 And remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 Galen says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Do not undertake to treat serious illnesses, lest you be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have arranged this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 The first chapter is about fire cautery and cautery with medicine of garlic, and the chapter is ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 and of the shapes of the instruments, and the irons for cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 The second chapter also concerns cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 and the chapter is ordered according to the shapes of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 The third chapter concerns the restoration of dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 And it is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 So that we remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of aid and harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest speech and most subtle science, and the secret answers.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 And about this many wise men have spoken, and they agreed on it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 And their words seemed little to me, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I say that cautery helps universally in every condition where there is material, except for two conditions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 That is to say, a hot complexion without material and a dry complexion without material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 In a hot and dry complexion together with material, some have argued and said that cautery is of great help there; 
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 et the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 that cauterization is not effective against diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for hot diseases or with dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 and he who said the opposite says that cauterization is very helpful against hot and dry diseases in the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 For I have found it true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 And however, one should not interfere with it except for someone who has practiced it and knows through long experience the chapter on cauterization, the diversity of human complexions, the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and duration of time;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 And know, son, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and more beneficial than cauterization with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 For fire is simple and does not spread beyond the member that is burned, and it harms no other member unless it can.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 The burning medicines spread from one member to another, and they bring serious illnesses to the member.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 And by chance kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The fire, due to its intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not do so unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 And this I have found through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, based on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 and therefore I apologize for the length of this explanation, because it is not my pleasure to withhold from you the secret that lies in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases of the body, as the philosophers say in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 And know, son, that they agreed upon what time the cauteries should be done, and selected patients.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm that occurs is remedied by the aid of cauterization;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 and also if the cauterization is necessary for pain that is urgent and pressing, so that it cannot wait until a greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 And never think of this, dear son, as the foolish doctors do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 for an illness that is cured by cauterization does not return;
et il le dient ensi;	 and they say it thus;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 but it is not as they think, because cauterization is only a medicine that changes the temperament, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and it works more quickly than other medicines due to the power of its work and dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And it can happen that the illness comes sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the place of the illness and its strength.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 and the superfluities are assembled in him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered in place where there is little superfluousness and moisture, such as cauterizations of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	 but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and this is true.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 but they do not believe that cauterization is worthwhile after medication, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in some illnesses and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is better than with iron, and they only said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 and they said that the site of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have proven it, and I found that it is true in some men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 and gold cautery is better than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 And yet, when you heat a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot enough by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 and if one heats it too much;
si font au feu;	 if it is done in fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 And thus there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 And for this reason, we use the fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	 of the olive-based cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 This cautery is effective against moisture and cold in the head, and there are two types made for this reason: one is due to a disease called "soda," and the other is due to various humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and cause many dreams, toothache, sore throat, and all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 The shape of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a dissolving medicine, modifying the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength, the age, and the habit of the patient can tolerate;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 And then have the patient's head shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 And then have him sit crossed-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his feet;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 Then place the root of your palm at the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 And where your fingers will be, there will bleed and warm the cautery which is called "olive," of which here is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And place it on the spot marked with ink, and make in descending and stretching your hand little by little while turning.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 Then lift your hand immediately, and return to the place if you see the bone is not yet visible;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 And if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 After that, take a little silk, and put it in warm and soft cotton inside, and place on the spot, and leave it there for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 After that, place a piece of moistened linen on top of butter.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 And let it sit until the burn is healed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward, treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, it drains more.
et por ce si aide mues.	 and for this reason, it is beneficial to move.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 And some of them said that the cautery should be applied so long that part of the bone is burnt; and then scrape off what has been burnt from the bone, and let it heal.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And others say that the cautery should be left on for so long, and pressed so hard that it cuts into the bone as wide as a spindle whorl that women use in their distaffs, so that the humors may exit more.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 and one must leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 afterward, one should cure and suture it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 And these two methods of cautery do not seem to be good in every way, except in certain men where there is fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 and it seems to me that I should leave him alone;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 because the head is weakened by continuous natural dislocations, as we have seen in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 and similarly when the patient's head is naturally weak, and the first signs of cauterization are more healing and beneficial to me, I then work with that together for salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 From the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts long, then the patient should use herbs and pills called "coccium," and of purging the head and oils and poultices;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 and if one makes the cautery that we have previously mentioned, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 Take care if the patient's head is of a strong nature, and that it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Then cauterize under that cautery a little, as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 Then make a cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place that is called "vasculum";
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 and this is the place where one applies cupping glasses;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 and raise your hand so that you do not see up to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 and the cauteries of the horns should be finer than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the shape:
dou cautere dou chief	 Of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When there is sudden pain in one part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the eye is purged with purgative medicines, and other treatments have been done as I said in the classification of diseases, and none of this helps:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 Then he makes cauteries in two ways, that is to say with hot iron and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 The cautery with hot iron is done by taking a piece of alder wood, removing the bark and shaping it into two points, then making an incision in the place where the pain is such that you can insert the alder wood under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 and when it is inserted, tie and bind it well and leave it so for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 and then untie it and pull out the alder wood, and let the wound remain so for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 then put a cotton cloth soaked in butter on the wound until pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the treatment with ointment, when it is healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 And if you see it thus, do as with some burning medications that I have written in the twelfth treatise on burning medications.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 Le fer cautère est fait de cette manière.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Chauffe le cautère comme suit :
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a small bowl where there is a hole, and in the middle there is a small opening;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn it lightly a little, until half of the thickness of the head is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 and lift your hand so that the surrounding area does not burn, which is outside, and an abundance of blood will flow out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 Afterwards, place cotton in vinegar, and apply it to the spot for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then place dampened cotton in butter, and then dress the wound with bandages until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cautellare", then use all the point, and beware of cutting the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	 of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 When you cure the migraine as we have previously said in the division of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery of medicine and iron does not suffice for it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it becomes white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 and thus place on the painful spot a line of half two in length, and remove your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cut the artery and that you do not reach the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 and beware of the jawbone that moves while eating, and let the nerve not move or spasm in the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, for there is great fear in cutting, and also for him who does not know how to do it, and who is not trained and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 and leave the work halfway;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be done in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 And if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, along with the cautery that has two knives.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And this cautery is better and more helpful than that one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 of the ear pain due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When ear pain comes from cold, and one has worked with solvent medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 Afterward, prick all around the sore ear or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 And let there be ten points around each ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward, heal the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	 of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 The ulcer that must be cured by cautery is none other than those caused by inflammation, as we have said in the classification of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 And do not perform cautery on similar things that come from drying out and paralysis of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When you treat this type of injury that comes from the poison of serpents and from purging the head and gargling, and if it does not work, then you must perform three cauteries on the patient.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 One at the root of the ear, and the other a little below the temple, and the third between the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 And place the cautery on the part that looks healthy, and make a cautery at the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 And leave the cautery there until half the head is burnt.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And it resembles the lancet that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the blade be a little larger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after curing the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 When the stroke is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the place that is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the stomach's mouth;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 And let it be cared for as we have said before.
de litargie	 Of lead poisoning
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 At this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills that purify the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 After this, wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and place on the back of the head a mustard plaster as is written in the treatise on plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 And this is the manner of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 Do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If he is cured in this way, good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 And if not, let three cauteries be made in the middle of the head descending to the neck, and there should be two fingerbreadths between each cautery.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 And treat it as the others, and if you see something added, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if necessary, two more on the two horns, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 And let the cautery be called "olivare," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	 of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hairs and what we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 then shave the patient's head, after which make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, one behind, and three on the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient can withstand it, and the disease is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 And leave them until the most heated part is burnt, and then remove your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 After the treatment, until he is healed, and let the cautery called "olivare" that we have mentioned before be used.
de l’epilempsie	 Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 Those who suffer from epilepsy should not use cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and first it is necessary to purify the brain with years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is strong and able to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 And if it is a child who cannot endure it, give him a gargle and chew the brain often with good food.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 After the king cuts off the head in the middle, make a cautery as we have said before, and a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if the patient is strong and can endure it, make a cautery as I have said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-shaped as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If the patient is a child, perform the subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 When due to melancholy there are superfluous or corrupt moisture and thick phlegm, then use the same cautery as mentioned for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And if due to melancholy the superfluity inclines towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him something to drink that will purify his brain, as mentioned earlier in the chapter.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After washing the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 then make a bandage of linen well made, like a circle, and place it on the head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 And the patient should sit with their arms crossed, and be held firmly from all sides.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 then present the linen and wash it with old sheep's butter.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 and heat [the linen] over a moderate fire, so that two can touch it without being burned. xspacexn
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 then empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And do this for the patient once a week with good care until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 And if you see cauterizing it by making several points throughout the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This method of cauterization moistens the brain equally;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 And then apply moistened cotton in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	 from the fear of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 When fear comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, and protect it from all moistness, and make them sweat in the bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 Then command him to lift his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent is on both eyes together, or one if the descent is on one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temples;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, staunch it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how to staunch it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 And sometimes one applies cautery or burning under the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	 du corps des larmes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When tears are old and habitual and are on the veins or near the arteries that appear on the head's exterior;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 and one sees that it is from cold, phlegmatic excesses, then the practitioner performs the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of this work, descending towards the eyes;
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 Cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries in the rear under the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 And if there is further need, then cauterize judiciously over the forehead with small cauteries all around it.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 From the body tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient to drink three times cooked eggs.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 after the king of the head, and make a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 and make two cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the two shoulders, one a little below the eyebrows;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 and beware of the artery lest you cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the eyelid is softened by illness and moisture, then use this cautery called "olivare" for it.
de coi ci est li forme:	 de ceo est li formes:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 And if you see so, make two cauteries on the two shoulders as long as the shoulders are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 and do not leave the hand there except until the third part of the skin is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	 because of the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes is turned towards the inside and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 This is to know about fire, or burning medication.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 Or the fire cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and equal;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they are born.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 When they are born and equal, then put the patient in your health;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 After, let there be on the skin of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then put moistened cotton with egg white and mastic on the eye, then heat the cautery whose form is this:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 After cauterizing on the face where you have a pimple or lesion, do so very carefully several times until the area is burned.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 and the sign of the healing of the work is that you see the skin drawn back, and the hairs raised at the edge of the wound.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 then remove your hand, and leave it this way for three days, then apply a cotton swab dampened in butter until the scalding is gone.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after the treatment of the burn until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 And if after this the hairs come back and the skin is softened, then begin again with the cautery on that same spot, just as you did first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural place, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and equal, then make a form from parchment like the leaf of myrtle.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 Then take French soap and quicklime, one ounce of each, and grind them well together.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 And do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the form you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and place it on the paper of the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 And if the disease is in one eye only, then work on that one alone, and if in both as well.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 And place moistened cotton under the eye like egg white.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 And let the patient's head be in your hand and place your finger on top of the medicine, and press down the cup and move it every time the patient feels a sting from the medicine, for they feel a sting as if by fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 And when the stinging has passed, lift up the area of skin, and look to see if you observe the flesh raised as if it were raised by the constriction of fire or by incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 and if it is so, then all is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 If not, then apply more medicine to the area where the medicine has not worked, until your actions are equal and your eyes focused.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place a piece of cloth soaked in butter over the burnt area until the heat subsides, afterwards treat the affected area with ointments called "diaphenes" and others until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you need to take great care at your work that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the treatment again on that spot which has been softened by the proper paper, just as you did before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 after the treatment until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And this is the shape of the mirto leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to which you will constrain it;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And the right way is not responded to him who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 Of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When you cure a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures do not benefit, then it is necessary that you make him cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Command the patient to put his head in your lap;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 and let the minister hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor lower his head.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 After, place moistened cotton wool on the egg white or in the juice of pearlwort on the eye.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 After, heat the cautery which is such:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 And it is hollowed out at the end like the quill of a feather, together with which is the cautery.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If you wish, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, let it be like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 But nevertheless, this hollowed one is better suited for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After, press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 And if it is closed, then incise it, and bring forth the head.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 Upon this, place the hot iron on, and hold your hand to the iron at the part of the nose above the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 and put the iron in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 Se tu arrives au début de la cautérisation jusqu'à l'os, ce serait bien.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 If not, then repeat the ironing again once, or another if you need to, and leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 afterwards put on moistened cotton in butter, and the cure of drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass that it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 Et il y a une manière de faire la cautérisation d'une fistule que certains des anciens ont mentionnée.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 Attend to the fistula, and open the site;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Afterwards, insert into the slit a subtle instrument shaped like this:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 and make it to the size of a .3. of lead;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 and hold your hand firmly on the instrument, and let the patient not move at all, until the melted lead runs to its end;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 and it is necessary that you place on the patient's eye a cotton swab moistened in egg white or honey;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 lead heals as well around the site of the fistula, and it heals wonderfully.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then one must administer a perforation in the nose, and redirect the fistula back into the body of the nose according to its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	 of cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 Often occur cracks in the lips which are called "poils", and similarly in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 When you treat these cracks as we have said in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery like this:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 And place it quickly in those cracks until it reaches the bottom;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 afterwards, treat the site with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, afterwards it causes putrefaction and a hole forms and it becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 And you treat it as we have said in sections, but it does not benefit at all:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 Therefore, it is necessary that you use the cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 After the opening or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron comes to the bottom of it, and in the deepest place;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 And if it is treated thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	 of tooth movement
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and it is of no use, then place the patient's head on your healthy side.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 afterward heat the cautery whose form will come hereafter in such a manner that you place a reed on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 and put the hot cautery inside hastily, and hold your hand steady so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 afterward remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 afterward have the patient fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 And in this way the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gum is restricted, and the corrupt moisture is dried out.
de la dolor des dens	 of tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor,
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 And fire cautery and grease cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 A grease cautery is such that you take cow butter, and put it on the end of an iron or copper spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 then take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent pole, and wet it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold it until it is cooled;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 and do this often until its power reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton in cold butter are moistened, and put on the aching tooth, and put hot iron on it until the fire reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 The combined fire cautery is such that you take an iron or copper tube, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 After heating the cautery, which will be formed later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during this cautery, and then rinse thoroughly.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 And make a cautery from whatever material you wish, according to what you have available.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 and this is the shape of the cane.
des scrophules	 from scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 When the scrofula are caused by cold and moist phlegm and do not respond to digestive medicines, then heat the cautery made of that which is described below, and it should have two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 And if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it there for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 And apply a cotton pad soaked in butter until the burn has healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward, treat the area with onions and vinegar until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the dog:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When moisture prevails in the channels of the brain, and especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged with purging medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 Afterward, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go all the way to the throat, but only a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 After that, make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the base of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavicle," of which we have the form before;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and heal the place as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	 from the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 When all and the illness of the scrotum are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is old, make two cauteries on the scrotum in close places;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 and another cautery in the middle of the breast between the two breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 and let the cautery be called "clavicle" according to the form that has been said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 And if you wish, make a cautery by pricking the entire cautery that is called "point" as the form is here before in the disease of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And let the points be up to XXX, or around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 Après avoir traité la zone comme indiqué précédemment, utilise un cautère avec trois rangs, tel que montré dans cette figure :
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 Et parce que ces cautères sont plus légers, car tu en fais trois à la fois.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 Quant à la dislocation de l'épaule
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 Et pour réunir les deux parties de l'articulation, prends une bande et fais-en un nœud double autour du cou et de l'épaule, puis attache-la au sol ou à une autre partie fixe, de sorte que le patient puisse rester immobile.  Ensuite, remets doucement l'articulation en place avec tes mains, en appliquant une légère traction.  Après cela, fais un bandage autour du cou et de l'épaule pour maintenir la stabilité.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 Then let the patient be made to lie on his back and on his side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 then lift the heart which is inside the little hollow between the two fingers of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 and if the joint is dislocated inward, heat the cautery which has two wires like this, here is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the side, and there will come the figure of the cautery along with four other cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 and therefore the cautery is made with the three-wire cautery, because the figures of the cauterizations are six cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 and the wires are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the three-wire cautery: ️
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, which is why there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 After, place on the cautery powdered with silk;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 After, make the patient rest, and let the limb remain undisturbed for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the shoulder blade, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture to the point that it alters his complexion, and he has many catarrhs, and with the usual methods of care he does not benefit, then it is necessary for the patient to be laid on his back, and extend his legs and hands. 
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 After this, make three cauteries: one beneath the heel of the foot by the quantity of a finger, at all the cautery cavity, and two cauteries on the two sides such that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and there is enough space between one and another so that they do not join together when they exude pus;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 and let the cautery be so deep that it reaches the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without alteration:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 And if you see one being cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 and he who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach at this point according to the amount that you see in advance;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the previous treatment, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 When concerning the liver, pain comes from cold and moisture and great flatulence, so much that it is strongly displaced from its natural complexion due to excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 and the patient is treated with what we have said in sections, and it does not benefit him at all, so it is necessary that the patient be seated on his heels; keit
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 And mark three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, beyond the hypochondria, there where the ribs of the man come.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 And only burn half of the head, and let the patient be upright on his feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 And if he cannot, then let him be lying down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms;
et c’est li forme:	 And this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 And if it is your intention, then cauterize these cauteries with the knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the entire head, for you would dry out the whole body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And let it not come up to a boil, for the heart is very sensitive in that place, and you should know this well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not very strong;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 and if it is in the membrane, then the pain is insane.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 And at that time when this treatment was done by the physicians, it was necessary for the patient to be placed on his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 and then sign the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a grape, for this is its shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 And burn with a cautery until the heart is burned, and reach up to the navel, so that the entire abdomen is emptied.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 after the treatment according to the treatment of the excrement, so that he may be healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 and it is not fitting that anyone use this cautery except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and through whom many of these diseases have been cured at some time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can work boldly, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	 The fire cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 The ancients said that one should make for pleurisy cauteries from the roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 take a long root of Aristolochia, the longest you can find, and let it be dry, as thick and as long as your finger;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 And place it in oil, and grasp it with fire, and apply a cautery between the collarbone and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the area under the chin.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, slanting backward a little.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 And one cautery in the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the ribs of the chest on either side of the cautery that is between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 And do not press with your hand, but make it openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 And some ancients said that some men use a cautery similar to a razor, and heat it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And the pain jumps out, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula will occur which cannot be healed.
de la mice	 of the urine
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 When you treat the urinary disease as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 The type of which one is such that you should make three cauteries, or four, aligning according to the length of the muscle, following the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 And do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be seated on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 And another type of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two irons, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 And lift the chest that is near the muscle, or the rib of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the chest be according to the chest, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 After he cuts out the two inflamed nerves so that the heart is pierced from the other side, then draw forth from the cautery, and thus there will be four of them.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 And if you see this, cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment when he has had pus for a long time, and this is different from the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	 Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery is not useful for those with dropsy, except in the manner called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 When you cure according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the abdomen, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the bladder, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 And let the cautery be very close to the tip of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 Afterwards leave the cautery open for a long time to expel corruption, and do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 And healing would hasten, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the claw that we have shown before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 And the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as it is placed here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	 Of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 And lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply; thus, it would burn beyond the desired area. Let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the little toe;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 And let the long cautery be one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 And let the cauteries heal over for a long time without curing, as the wound heals.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After the cure of other wounds that we have spoken about.
de la menoison	 of the humors
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 When diarrhea comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by usual methods of treatment;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 And if you see the patient in good health and of strong virtue, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before concerning the stomach cautery, and also apply a circular cautery.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 And four subtle cauteries around the navel, each one a subtle lancet cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, perform cautery on the armpit, and one cautery on each eye, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	 of the cure for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and they are old and of thick, cold, and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said by division, and it does not benefit, then make cauteries.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 Three on the spine of the back, those which are entirely below the anus, little by little in a triangle, and one cautery below the buttocks two fingers wide.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 And if you think his stomach is chilled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then one should make one large cautery on the stomach, as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the bladder with all the cauteries slanting.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 And let the cauterization remain open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 of the fleshiness which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you cut the throat, heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it completely ignited on that slit throat;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, so that the blood stops;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 do this once or twice, and if there is much throat slit, then cauterize each one as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 after curing with beneficial ointments until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 and if you cauterize with a large cautery on varicose veins, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	 of an improperly cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 When the patient cannot tolerate cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease occurs that cannot be cured except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When a fistula comes to someone, and it is inflamed and emits foul-smelling pus and corrupt moisture, you should probe it with a very fine tent, and ensure that you know the depth of the entire tent.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 After heating the cautery which resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tumor has entered, and renew the cautery until that rotten and corrupt flesh is burned, once or twice or three times, depending on what is needed;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 And take care not to cut the nerves that are within, and of large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these places, and do not make these incisions except in a fleshy place, and think that it is not persistent;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 after healing the place until it is healed, and if the place is old, and the material has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 and if the materials are not removed, know that the place is too deep, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 and so with one of those which we will discuss in its proper place.
de la maladie des reins	 Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 When pain comes from the kidneys due to great flatulence and a woman does not desire sex, then it is necessary that you make a fire cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the same cauterizing tool we mentioned before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 And if we make the cautery in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and they will provide greater help.
de la vessie	 of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the opposite side of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one to the right and one to the left, and each cautery should be as long as the length of a thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 And if you perform the cautery on the back, or two, if you need it.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 And let the cautery be flat according to the shape previously mentioned.
de la marris	 against the retention
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 When the womb is cold and moist, and it does not allow conception for this reason, and the flowers are corrupt and their ends delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 And when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 Then it is necessary that one makes three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the treatment of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 And let the cautery be flat, as we have said.
de la hainche	 Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When the moist and viscous humors descend to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 And the place of separation is found visible, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip bone with a circular cautery, and mark before the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is inside the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And let the cautery be such as that used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 And if this cautery is not present, then make three large olive-sized cauteries, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the hearts.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And care for it until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	 of hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 When pain comes in the hip bone, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated for this as we have said in the treatment, and the treatment does not work, and the disease is chronic.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of foul-smelling pills or other good similar pills containing thick humors.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 Afterwards, perform a cautery on him;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 that you cauterize on the pelvis of the hip III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and large, and let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on the top of the hip, for which there are IV according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 And if you see it, then cauterize with the circular cautery that we have previously mentioned in the case of hip dislocation;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the flesh of the joint is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the manner in which one proceeds with sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip and does not reach as far as the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 And if it goes as far as the thigh and leg, then make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle, four fingers wide, a little to the left side;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 and let the cautery be a sharp one, and burn the thickness of the joint.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two feet or near there, then cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four with the cautery called "point".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 And if necessary, do more of them;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with a knife or a circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery so that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the entire leg was swollen, as well as the foot, and all the foot was pierced and corrupt.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a treatment for a stomach ailment from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 And the wise say in the cautery of the hip, which is thus: make such an iron and let it be at the tip as thick as a nail from a thumb, or somewhat less, and let it be serrated and let there be between each serration the width of a pea;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 And the hooks shall have two parts, and they shall also be like needles, and there should be one handle of well-made iron.
et c’est li forme:	 and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then place it on the thigh of the sick person, and turn it over on the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 And cauterize once with the cautery, and leave it for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 And then make a poultice of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After treating with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Al-Bukhari said that we use the cautery rarely because of the fear of its gaze, and if we see anyone using it,
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 And yet this is of the good cauteries, which one can bear, and there where it is appropriate.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 The cautery of burning medicine is such that you should make the instrument with tines, on which descends the margin of the opening, and it should be of bronze or iron with one long side, and at the height it should have two noses, and between each there should be the width of a finger;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 And they should be open from below and above, and joined together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 Afterward, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and then press your hand very high up on the hip bone;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 Afterward, place between the two circles of the awl hot iron that has been heated in the fire one bag [of powder], and let it stay for an hour, and the patient should bear the heat and burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 For there is burning as if by fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 And when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip, leaving it so for three days, and then apply butter until the blackness of the burn is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 And leave it there for three days to allow for drainage of pus.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And that would be the last aid after the treatment with onions until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, then make an instrument that is soft in the same way as you have done on the hip similarly;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And this is the manner of applying heat, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take quicklime and live coal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 Or if there is a small opening outside where the tip of a razor can enter.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 And put another well-leaded pot on top of it, and put powdered alkali and chalk and sweet alum on top, so that there are two layers of powders above the razor blade when you have taken hold of it in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 And leave it like this until the water descends and reaches the bottom of the leaded pot, then take all that water and pour it onto chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 And then it will be very pure and can be used in many medical works and for other members' cauteries.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 For it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hip well, such as castor, anacardium honey, and chalk mixed together with soap. 
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a cure by which a man was healed of the pain in the hip and the sciatic vein, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other cure was done, and that he was cured with one treatment when this cure was done, and he bathed as instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 And says in this manner that you take fresh and dry litharge, and grind it very well with a little fat, and place it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and leave it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And leaves it for three hours, by which time the patient should no longer feel the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then have him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed, and put him to bed, and all the pain will go away and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 Et sachez que nul ne doit user de cautère de telles médecines, si ce n'est après l'évacuation du corps.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps greatly.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow that is between the big toe of the foot and the other one called phalanx.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 Afterwards, take dry goat hair, and hold it in the fire until it becomes coal, and put it on wool, and leave it until it is stained.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 and do so again, and do not stop doing this until you think by your sense that it reaches the hip, and that the pain is stopped.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of cheese".
de la dolor dou dos	 of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 When pain comes to the back, either from falling or striking or too great an evacuation, or from the appearance of cold matter spreading, in none of these cases is it worthwhile to use cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 It is necessary that, after the patient has been purged with foul-smelling pills or other similar substances, three lines of incense should be made on their back where the pain is located, and in each line place five cauteries or more, depending on the strength and quantity that the patient can endure;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "point";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 and if you wish, make three or four cauteries in the middle of the nail-shaped cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 Many times this illness comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow gait when they rise, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 And you will find at the end of the spine on the back, and it appears on top of other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see this and you wish to cure it, then you cauterize it with the cautery of celce according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 So that the cautery penetrates each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines long, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery to a swollen place that is in pain from nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	 Of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 When pain in the joints is due to moisture that spreads throughout each limb of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which doctors call "podagra," and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 make many cauterizations around the foot joint, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary that you prick on the surface of the foot, make a cautery at the point called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 And if the pain reaches the knees and other joints, which often happens, then make three or four cauterizations on each knee from every side, with each cautery being olive-shaped.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if you need more, do more, but do not keep your hand on it longer than the iron rod is hot.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 Et si les douleurs descendent jusqu'au genou et au dos, administrez-lui la cautérisation que nous avons mentionnée dans ce chapitre.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 And if the pain is in the hands, make an incision around the wrist two lines long;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 and if there remains any pain in the fingers, then make an incision on each joint and on the back of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pain reaches up to the ribs or up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and give them medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 Et car si vous prenez bien soin de lui et que vous purgez la fièvre, il sera guéri avec l'aide de Dieu.
de la routure dou syfac	 From the rupture of the shoulder
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When ulcers occur in the anus, and feces descend into the testicles, which is new, then it is necessary that when you see it cured, he does not eat anything that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 And instruct him to use things that cause flatulence, so that his feces descend from his stomach.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 Then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command that he hold his thighs until the testicles descend, and bring them to your fingers, and sign below the pubic bone on the wrist bone, and let it be similar to half a circle above the body.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then heat the cautery which has this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and throws sparks.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 Then return the testicles to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 And let the attendant hold his hand so that they do not return back;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 And bandage the patient's thighs well and place a pillow and a bolt of cloth on his thighs, and another on the penis which he holds with his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 Then place the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and firmly until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then begin again another time until you reach the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 and be careful that the bubble does not burst when you make the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	 that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 and that the patient may not die from this or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 And it is necessary for the cautery of children to be fine according to their measure, and also large for adults according to their measure.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 after three days, cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is removed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 after curing it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days so that the wound may heal well.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that its caregivers be weary for a long time, so that the boils do not break out when he tries to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let a well-made sling be placed on him, and he should wear it for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 And let him have good rest, working little and guarding against excessive drinking and eating, and against excessively loud laughter.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	 of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 When ulcers come in other places and are recognized, and you see that they no longer grow, make a second cautery according to its size, and burn one-third of the heart.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 after the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-pointed cautery like this:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the place and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and then hold your hand in the middle of the entire cauterization tool.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cautery is lighter and more delicate.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes to any limb, from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 if it is healed from the first cautery, that is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 if this is not the case, commence another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it should move to the nearest limb, therefore you must perform the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	 of blending
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The messengers are sometimes helped by cautery with great aid, and likewise the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 When you see it being cauterized, beware if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not move or remain, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 I pierce in the crown towards the back of the head,
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 and one on each of the two temples, and one behind on the occiput.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 and you leave it until your hand is soaked with the cautery reaching the bone, and enough to bring out the scabs so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 and cauterize over the bridge of the nose accordingly as it is described before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 And if the disorder is spread everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 and it is manifestly deteriorating, then you must cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, one cautery below the nose, two on the spine of the neck, six on the spine of the back, one large one on the buttocks and another beside it, and two on each shoulder. ︎
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 And there are two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 And beware of the nerves that are under the heel, lest you burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 And sometimes one makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 And know that the more cauteries I make, the more help I provide, and it brings him benefit;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy ones do, because his body is already completely corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find them in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After treatment, dust the place with flour of vetch mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 When swelling comes to some member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the member according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 And let the cautery be a little bit inside the thickness of the heart;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then the curing of onions until they are healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 And sometimes the cautery is done on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 however, let no one interfere with it unless he is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	 from scars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 When the disease called "albaras" is healed, and medical remedies have no effect on it, then it should be cauterized with a small, deep cautery, according to the thickness of the heart, until the paleness is removed and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 then the remedy of flour from chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of a pigeon and almonds, one part each;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and all should be mixed together, and tied with a cloth, and placed on the wound until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 The cure of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When cancer first appears and you see it spreading, then cauterize it with the cautery that resembles a circle, all around the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 And nevertheless, the wise say that one should also apply cautery in the middle of the ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 and yet this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupt, and I have seen it happen before.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 and a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around the edge with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 Of the inflammation that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is delayed in death due to the excess of its production or the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 And you see that it hastens death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 Then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, pricking.
aprés le laisse ensi.	 Afterward leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you see her pierce with all the cautery, then heat the cautery as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it outside in such a way that the course of the corruption is made clear.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment until he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	 the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 There is another manner of disease which is called "corrodens," and is nothing other than a gnawing away of the limbs, for it gnaws at the limbs just as fire does with dry logs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire together, then heat the cauteries very small and large, according to what is necessary for the place where the disease is.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 After that, cauterize it from all sides so that you burn away all the corruption and nothing remains of it, except that everything which is corrupt be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days, and put on the places that have been cauterized a poultice with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment of tumors producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if you see after three days that no hair grows, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 and if not, then repeat the cautery on the spot where the corruption remains.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 And this condition has sometimes been treated with astringent medicine instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 but nonetheless, fire cautery is more effective, and I have already described the treatment with astringent medicine in the section on wounds.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 of leeks that grow at the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often it happens that at the feet, on the outside, a disease grows which is called "clots" according to our intention, and it is a large hairy thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cautery for this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 That is to say, cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 Fire cautery is that you heat the cautery as if it were a goose feather, and let it be made of good iron to the extent that it can fit the nail on all sides, and let there be subtle edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 After, place everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the head of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 And leave it thus for three days until it begins to emit pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with vinegar, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its base.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the burn site by applying ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 And if they are turned outward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery;
et est en teil maniere:	 and it is done in this manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 take a reed of copper or iron, or a goose quill, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, on warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 And put the candle on top so that it drips all around, then place a cloth of warm water there, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the candle comes to the base of the nail, and let the hot water find its deep way until the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 and let the patient endure a little the biting of the hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted from all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 So do one after another, until you remove all those that are on the body, then treat the swellings that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	 treat the shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 When someone trembles from cold of the nerves, or from tertian fever or another, then you must make four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra;
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 And for cautery on the foot, and above the stomach for the liver cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 let it tremble, and the health of the cold illness will hasten.
des pustules puans	 stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes appear on the surface of the body washed with water, or stinking pustules, which come from large corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 so it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, whose point is taken from the fire, or of long aristolochia root, or for the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow from then on, but the excesses from which they come are broken down, and they heal;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 but it must be done after blood evacuation.
quant li artere est copee	 When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 Many times there is a great loss of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound on the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cautery of the member, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 And it is very serious to stop it.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 And yet when this happens to anyone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is quiet under your finger, and no more drops come out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 then heat several small and large olive cauteries in the fire until they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 then take one, large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 And if it spurts when you remove your finger from the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 And do not stop doing one after another until the blood is drawn out;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stopped well, especially if the artery is large, except by one of the four methods that we have mentioned;
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 or by cauterization, or by extracting it if it has not been cut, or by tightly binding with a thread, or by applying medications that have the power to stop blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 and let it be tied and bound properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 Whoever manages this will use a tight bandage of cloth or place burning objects on it, or similar things, if it is not beneficial or possible otherwise.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 And if this happens to someone and they have no physician or medicine at hand, then they should place their thumb over the wound of the vein as we have said, and press down firmly until it is stopped on the wound and on the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 And do not move the finger, but moisten it with very cold water often until it is very cold and the skin is frozen and swollen and stiff.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 And make inquiries about what he needs for cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 Here begins the second book on the treatment of hernias
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 We have told you in the first chapter all about the disease for which one should cauterize with fire or burning medication, and the occasions and causes and instruments and forms of cautery;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 and I have placed this chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that one may more easily find what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one concerning cautery, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 For in the work of this chapter there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many types of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 if they are of such a nature that they will die quickly from their illness due to the madness it causes and the severity of its harm;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 and one should fear them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 And there are some who give you their reason and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 “wait, I am cured.”
et li maladie est despitouse.	 and the illness is disdainful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 It is not appropriate for you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but rather put more consideration into your honor than your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely concerning that which you are certain of, and from which you can gain respect and praise.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 and use prognosis and diagnosis in treating your patients so that health may be restored;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 and this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and fame.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 Very dear son, may our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 Now I have arranged this chapter for you by chapters, according to what is in the previous chapter on cautery, which I have discussed with you from head to toe, so that you can find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 Know that this illness often afflicts children during birth, and when the midwife pulls too hard on the child's head;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 and sometimes it occurs due to an unknown cause, about which we know nothing.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 And I have never seen this illness except in children, and for all those that I have seen, death was imminent;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 and therefore it seems to me that I should leave the work of treating such cases alone.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled each day so much that it could no longer hold it; ‌
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 And so much moisture gathered that he died, and this moisture is collected beneath the bone on the rib, between the heart and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 And the work is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should cut a wide slit into the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 And it should be as long as two fingers, until the moisture has drained.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 And see here the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs are that you see the seams of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out strongly when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 then you must cut three slits into the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After bandaging the cuts with rags and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Then unbind it, and treat the wound with tentes and dressings, and let the head be bandaged evenly, and then give the patient dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 And another method of incision is that you consider where the greatest part of the abscess appears, and the accumulation of pus;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 for sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	 sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	 sometimes on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	 and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 Cut then where the abscess appears, and the accumulation of pus, and make the incision according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 And see that you do not cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 and a vein flows with blood, so that the patient dies from bleeding and moisture loss.
de reume	 of inflammation
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 When someone has a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or nose, and the illness is longstanding, and medical treatment does not help, then the final cure is to use cautery, with which two arteries will be cut.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 Therefore, when you see him cut, it is necessary that the patient lean his head back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 after which you rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient strain his neck against the entire cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 then look where the veins beat, and the place of one and the other is after the ears, and a few are returned;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 then mark the places thus, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, so that the incised vein reaches to the bone, and this should be along the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 And if you see, push the spatula under the vein and cut above it, cutting also as two halves across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 And when the vein is cut, the blood constantly spurts out.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And if the artère does not open to the touch, then you must measure the width of three fingers, then take a saw and cut down to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 and what is needed of the blood let out is six-tenths, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	 then observe the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 if there remains on the bone no trace of pus, then shave it clean so that no such abscess may come; then constrain the wound and bind it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	 of headache
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 When an ancient headache comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old foolishness and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medicine and all this does not benefit him at all, then we will extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 And the manner of extracting them is that the patient must pull back the hair from his temples and aim for the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is little hidden outside except in certain men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 And if it is inflamed, let the patient constrict his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and rinse the area with hot water until the veins appear clearly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 Then take the spatula which is shaped like this:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 Then peel off the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up with the tweezers, and make sure it is well separated from the tissues underneath each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 And if the artery is thin, then wind it around the tip of the hook, and cut off that part according to the size of the two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 For if it is not cut, then the blood will not come out at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 And draw blood for six times, until three.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 And if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that putrefaction does not occur before the healing of the wound, and let the blood flow gradually;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 Then cut the superfluous tissue that is between the two ligaments at that very moment, and then, if you see fit, apply the cautery with the knife until the bone.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 And this is a good work, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 For the cautery helps to dry up the moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 Therefore, it is of greater help to moists.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 Where for the extraction of arteries one should fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made bandages.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when they are unbound, then they should be cured with dry medicines that promote healing and with bandages, until they are healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if you cut the artery as much as you work on it, then hasten with the copper by cautery, or apply vitriol to the place and hold it in your hand so that the blood is staunched.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 And if you do not have this (vitriol) present, then place your finger on the spot until the blood is frozen, and rinse the spot with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it as needed.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 And that which is better and lighter in the extraction of the artery is for you to cauterize the wound with this cutting cautery from two sides, but let the cuts be well spaced to maintain their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 Car when the instrument is too blunt, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 And there should be one finger's width of space between the two knives, and then when you have inserted the two blades, place the burning iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the wound in two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 And they should be separated between the two heads because they are not fused by this cautery at all.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	 tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 When tears fall from the eyes and descend into the veins that are on the temple of the head, and medicinal treatment does not help at all, and you see the patient's face redden, and they feel a throbbing sensation in their forehead as if trembling;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 And if the eyes are pale and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids have fallen out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 And the ancients called it "treatment for concussion", and what you must do is to cut off the hairs that the patient has on their forehead, then make three incisions in the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 and let one of the incisions be like the two that are all in the forehead from top to bottom until the nape, and the other two on the ribs above the breasts, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on the sides above the breasts.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be three fingers wide across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 and have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping away the blood, then pour in the sharpened instrument from two parts where this form is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 from the incision which is in front of the temple up to the second incision.
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 and scrape all the skin that is between the two incisions to the full thickness on top of the bone, then do the same from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then withdraw this instrument strongly.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 Place in the first cut the instrument called “scraper,” which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And put the sharp side towards the flesh of the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 And cut all the vessels descending from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what opens from the heart, and then make another cut in the middle of the split until the other defect.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 And then draw out the blood equally, and press on the place for the blood taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 Then put in each split a tent of old cotton, and put on wet cloths with wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure that no abscess comes there;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And on the third day untie the bandage, and apply a large compress of boiled water, then treat with ointment of basil and rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	 of the humor of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When to some people comes acute catarrh usually, and you see the eyes watery and small, and weakening the sight, and the eyelids burned;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 and the hair falls out, and on the head there is intense pain, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 then know by these signs that those matters and that catarrh come only from many veins, and the best treatment for it is this:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And it is that you instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a great incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from the left eye.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 And begin from the cleft of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go down to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move during eating;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then dry between the two lips of the cleft and put in old cotton wool and linen cloths;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 then lay upon him moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 when it is removed, then you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that cause the flesh to grow.
En teil maniere:	 In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice with it;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 and administer it to these wounds to promote flesh growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 Of ear blockage
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 All that falls into the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 or grain, or animal, or mineral stone or similar thing like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 When something flows like water and is easy and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When something falls into the ear that does not belong there and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see the stone, then drip some violet oil or sesame oil onto it, and then perform an extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 And make him sneeze with a stimulant, and plug his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 and stretch the ear upward.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 Often this cure is successful;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 and if it does not succeed, then apply an extraction with fine tweezers, of which the form is this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 If it comes out well with the tweezers, that is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 if not, then apply an extraction with a fine hook of small size;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 And if it does not jump out by itself, then make a tube of brass and insert the end of the tube into the opening of the ear firmly, and stopper that which is around the tube with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter along with the tube;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 then pull strongly on the tube, for often it comes out as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 and if it does not come out in this manner, then take the birdlime with which birds are caught, and put some on a suitable instrument for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 then press the birdlime onto the foreign object or whatever it may be, and pull strongly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 And if it does not jump out from all these things that we have said, then you should hasten to cut open the ear before a hot abscess and spasm arrive there;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 and the manner of the incision is that you first anoint the patient with cephalic, and let out blood according to its measure of virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upward, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fatty place where it depends;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it as best you can, and suck on it hastily to your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and the treatment until he is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 And if it is grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 and if it cannot come out, then administer the subtle, gentle sputum according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision for that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not do this when you think the grain is wet due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 then strain it through fine sieves and press, as we have said, so that the extraction may be clear.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In the case of water falling into the ear, it is necessary that the patient first use sneezing condiments, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let him lie on that same side where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If she jumps through the roof, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 if not, then take many stones according to the length of your thumb, light and thin, and heat them a little over the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 and place the patient in a kneeling position with one knee under his ear, and have him stand on his other foot, and strike another stone over the stone that is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 and do not stop striking stone after stone until all the water comes out, and thus it jumps out completely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 And if you see it, take a reed, and put one end in the ear, and set the other end on fire until the larger part of the reed is burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 Then do the same with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said about stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 In extracting the creature, if it is of small body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 but if it is of large body that can be felt, then use a puncture for extraction;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 In the extraction of worms stuck in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not work, then you must look at the ear to the sun.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 Si il y a des vers, retire-les avec des pinces fines. Et s'il n'y en a pas, prends le couteau pour faire une incision.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 Et mettez délicatement le bout le plus fin dans l'oreille, en fonction de la tolérance du patient à la douleur, puis tirez fortement tout le couteau.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Faites cela plusieurs fois jusqu'à ce que tous les vers sortent.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 Et s'ils ne veulent pas sortir, bourrez autour du couteau avec du coton, comme je l'ai dit pour la pierre.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 Et s'ils ne sortent pas comme nous l'avons dit, administrez des distillations que les anciens ont prouvées pour tuer les vers. Vous trouverez comment préparer ces distillations dans le traitement des distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And so drip your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of which here is the form as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 And whether it be of silver or bronze, it should have a small hole at the bottom and an opening on top to drip through.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 And to press the distillation inside, use an instrument of bronze well-made for this purpose. And if you wish, take a scraper and wrap tightly around its point with cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 Then cast your oil or juice, and whatever you wish of your medicines into the reed, and let the reed be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 Then insert the scraper with all the cotton inside, and press your hand gently until the oil is dripped into the depth of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 And let the patient feel within him, and let there be the distilled juice in a heated pot over the fire before it is dropped into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And ensure that it is not too cold, for then the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 Of ear blockage
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 No child is born without a small opening in the ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 and the same thing happens to men due to the obstruction of a wound or growing flesh within the ear, and this obstruction sometimes goes deep into the ear, so that it cannot be seen;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 And sometimes the pot overflows through the opening, and one can see it clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 That which goes deep within and cannot be seen is difficult to treat in many ways. And that which one can see must be placed in the sunlight by the patient;
et regarde dedens:	 and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 if you see the hair obvious, then do all this operation with this instrument of which here is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 And let it be sharp and cutting both in front and behind completely, so that it does not wound the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 if the hair is of flesh or body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and cut lightly until all that flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the hair has grown deep into the ear, take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the cartilage of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 If you feel the hair of which the patient feels pain when hearing, prick lightly and take care not to harm the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 then place in the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Pour ce remède, fais cela chaque jour jusqu'à ce que la plaie soit guérie: prends une étoffe et trempe-la dans de l'eau de rose, puis saupoudre dessus du vitriol broyé.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 And if you see the ear swelling, it is necessary to remove that cloth and replace it with another cloth moistened in a salve made of rose oil and wax until the swelling disappears.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 And if bleeding continues, soak a sponge in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding, which are discussed in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	 of the skin of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 This ulcer, which comes on the eyelids when they are moist and then dry, you must extend it with tweezers and scissors, and cut it off with a spatula from its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 Then place vitriol powder on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 And if it comes off, then cauterize with a subtle lenticular cautery, and afterward cauterize the incision in order to move (it).
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 and often they return, as long as something remains of their root;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burnt and do not come back.
de la gresle	 of the hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 Often in the eyes there come things that resemble hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "hailstone," and it is a collection of thick moisture above and below the eyelid.
li ovraiges est telz:	 The workings are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 watch if the hailstone moves from one place to another, and this is easy to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Wound it then broadly, then gently scrape each part, then take it with tongs, and cut it off.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 if you cannot cut it without slightly piercing the skin, it will not harm the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 and if the split is large, join it with a stitch, and treat it until it heals;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 and if it is small, do not apply any pressure, for the ointment will restore it quickly and promote flesh growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 And if the sty is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the skin, and hold the sty with tongs, and cut it off while pressing on both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 and if the skin is separated by the incision, it will not harm anything;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And when hail is struck, lift the eye with salt water, and heal the place of it which injures flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	 of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 Exinach is a fat that is inflamed in the membranes of the eyelids, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it greatly harms their eyes, and catarrh comes to them in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 and therefore they always lie on their faces, and sleep with them swollen, and their eyelids are moist beneath their eyelashes where the inflammation and appearance cover the exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the place between your fingers and feel the exinach there.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 And the manner of the work is such that the patient places his head in your hand;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 And then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains each part, then place it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 And press with your two hands from both sides, so that the parts are assembled within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 Then in the middle of the moisture make with a sharp scalpel an incision wide enough, but not larger than the wound that is made for venesection;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 And pierce the skin thoroughly until you reach the parts;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And in various positions pus comes out of the incision, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 Pull it out then all at once with a piece of cloth between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread out.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 And make sure you do not push into the slit, so that you do not reach all the way to the eye and injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 And if the sty does not open at the beginning of the slit, then slightly widen the slit until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 Then pull it out as we have said, then wet the cloth in vinegar and water, and place on the spot, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And there are such men who grind salt and place it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the patient until he is cured.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is cured.
des poilz des papieres	 of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 When hairs grow on the eyelids that are not natural, and they become irritated, they harm the eyes and bring about various diseases such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and pus, so much so that it leads to the loss of sight.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 And the treatment is according to four ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 Or by fire cautery together with fire, or by medicinal water according to what was said in the previous chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by chains, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 You must place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid of the eye to your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 If it is turned inside out, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 If not, then insert a needle all the way to its eye;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 And let it be near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow near these hairs, and draw the thread all the way through the eyelid, and turn it to the razor.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 Then they make an incision in the part below the skin, under the hairs, covering all the flesh, from the large tear duct to the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 Then they pull out a thread, and place under the skin a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sign on the skin a figure of ink, such as the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you wish to raise the skin that is divided into all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 And for those who need it, cut a large quantity of the skin according to how the skin is softened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 Then they make an incision along all the flesh on the two lines you have marked, and begin from the large tear duct down to the small one.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 And let one of the clefts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then apply oil to one of the two corners of the heart, then scrape it all off.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 Then join the two lips together with a seam of one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and let the excess of the threads dry on the two corners with any sticky substance, if you wish to do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 And if not, then pay no heed, but leave the seam and the threads for three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 Then treat the wound without seam with dry and astringent substances, for the skin revives at the healing of the wound and its union, but the seam is harmful (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	 And there is another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 and it is that you should mark the paper with a shape like the leaves of myrtle, as we have described, in three empty spaces according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 then cut the one that surmounts the small equal forces according to the form that is here
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and insert it into the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 and insert another thread near the large eye, and the second thread near the small one, and bring together between your fingers the threads equally;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then raise your hand equally, and lift all the leather on which you have marked, as we have described, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar calming ointment;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 And sometimes it happens that the hair of the skin is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 then you should use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 but the sewing in one and the other is more technical.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The treatment of dogs is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 and it is that you convert the skin and open it inside as I have said, then make two dogs with skill, and two fine threads as long as the length and width of the spatula is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 and cut off the ends of the thread in two parts where you hold the threads; etime la cure est moult bele, et moult prodoment faite.
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 Then carefully bring together the two parts above the papillary layer of the eye, and firmly pull on the two canthi from the two sides.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 And leave it this way for some days, and the skin that is pulled will die and blacken and rot, until it falls off on its own.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If it delays, then give it some strength, then treat it until it is healed.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 And when the wound is healed and the papillary layer has been lifted, then the hairs will no longer grow.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 And these are the shapes of the two canthi that you should make according to this figure and according to this measure in length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 The procedure is such that you take a fine needle, and insert one thread of soft and fine silk into it.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 Then gather the heads and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the thread be a palm long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 then order in the sheath another thin silk thread briefly, and tie the heads of the thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 then have the patient place his head in your hand.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 and let it be near the sun so that the work may be illuminated, for this is a subtle and small operation. Then push the needle all the way into the sheath at the root of the hair, and make it pierce the skin quickly until you draw it out above the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 then pull the hair until it reaches the sheath, and push into the sheath that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 Then pull your hand until the hairs come out completely from the skin with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 And if the skin is stretched and the hair does not come out completely, you will draw the skin down to the bottom of the thread that you have placed there, so that the skin comes out from the opening above and that you can see it with your eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 Then draw the skin and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the hair is small, accompany it with one long natural hair from the head, and raise it with that one until it is lengthened, then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	 of the infection of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 When this disease called "aleacrati" or purulent infection comes to the eye, there are two types.
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting, or from cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And the way to work on it is that you split open that union, and undo its lips, and put inside linen tentings, and let it rest until it heals.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And it is not necessary to use in the cure of it things that dry out and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 Because if you do this, the disease returns worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 but working with softening things, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 and the juice of water or ale and flaxseed boiled together, and melted onion in some oil, and wrap it in a tenting, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the treasure of your care is such that you must take caution that it does not heal in a manner different from what it was before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 and these works that we have spoken of are not outside of the remedies for this ailment, so that it may heal according to its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This illness which is below and is truly called "axacrati," and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The accident comes from wounds and cuts and burns and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 and the way to perform this operation is such that you take a needle with a double thread, and insert the point into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left margin as far as the right, so that the thread comes out in two places in the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 then press the flesh down over the entire needle, and cut it to a wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 And if the shape of the stone returns as it should be, this is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 if not, then take a razor and place it in the crack, turn the stone, and make two cracks on the inside of the stone;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 and the heads of the two cracks should be at the two corners of the cut that you have made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which is called "I Greek";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 then remove that piece, according to the quantity that its sides are sharp underneath, from what follows the stone, then join the two separated parts and sew them together with a thread of wool;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then care of what we have said about softening medicines, and tents, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 And if the illness comes from a cut or stitching or cautery, then you must make a clean cut under the skin of the paper, according to what is said before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 Then sever between the two lips of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 and one should perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an engine with all his power how he may bring back the figure to its natural form;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for him in work and instruments, in many situations.
dou soudement de la papiere	 of the suddenness of the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When this joining occurs in such a way that the skin on top is joined with the white of the eye, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor beneath the skin, and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 and stretch it with pincers, until you cut off what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or cutting, so that the patient cannot tolerate the spatula being too sharp hurting the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 and let your incision, by which you peel off that assembly, be light, so that the skin returns to its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 and all that assembly is healed, and sometimes the eye becomes inflamed with salt water, and lift it with fresh water, and with honey.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then place a linen bandage between the paper and the eye, and put plenty of wet wool on top of the eye.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And after three days, use cold compresses and astringents until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	 of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 Know that the nail is according to two kinds:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 the first is nervous and similar to hard stone, and the other is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and one tries to take it with pincers, no one can.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 And both resemble the growth beginning towards the large tear duct and grows little by little until it covers the entire eye and all its light and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 And the manner of the incision is such that the patient places his head in your lap, then closes his eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 and lifts the paper to your hand, then winds the nail around small forceps, and stretches it upwards.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 then take a needle, and put a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair in it, and the thread strongly.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 and double the point of the needle a bit and insert it into the nail, and pierce through the entire nail, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, and peel off all the skin on the side of the nail that follows the fingertip and the silk along the hair down to the root, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with all the delicate spatula and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh in the tear duct, so that through the incision the body does not usually come to tears.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 And sometimes the nails extend to the fingertips, and to the thread, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 Then scrape off all the soft part from which this form comes:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 And be sure that the soft part does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the wound is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And after the incision, put in the wound a little bit of crushed salt and from the vitriol made of lead, and leave it until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat this until it is healed as needed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 And if the nail is not fleshy and you cannot insert the needle, and the fingertip cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail can be cured with medicine.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 And they are born like I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, work the eye of the patient, and take a small knife with a sharp point according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And lift the nail gently on top, and if you see that it does not thin out at all and the reason presses there, then drip from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of lead oxide and red collyrium, ground together, and plug the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 Then resume the other work according to this same procedure, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If nothing is against you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then let it be, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear duct clouds the eye with great annoyance, then suspend it to the upper eyelid, and cut off a part of it but not all, so that tears do not come into it;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 then pour into the eye red choleric [substance] made from lead.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 In the eyes of some men there sometimes appears red flesh, and it covers the pupil and extends onto the eyelids, and it turns outwards, and it resembles a rosette of a baluster.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 and the work is such that the patient should place his head in your lap, then you should open the eyes, and all this flesh is collected into suitable receptacles, and it is sustained with force.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 then cut the first flesh, and continue cutting everything down to the end with the razor, and be careful not to damage the eye in this work.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 and let the incision of the [instrument] that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and in small forces from which one removes the splinter be as described after this chapter shows it.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 and when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, fill the hole with hot oil from a burnt seal, where you drip red colocynth and similar corrosive medicines, and place over it cotton soaked in egg white, ensuring the abscess is warm.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 and if anything remains, and the pus overwhelms you, and you doubt the abscess is warm, then leave the hole and treat the abscess with soothing remedies.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 then return to your work until it is healed, and do the same when flesh forms in the hole by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 Yet you must lighten the treatment of each weak hole according to its natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 And by the way of an accident, in ironwork;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 And do not put your hand in any of these workings until you see that this limb is tolerant of the working.
des voines des eulz	 of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 If they are red veins that cover the eye, they take away from sight its function and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 It is necessary, therefore, first to examine whether the eye in which it is located is sound and there is no other disease besides the cataract;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 then cauterize the eye in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 instruct the patient to place their head in your hands, then suspend those veins with all the skill you possess, and let the needle be fine, double, according to this form: ›
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 And let there be two marks by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 then cauterize the veins strongly and subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins move outside of the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 And be careful not to wound the eye with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not cut deeper than those veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 And when you have done this, instill in the eye green and red choler to corrupt what remains of the black bile.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then make a poultice for the eye with soothing substances to relieve the pain, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and an abscess is certain, then begin again according to this manner until he is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	 And this is the shape of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	 of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 The physicians call these «arissati» fistulas:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 when you cure it by cautery and by burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a trick in it that you should cut over the abscess where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 And when the bone is exposed and you see the decay and blackness, then take away all the instruments of which there is the shape;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 and it is called an "asharpened head," and should be made of iron or steel, and should be pointed like a file as it appears in the following figure:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And put on the spot of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press with your hand for a short while until you know that this corruption is remedied.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 And do this several times, then restore the spot with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If the spot is healed, and flesh grows there, and the body of the wound is healed, and it remains so for forty days, and it does not reopen and is not infected, and no bad incident occurs, know that it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 If not, then there is no other device than to bring the fistula back to the puncture of the knife according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 And it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered then take a drill according to this form, and let the head of the iron be three-sided, and let the shaft be tapered up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 Then place it on the bone next to the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye socket, then turn the drill until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the wind escapes if he holds his hand over his nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 and then restore the place with dry medicine as I have taught you, and when the flesh heals and the spot hardens, the material goes to the nose;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 so it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	 Of the eye issue
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 When the eye is fully open and there is no obstruction or narrowing of the nose, then you must bind the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 then let him heal, then place cupping glasses on the temples without pricking to suck out [humors], then put on the eye a poultice made of iron filings and aloe and frankincense and sarcocolla, and then bandage the eye with bandages and cloths;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 And the manner of bandages is such that you take bandages soft enough, and fold each one in four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye may need.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 Then press firmly with a hard bandage on top, and start the cupping again to draw without hurting.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 Then remove the cups and leave the eye bandaged day and night, and if the bandage becomes loose, you must tighten it very much.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 Then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye improving, that is good;
se ce non;	 if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then begin again with the poultice and the bandages and the bandage and the cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 of the dislocation of the toe
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 When discharge comes from the bladder, it opens, and comes forth from the flesh like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 then if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle at the root of the lower part up to the upper one, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the eyelid;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 then cover the place of the double thread and tie a part of the vein around it, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye a wet cloth soaked with egg.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 and leave it until the thread dissolves with the vein, then treat the eye with soothing things until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And sometimes the wound is bound with wool on each side of a circle of cloth until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 And if the eye appears to be badly infected, pierce it with a fine needle deep into the eye, and drain the cloudy liquid from the eye, and insert it immediately;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then withdraw it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	 from the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This disease called "alcunny" is nothing other than an inflammation that forms in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 And the manner of performing this work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the inflammation rise above your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 Then let it be pierced, and do not descend, and let the light be dimmed, and let the patient see things as he used to;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 And if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the wound is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a thin spatula and pierce on the hardened tissue at the junction of the sclera with the scleral ring, until the wound exudes.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when it has exuded, then instill in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek that has been boiled and mixed with honey, and then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	 of the eye's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have the likenesses of needles in the division, and those which are necessary for perforating;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 do it according to the healthiness.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands, out of the light from the sun, and bind the healthy eye very tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 then put the eyelid of the affected eye in your left hand if it is the left eye, or in your right hand if it is the right eye.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 then take in your right hand, if it is the left eye, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand, if it is the right eye.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea by the thickness of a ray in that white part of the eye towards the lesser tear duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly and turn your hand until it perforates the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 And it is necessary that the measure of the almond-shaped eye should be at the depth of the measure from the pupil to the end of the iris.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 And this is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 You will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horny tissue, and then place the instrument where the water is, then press it under one eye after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If he has weak vision now, then the patient sees what is before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 After resting for a while, and if the water rises in the second eye, place the finger with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise, gently extract the almond by turning your hand little by little;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 And then put in a little bit of pure water, and leave the eye inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then apply outside the eye gauze or cloth soaked in rose oil and plenty of egg, and bind with healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 Now, and those who are of our time, apply a poultice with plenty of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if Almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have eyes that are too hard, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 And then pierce only the conjunctiva, do not go too deep, but make the place subtle, then put in aloes, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a warm pillow on which he can sleep on his back in a dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 and he should be still from all movements, and take light foods, and not move his head to the right or to the left, and let him rest according to his condition for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 then unbind him in that same dark room, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 and it is not necessary for you to do this at the time of the treatment or immediately after the incision, but you should wait until later because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 If an abscess comes to this, that you release the eye before the seventh day, and apply a remedy that soothes the abscess;
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 And when it is soothed, then release the eye and place on its face one gold coin to cover it for some days, and let it always be in that darkened room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 And then go out of the house little by little, and turn back to its usual activities;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And one came to us who was from Jericho, who told us that in his country they make an almagda perciet, with which they draw water, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I read about it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And perhaps this is something new.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	 and they should be made of brass properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 And their heads should be of the same subtlety, and the rear in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	 of the flesh upon the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 Sometimes there are also various types of chariots, which is why some seem to have many feet like scorpions.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 And there are such that they have a wagon engraved with red color, and there is also a smooth wagon of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 In that wagon then, which is smooth and not engraved, you must have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 and open his nostrils, and cast the unguent on those wagons, and draw them out.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 Pour couper cela, soutiens avec un stylet subtil et aigu d'un côté, jusqu'à ce que tu saches que cette chair est entièrement coupée.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 And if any part remains that cannot be cut, open it with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 And if swelling or pus forms, then drain it as necessary;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 And if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize until the pus is dried up and all the flesh removed; then throw into the nose a mix of salt and vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If the nose drips, and moisture reaches the palate, know that he is healed;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 And if moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is flesh born in the bone above, which prevents the instrument from coming to cut.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 Then it is necessary that you insert a little thick thread of linen, and let it be tied by hand, and have between each knot a finger's width or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 And let the patient put the end of the thread in his nostril as best he can, and pull until it comes out through the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 And many times children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for those who want to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 Then hold the end that comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and know each one after the other by feeling along the thread as we are in the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe off the blood, and wet the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has dissolved all the remaining flesh.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 and then put in the nostril a piece of lead for several days until it is healed, and if dry medicines are needed, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 and this is the shape of the instrument for cleansing the head, into which one distills the oils and medicines into the nostril:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 And let it be of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and the tube likewise.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full to cleanse the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 and have one handle at the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	 of the flesh upon the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 Many times at the head of the nose a disease arises which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes large often, so much that it is a visible thing to look at.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 and because of this you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place on it the cautery or burning medicine.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 and if one delays cutting it until it is large, then beware if it is hard, of dark color, and lacks sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 do not touch it with iron, for it is an infected abscess, for when one cuts into it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 And if the abscess is of a soft touch and not of fiery color, and you see that it can be entirely covered, then let the patient fast and cover the lancing without fear, and treat the place with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 when the nose is cut and severed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 know that when the solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilage works, it profits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 Therefore, when this happens to anyone, look to see if the wound is fresh in all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and then bring together the two lips with one stitch, and then treat it until it heals.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 and if the lips have already separated from one side to the other, then it is necessary that you cauterize all the parts of their heart until they heal, then bring together the two lips with one stitch, and hold it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and crushed incense on top.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And put on the powders a piece of emplastrum made of strong glue or other adhesive plaster, and let it stay until it falls off by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The way to stitch is that you gather the skin together:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 or with thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	 of the lips' abscesses
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 In many people, there are hard abscesses inside the lips, similar to peas, both smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 then you must turn back the lips, and slice into each knot, and take with tweezers and cut into every part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 Then take lupin seeds after the vitriol incision, grind them until the blood is clotted.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then take flax seed oil, and cure the wound with dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	 of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 Many times there appears on the gums hardened flesh, which the ancients call "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 so you must hold it with tongs, and cut it at its root, and let the wound or blood flow.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 then apply vitriol powder, or other astringent and drying powders, to the wound.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 And if that flesh returns after incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 If it does not return after cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 And these are the forms of the instruments for covering.
des sordens	 of boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 Sometimes they are gathered at the roots of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs that are unsightly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 And sometimes the teeth turn black and yellowish green, until the decay reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul-smelling;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 Then you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and clean the teeth or scabs until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 And do the same for the blackness and greenness, and the yellowness and other stains, until they are cleansed.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 And if what is there at the first stage is removed, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 If not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have all healed.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 and know that the teeth require various types of instruments for healing, according to what the work shows, because the scrapers with which one cleans outside the teeth have other forms than those with which one cleans between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 and let these forms and others be ready with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 It is necessary that when you treat the tooth of its pain, you delay the extraction as long as you can, because one should not do this.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 for it is a very high substance until such time that one has no excuse to extract it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Therefore, when the patient is forced to draw out the tooth, you must be certain of the aching tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and has the good tooth extracted;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 et yet the pain does not leave until the evil spirit is expelled, for we have already tried this with these sick people.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 and when you are certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you burn around the tooth in every direction with strong cautery to protect the gum from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 then move it with your fingers or fine tweezers at the first knot and notch, until it is well loosened, then firmly secure the tweezers.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 and let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 Aprés remove the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and push it gently into each side, and remove it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 And if the tooth is decayed and hollowed out, you must fill it with cloth where the holes are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 And if you delicately hold it like tweezers, so that it does not break when pulling.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And it is necessary to work very wisely around the gum to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And take good care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and the patient will suffer greater pain than before due to the root’s malice.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 And be careful not to act as do the ignorant surgeons, who through their haste and boldness sometimes break the tooth and do not achieve what we have described.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 but they sometimes cause great illness due to the roots left behind or the broken tooth, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 and when the tooth is removed, wash the area with wine or vinegar and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 and if blood continues to come out, which often happens, fill the area with powdered vitriol.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The shapes of the instruments that one uses to first pull teeth should have long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull out the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	 and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 And let them be of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling out, and let them be well-made iron, and let them have teeth to hold firmly.
de la racine des dens	 from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 When the root remains after pulling, you must put moistened cotton in butter on the place for one or two days until the spot is softened, then insert tweezers called "algefri," which make it look like a bird's beak;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 and inside they are made like a file, and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pincers, then you must uncover the flesh completely around the root, and place there the instrument called "althali," which is actually pincers.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 And let it be thick and strong so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with this, that is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 If not, then use all the instruments, which are described below:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 And one helps oneself with this instrument which has two teeth, of which here is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 and other irons that are in front for the reason of teeth, and with this instrument which looks like large pincers, of which here is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 and similarly, other instruments which are not counted here.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 and the wise and subtle master finds his own instrument by himself, according to what his works and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instruments due to their diversity. And if one breaks the cartilage or other bones, he should look for the necessary instruments that I have mentioned, and use the following gestures:  as shown in the figure below.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 And let it be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, that it does not slip away, but can hold and remove it.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, then remove everything from this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 When the teeth appear not according to nature, and their form is ugly, especially in virgin women, you must know if the tooth is new after a lost tooth, and is not in its proper place, and it cannot be filed or ground down.
adonques lou raie;	 Then draw it out;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 And if it is attached to the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and is made of iron, sharp at the end.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And the claw bites little by little each day due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others; and if it is protruding such that it can be filed, then file it with a file like this form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 And it is like the limb from which needles are made;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 And in the limb where the tooth pokes little by little each day, gently so that it does not move until it falls out;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 then the plain at the end of all razors, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, it is necessary to file down the roughness until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	 And when the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 When the front teeth loosen, either by impact or by falling out, and the patient cannot chew what he eats without them falling out, and you have treated them with restricting medicines, and this does not work;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 then they must be restrained with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but the gold never moves;
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And let the wire be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, then put the pliers between the misaligned teeth, whether there is one or more, until you wisely reach the other healthy tooth.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 Then begin the covering again from the part where you started, and gently and wisely tighten your hand until it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 And let your wire be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then cut the wire from the pliers with shears and reassemble it, and put it between the healthy tooth so that it does not harm the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 And then leave it tied tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone or the thread breaks, tie it again with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 if it stays and serves thus all its time, this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, fresh by fresh, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes a tooth is made from the bone of an ox, and it is placed where the gap is, and it is tied as we have said, and stays and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 Of copper to the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue at birth.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 or by accident of a closed wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your lap, and lift up the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 then cut the nervous ligament from the wide part, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or a knot, and this is due to the sudden closure of the wound, then insert the hook and cut the ligament widely.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 and be careful that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery beneath; xspace
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 and when you have done this, raise the place with rose water and aloe, or cold water, then place a linen compress beneath the tongue;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 And the scabies should be treated by the patient every night, so that the place may not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 And if bleeding continues, then apply ground vitriol to the place;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 and if the blood is thin, then cauterize with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 then continue to care for it until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 and if you see a dark or hard color, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 and if it is inclined to turn black, and there is moisture, then apply onion juice, and make an incision with a subtle spatula, and release it from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 And if your blood fails you in your work, apply a poultice of vitriol until it is stained, then return to your work until you draw out all the strength.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then lift up the place of ease and rest, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	 of the throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 Sometimes there come into the throat certain ulcers called "godath," and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 If it is a hard abscess of small feeling and greenish color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent bleeding;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 but let it be until it is ripe, and then you will separate it, lest it should burst of its own accord;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 and if it is of pale color again, and the root is delicate, then prepare the instrument to cut, but first look whether the hot abscess rests and is quieted.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your hand, and he open his mouth and you take the root between his hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, which has this shape;
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 and let it be of silver or fine brass as thin as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 And when you have pressed the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take a hook and insert it into the almond, and draw strongly upward more than you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 And pierce something through the cloth with it, then cut with the instrument, whose form resembles a forceps.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And nevertheless, the heads are curved and one against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then use the tongs, which has this form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 And let them be cutting on one side and notched on the other.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner. After the incision, gargle the patient with hot water and cold water and vinegar. If there is bleeding, then gargle the patient with water or boiled pomegranate rinds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is healed.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then cure until he is healthy;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them off in the same way as the two tonsils equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 And I treated a woman of an abscess that was located within her throat, namely one small abscess;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 and it had almost completely closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed like this for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two eyes through the two nostrils of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 I hurried then quickly, and inserted in it one oncine [a small lancet], then drew out forcefully, and drew out a great portion of pus;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 Then make another incision in the other nostril, and open the mouth and press the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 Afterwards, I inserted the probe into these abscesses and drained some of it, and only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 And thus the woman's throat passage was opened up, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting away at that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 And the abscess would always grow back and fill up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 Then I cauterized it from within the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	 and thus it remained without growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 And I am separated from these parts, and let God make of them after me.
de l’uve	 of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 When water descends into the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 And if it is below and thick and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that this abscess is calmed down, and it is subtle, then you must cut it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 And that which is round and gathered together and is not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 And it is bloody or of a blackish color or black, then you must avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 Because there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have said, of its whiteness and length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned before;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out from below, and cut it with one of the two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And you must not cut more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 for if you cut more, then it will harm the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient is afraid of being cut, then it is necessary that you use anesthetic for the cauterization to reduce their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the manner of the cautery should be very sharp.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and cauterize with hot, fresh water, neither too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And in the use of this instrument, which has the following form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 And at its end is a lock where one places the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 And let the patient lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so it does not descend to the throat or wound.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour until you see it moistened and the irritation from the medicine is soothed.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the corner of the eye, so that the cotton dries on the eye.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 And do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and it will fall off after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 And if you need to repeat the cautery of the medicine, then repeat it, and after the cautery wipe around the ulcer with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it be rinsed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 This treatment is more effective for incisions than the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 if it is cured with fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and horehound and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in one pot, and put asafetida in it, and boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 And let the jar be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the jar there should be an instrument made according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 And let it be made of silver or brass, and one of the heads should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapors rise through the neck, until the vein is suppressed.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 afterwards it is often repeated until the vein dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, because many things can happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And do not perform this unless at the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 And if this instrument is not present, then take a reed and insert into it the yolk of an egg, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 for the head of an egg or milk does not allow the vapor to burden the mouth, and this is a good cure together with salt.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 Many times something sticks in the throat like a bone or fishbone;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 and that which does not open to you and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 perhaps it will expel the harsh thing through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 And tie a thread to the sponge, then make it pass through.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 and when she comes to the place, she will harden, and then you will draw the hair;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 and if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument of lead in this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it may enter the throat more easily, and have its tip raised up;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 and take care not to touch the epiglottis, so that the entire throat does not swell, nor push a bone into it;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 and it is better that the patient inserts the instrument himself, because he can feel where the thing is difficult;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 If the bottle is empty, or if he draws strongly with all of the instrument equally, until it is strong.
de la sansue de la gorge	 from the blood of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 Anytime bloodletting is performed, as I have said in the section on divisions, by means of medical treatment;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 And when this does not benefit at all, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, after you have pressed the tongue to the instrument that I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 Et si tu vois la sangsue, alors traie-la avec une très petite aiguille, ou des pinces fines qui conviennent à cela.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if this does not work, take a horsehair and place it in the patient's throat, then put a hot iron at the end of the hair, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if the patient has a fever all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 Then take a full glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without choking, and move it around in his hand often;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 And as soon as the blood feels the water, it will fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument that I have mentioned in the section on fumigating the eye;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 Do this many times, for she will fall without hesitation.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 And the manner of the fumigation is such that you take a pot in which there are live coals, and let the lid be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and through that hole place the head of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 then cast your fumigation, and the patient should place the end of the reed in his mouth, and close his mouth so that no smoke escapes, but let it go down to the lungs.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 and then the phlegm will fall now, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 and let the patient be thirsty, and chew on salty things and such, and do not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And then he will need to come out by this rule.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 And the shape of the instrument with which one draws blood is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved pincers for entering into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 and let it have the appearance of a sparrow's beak, and let it have the roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot leave behind;
et vez ci la forme:	 and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	 the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 Many appearances of abscesses are, according to the memories that come hereafter in this book, one and another, and they differ in perforation and cutting;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 and it is in two ways, one of which is in its appearance itself, and that which holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second manner is according to the places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 because the abscess of the head is different from that at the base, and the abscess of the fleshy place is different from that which comes in the joints, and each should be judged accordingly in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 And so with abscesses that one must not pierce, until the boil is dead according to its course;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And so with those that one must pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their course, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 Because when an abscess comes near the joints and it is left until it is purulent around, it may happen that the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 Or if the abscess is near the principal member, and you delay the piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 Or if it is near the fundament, one should pierce it as soon as it is ripe;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 And one must not pierce a ripe abscess without completed digestion, except for those near the fundament, lest it putrefy within, and become inflamed inside, and a fistula develop.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 And it cannot heal within a short period of time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 And it is necessary that you know the hour of the maturation of the abscess according to its completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the diminution of the pain and redness, and the softening and the improvement of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 And it is necessary that you make the incision sit in the most dependent part of the abscess, and where it opens moves;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And let the incision be long along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in the joints and near the nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no folding.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 En those that bend, according to this limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the opening until it is confirmed by completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 Because if you pierce it before this, the body will be elongated by the venom from it, and it is full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 And perhaps it will harden the lips and deepen them with it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb needs from it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 And it is necessary that you bring forth in small abscesses, small openings;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 and in large abscesses, large openings, and many slits according to the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to remove the core and cover it;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 When they become old like cloths, and are dead, then one must do as one does with boils:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 And if there are such that are split into three corners, and some that one cuts like the leaves of myrtle, as boils of the corners.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And if there are such [conditions] when one makes a circular incision, and other incisions and similar cuts.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 Those who have no head, as with a soft superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it fully;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once in that hour, but draw out part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 Then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more again;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 do this many times from large to small, until all the pus comes out.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Similarly if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old feeble men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the spirit may sometimes jump out with the issue of the pus, which could accidentally kill the patient, and you would not notice.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 Avoid this chapter with great caution. When you have perceived your abscess, then clean the wound, and look to see if the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 And if it is a deep cut, then apply linen or old cotton bandages.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 And if it is a large abscess and there are many openings, then you must insert a bandage into each one so that they meet each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 And if you have cut into the abscess a piece of leather and you have wrapped it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or scraps of linen without moisture, and bind it until the third day.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs during your work, then bring cold and easy water, and moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 Et si le saignement persiste, administre un traitement et des soins appropriés, ainsi que les poudres dont j'ai parlé dans ce livre. Si cela se produit pendant l'hiver, et que la zone de l'abcès est très nerveuse, il faut appliquer des tentes et des draps humides avec du vin et de l'huile chaude.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 et si cela se produit en été, et que la zone est charnue, il faut appliquer des draps humides avec de l'eau et de l'huile, ou du vin et de l'huile froide, pendant trois jours, comme nous l'avons dit.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 et ensuite, incise l'abcès, essuie-le et soigne-le comme il convient, jusqu'à ce qu'il guérisse.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 And this is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 and as I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, see here the chapter.
des soros	 de soros
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 When the veins of the head cause small abscesses, and they are like those that are in tissues, similar to the pouch of a chicken, there are many similar ones.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 There are those that are fat and such where there is moisture like poultices;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 and there are those that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the surgeon does not make a mistake.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of cutting is such that you should try any instrument that is called an "entromissoire," which causes the shape to come hereafter, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Car if it contains moisture, then open it from above the long [bone].
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape off without leaving anything the skin that contains this moisture, because it returns immediately if one leaves something there;
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And this will happen to those who remain in the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 And then resume cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know well that it does not remain in the night;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat the wound with ointment according to what is suitable, until he is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 And if the abscess holds the night oil, cut it according to this form, lengthwise;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 and put your claws in it, and skin it all around, and put all your effort into drawing the coat where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the art [or craft] makes you uncomfortable, do as I have told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And do the same for a pustular abscess, in cutting and cleaning as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And cut above the pustular and moist abscess, for it is lighter because they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if there is one of these abscesses in the head where there is no moisture, and it is like the abscess that I cut on the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 And I found the abscess like a deaf stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if one had struck it, one would have made as much of a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 In other abscesses that come to the head, except for those that come to the heads of children and the roots of the ears, the opening should always be in the most dependent place, so that the pus may exit;
et les cure si com il covient.	 And treat them as is necessary.
des scrophules	 from scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 These abscesses often occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and there are many of them, interconnected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 And each scrofula is properly inside its rib, like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And the likenesses of these scrofulae are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that do not want to obey healthiness.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 And then in that which you see of good disposition to touch, and it is similar to the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not harsh to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery or duct, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 then you must cut above it, and scrape each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart with tweezers if needed, as we have said in the case of head abscesses.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 and draw it out little by little, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, and let the instrument not be sharp or cutting, lest the hand slip, and do not go too far forward, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 And if you cut the vein or artery, and this prevents you from working, then place in the wound vitriol paste, or some powder that stanches blood, and tighten the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And leave it there until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to fester.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 And when the blood is stanchioned, return to your work until you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 Then inquire at your fingertip if there remain any small scrofula, and cut them off and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then it is not proper for you to cut this scrofula at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 Then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you cut the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and stitch them now, since no excess remains due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 so it is necessary that you take care to cut the root of it, and pull strongly, and stitch as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 Those scrofula that hold excess, pierce there where it appears dark;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 and pierce it in the same way as was said before, hanging downwards, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the wound is well cleaned, dress it with healing ointment until it heals.
de squinance	 of a splint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 The ancients spoke and discussed the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 but I have never seen anyone in our land who has done it, and this is a record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 For those with stridor, the split in the throat called "epiglottis" must be cauterized;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 And that no aid is given through this, because all the veins and the flesh of the patient are hot with abscess in the mouth or throat or both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 When the illness is in the tonsil channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid death from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it between three or four small transverse slits, between two circles, or by the amount of the cartilage slice;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 and the patient is suitable for cutting the epiglottis if there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And if the master is fearful, he must extend the skin of the throat to the very end, then cut the heart until it reaches the chin.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 And pour out the vessels of blood, if you see anything, then cut off the sinew, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 And it is demonstrated by the cutting of the phlegm from the brain which escapes strongly through the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 And when the time has passed in which strangulation is feared, join the two lips of the heart wound, and sew it all alone without any padding.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely stuffed, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is healed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 Then cut off the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is preserved from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 And therefore the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease had passed, and it passes in three days or four. Then they commanded to close the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 I saw that a maiden took a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the cartilage of the larynx.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 And I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 I revealed the wound, and found the blood that had come out of it, although it did not pierce a vein or a large artery except for the throat, and the wind was coming out strongly through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 I hastened and sewed the wound, and healed it until it was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 And nothing happened to the maiden except that she lost her voice, which later returned to its original state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 for this reason, I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis, there shall not be fear.
de la grosse gorge	 of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 this abscess is called "goiter," and it is a large abscess the color of a sloe, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	 and it occurs in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	 naturally, and accidentally;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 or naturally, there is no humor present.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 And the accidental [type] is in two ways, of which one is similar to our fat, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 and there is fear [of operating], and it should not be done by fire, except in the small one, and test and search throughout the entire [affected] area; 
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 If you find it thus as we know from fat, and it cannot be bled by any vein, then cut it, like one cuts the nose, and draw all its hair, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And bind well immediately, and treat it as needed until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	 of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 There are many types of noses, from which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 and now it is necessary that I speak about all the differences that exist between a nose and an ulcer.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say that an ulcer is hot and feverish as long as the inflammation lasts, and the pus has matured;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 With the nose there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the syfac, which is its own sack and corresponds to the body's color, and begins like a little bag, and grows. ‌
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 And they are according to two likenesses, either fat or moist, and of many colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 Il convient, quand tu viens à la cure du nœud, que tu éprouves et enquêtes d'abord de tout l'instrument qui est appelé «entromissoire», selon ce que sa forme sera dans le chapitre suivant.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And the manner of the examination of abscesses for us is that you take the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has perceived the heart, then according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 then draw out the probe, and be careful in this, lest it should jump out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 If running moisture occurs, whatever color it has, then pierce it as I have said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 and if after the probe comes moisture, know that it is fat, then pierce it in a cross shape, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape from each side and beware of the coat where it lies, so that you draw it out whole with the knot;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 And if you cannot remove it whole, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 For if anything remains, the injury returns many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if even a little remains and the wound troubles you, then fill the wound with some corrosive and hot herbs, hold the wound tight, apply soothing things to the abscess, keep it warm, and care for it with other remedies until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 And if the wound is large, sew together the two lips of the wound, and care for it as one would for a flesh wound.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 And if the beating of the veins is against you or something else, then hurry and fill the place with crushed vitriol, and leave it there for two days or three, until the wound putrefies and the boiling of the blood ceases.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 Then return to the copper what remains of the nut.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 Behold here are the forms of the intromissory instruments, and they come in three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	 large, medium, and small.
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 And there are three quarters which are called "albarets," and one that is called "breb," and they come in three kinds.
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 large, medium, and small, to enclose the abscesses of fistulae.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 And they are like the needles used to sew sorcerers, and they are made of citrine bronze, or iron, or silver. Those that are yellow in color are worth more, and those blackened with lead are better suited for enclosing the scabs of fistulae;
et sont de III manieres:	 And there are three types:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 large, medium, and small, according to the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The shapes of the nails are very diverse, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 And there are nails that have two curves of three types as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 And there are also nails with three curves, which are of three types.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 And there are also nails with two curves, and single-curved nails, all of which come in three types.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 And all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The heads of these tools are sharp, and some do not cut more than from one side, with which we scrape the nails so that we do not cut the vein or the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 And of these intrusions are the amputated hands, so that the patient does not notice them at the opening of abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	 and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 great, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 and one should not use them except in fleshy places, such as the legs, arms, breasts, and the groin, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the scrapings of pus, in this form, with which one stops bleeding:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 And it is placed sometimes in the location that heals quickly at the veins and the arteries, and sometimes according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much so that they resemble women's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 And they remain unsightly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must follow this form of these lines from b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with meat-enhancing medicine; then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 And if the nipple sags downward and is made thin by its size, as happens to women, then make two cuts above it, through two similar openings.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, making the larger line contain the smaller one according to this form, from this line b to this line g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then peel off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely done, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, you must fill the wound with dampened cotton and caustic ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 And leave it until it dissolves the rest and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	 of the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 These abscesses that come under the armpits are hard like scrofula with ribs, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat it with ointment appropriate for this purpose until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the abscess is like scrofula, then cut it as we have said for cutting scrofula, and if the wound discharges pus, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	 of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 When the articular surface is damaged and the skin above it is healed, it often results in abscesses, and similarly, an inflamed vein can cause abscesses.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 And if one recognizes it thus when it is due to the artery, then the abscess is long in depth.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 and when you feel it with your fingers, you sense a tightening;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 and when it is due to the vein, then the reason is clearly apparent.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and in the groin and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the iron cure, and that which is on the head should also be avoided, and in that which is from a swelling of the artery, make an incision above the skin along its length.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 then cut the flesh as usual, and separate the artery beautifully from the tissues until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 Then insert below it a needle, and make it pierce to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 then prick the place that is between the two ligatures with a lancet until the pus comes out, and let the abscess be relieved;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 then prepare the dressing as I have shown you, until the ligature falls off.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat it with an ointment afterwards, until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 And if the abscess is as large as the vein, then it is necessary that you hold in your hand whatever you can of the abscess all the way to the skin, then insert the needle below the place that you are holding in your hand, and make it pierce, and there should be a double thread, so that you pull it out from the other side. 》
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 Then bind the abscess, as I have told you, with a thread on one of the two parts to the two shoulders.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 And if you doubt that the thread might come loose, then sew another needle through all of the first thread below the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 Then cut the abscess until the pus comes out, then cut the pus from the core and leave what is tied.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply dressings of lint and onion until he is healed.
des apostemes des ners	 of the abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 Just like abscesses come in the artery and vein, so too they come in the nerves when they are pierced, or by excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 And this happens most often in the shoulders and the thighs, and in all places where there are joints, and these are serious abscesses, and their color resembles that of flesh, and it is in many positions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 And when one pulls it strongly, the patient feels pain, which is not entirely in the body, but below the heart.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 And it moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and those in the joints should not be struck with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 Perhaps there will be contracture.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And those that are on the head or on the forehead, break the skin with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If the abscess is small, hold it with pincers and cut into its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is large, suspend it on the nail of the little finger and skin it, then remove it and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	 of hanging swellings
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, with subtle roots and a large head.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 And there are some that are small and others that are very large;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 And I have seen in a man who had two in his belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were always wet with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I cut them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces and the other six, and the work in the incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the tumor is white and moist and has fine roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If the wound is wide at the shoulder blade, and there is a fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 For in cutting, blood often flows too abundantly, and if the bleeding overcomes you, then hasten to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of linen, and tie it around the wound as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 And then tighten it, and do not stop pulling the linen thread until it cuts through the wound, and thus it heals without pain.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 And if the roots are large, there is fear to cut directly into the abdomen, but you can safely cut halfway, then cauterize so it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 then heal the wound, and be careful not to cut the skin that is of fiery color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 Because this is an embedded carbuncle, and I will come to the treatment of carbuncles afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	 when the abscess has become hot
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 If the swelling of the wound comes from the cautery of a wound or cleft in the intestine, and it is on the belly and goes to some of the bladders, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries as mentioned above, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 and if it is from the rupture of the intestine and the exiting of the bladder, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens in various ways.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And if it is due to the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed with two fingers, it returns to its place, and then comes back, and perhaps it will become hard, and swells greatly at the entrance of the bath and due to strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, but does not constrict;
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 And if it is due to blood, the abscess will be large and hard, and will have a fixed size.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to gas, it will be soft to the touch, and the operation is such that you should look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or a vein, or gas.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 Therefore, you must leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 Because there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, then you should instruct the patient to lift his leg and be stretched out straight, then press all around the stomach.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 Then have him lie down gently between your hands, then go around the place you have marked with all the spatula, then extend half of the abscess upwards with the whole large incision.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 Then tie around it with a strong thread or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the knot be secure.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 Then work on half of the abscess spread out over the cord, and insert your index finger, and search for the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 If you find it caught in the cord, then free it, and push the intestine out of the stomach;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 And if you find the swelling, then take it with tweezers, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 And if the artery opposes you or the vein, then go around it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two fine threads, and insert the two needles around what you have done in a cross that you made pierce.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 Then hold the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place until it turns black, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 And cut it when it is softened and blackened, then treat the wound as needed, and remove the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And drain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and heal the wound.
dou chancre	 of the cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 We have said in the section on the similarities of cancer, and how one should work with medicines, and how to avoid the use of iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 And we say that cancer begins in the flesh, and great care is needed in the treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where it can be scraped off, such as cancer in the breasts, and in the thighs, and similar places, and one should remove all of it when it is at the beginning;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 And when it is large and old, then you must not approach it, for I have never been able to heal any.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 nor has anyone ever healed one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 And the work, when it is in such a place that it can be removed, as we have said, is that you first purge the patient of black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 then let him fast if he has an obvious fullness, then place the patient in a good position to perform the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 then throw away your clippers and cautery iron, and remove all hair from all around it, leaving nothing behind;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the area with your hand or some other thing, and if the flowing of blood hinders you from making the incision in the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal him with another treatment until he is healed.
de ydropisie	 Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 We have already said in the division the similarities of hydropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron:
si est eclites soulement;	 it is only an eclipse;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 and one should not use iron in these two similarities:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 that is to say, tympanitis and hippuritic swelling, because they are deadly things;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 therefore when you treat this similarity of hydropsy which is called "eclipse" with medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, then look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides hydropsy, such as a burst belly and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 And if you see the patient of great strength, and he has no other illness except dropsy alone, and is not too young nor too old, then you should act as follows:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 Lay the patient flat on his back in your hands, and have an assistant press on the abdomen just below the ribs, then take the spiny spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut in two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 with a point, but nevertheless it should not be so long that when inserted it could reach the intestines and cause injury;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 Then check if the dropsy has spread towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 If so, you must cut open three fingers wide straight down to the groin;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 And if the dropsy is due to liver disease, let your incision be on the left side of the navel three fingers' width.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 And if it is due to the spleen, let it be on the right side. And it is not necessary that the patient lie on the incision so that the excesses do not flow to that weak place;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and discharge it, and lift your hand to the entire subcutaneous tissue between the skin and the fascia just as in scraping to the thickness of a nail or thereabouts.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 Then pierce the fascia until the subcutaneous tissue reaches the desired place, which is the watery area. Then draw it strongly, and into this place insert this instrument, the form of which is as follows:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and it is made of light brass or copper, and has in its lower part a small hole.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 and on one side there are three holes.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 and two on the other side, and one on another.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision which the scribes cut into the quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 at the top there is a small handle, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it will immediately rise above the water.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 empty then half or a third of it, because if you empty more than is necessary at that time, perhaps the patient will die from the loss of spirit from the weapon, or he will fall unconscious, or he will approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 But according to its emptiness, according to its power, according to what the patient's constitution indicates, and his pulse;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 Then withdraw the instrument and hold the water, which is now held by the kerf that stops up the hole on the syphac, as I have mentioned, that you should pierce in this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient tolerating this, and draw out a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 do this every day, and be careful not to empty it all but leave only a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water in them, then treat with burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing in the sun, and let them drink wine.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And the treatment with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	 of the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 Then it should be pierced as soon as possible with a very fine needle in this manner:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 Then put in the opening a thin cloth of linen, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four. And when he wants to make water, let the cloth be removed, and make water, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 And perhaps it is not necessary, because the water that comes forth does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 He whose opening is small, let him be treated with a lead weight as we have said, so that it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 Those who do not have the opening in its place are afflicted, because some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating before they lift their penis upwards;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 And cannot heal because the matter cannot reach the bone, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 And the manner of working is that the patient lies on his back, then stretch the head of the member and the foreskin like the width of a quill, so that the hole is in the middle, as it should be;
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And beware of bleeding that often occurs there, and if it happens, staunch it as one staunches blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	 of the boils of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 Often these baths come to the member, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 And there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 if it is necessary that you take them at one time subtly, and cut and clean all of them, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment on top
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then continue the treatment with fine-tuning ointments until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the abscess is malignant, with foul color and odor, then you must bring a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 When you have cut it, and if the plant is partially inside the vein and partially outside, then you must first remove the part that is inside.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it is joined together, then treat the outer part.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 Because when you treat them together, the head of the vein is not assured to not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into the vein and in the flesh.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then you must cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster made of honey, flour, pomegranate rind, and beans, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 The cautery helps with two conditions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 that is to say, for the flow of blood and for corruption.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 And if the head of the bladder is corrupt and retracted, then you must insert a cane made of pine into the bladder's channel, and let the patient urinate through it.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 And when the hair is adherent to the head of the bladder, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, due to a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape it off with one sharp instrument until the tissue is loosened and the head of the bladder is freed on all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 And if it is difficult to scrape this away, then you must burn it off with a hot spatula at the head of the bladder and the skin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 Then cut well between two (joints), and place one subtle linen cloth soaked in cold water, that it does not dry again.
de la circoncision	 Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 Circumcision is not a separation of continuity like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 however, when we perform this work of our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best and lightest work for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who perform circumcisions do it around the penis, on the foreskin, and on the entire glans.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 if the skin is cut because there are two layers, and perhaps one cuts the upper layer and leaves the lower one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 And there it swells up, and the pain is doubled, and at the end of the day, the point of the limb is not secure.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 and at the incision of the nail perhaps the iron will slip away, and the work will be ruined, and many times it happens that they do not need an incision, and I want it to be so.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 Of the amputation that is done at the joints, I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the scissors cut equally well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 Because when you press your hand, cut equally in all your strength.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 but let the thread be well tightened around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 and the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child, if he understands, think that you are not doing anything to him but tying a thread around the wand, and then let him rejoice in all the ways you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 then make it stand upright between your hands, and respond to the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 then put your hand on the stick and blow into the heart, and pull it up until the head of the stick is inside;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 then clean it well from the gathered dirt, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under the pocket to another ligature;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 and hold it with the two fingers of the second ligature at the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two ligatures, then lift the heart quickly and pull out the head of the stick;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the cure.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And put powder on it and on the powder a cloth stuck with a little of egg white cooked tempered with rose water, infused with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it again until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 The form of the plaster for cleansing is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 both ends must be sharp and equal in size.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 the mistake of cleansing is when the heart within is at the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 therefore you must spread it with your finger before the place forms an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 And if they exceed three days, and that which is below the penis is swollen, leave it until the abscess is appeased, and lightly skin it.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 If you can move the head as you please, and be careful of the part of the penis, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 Then cure the place with a sudorific wound powder, as we have said in treating powders, and if the head goes beyond measure and moves upward, it will not harm;
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	 of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or bone, or dead flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained due to the stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 And let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the upper part of the back, and the patient should hold himself upright as much as he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 And then the neck of the bladder is constrained to push out the stone from above, so that the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe," of which this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And let it be of fine silver, lightly hammered, like the feather of a bird.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 And let the chain be one and a half handspans long, and let it be thin at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 And the manner of urine evacuation is such that you take a double thread, tie a wool or cotton bag at one end, and put the thread end into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 and trim the excess wool and insert it into the syringe until the end, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis back towards the scrotum.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 Then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and the patient will feel it until it reaches an empty space, and this is not done correctly unless because the passage through which it passes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 Then stretch the thread all along the wool strand by strand, and the urine will follow the wool, then extract it firmly, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And repeat with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	 of the illnesses of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 When there are scabs or blood in the bladder, or an accumulation of pus, and you introduce water and medicine, do this with all the instrument called "clepsedra," and it is shaped like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 It is closed, and has three holes:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 And let the leather chosen for the surgeon's purse be such that it stops the tube well without additional material, so that one can draw out the moisture and insert when needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 And when you place your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the funnel into the moisture and draw what is inside.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 Thus you will draw out the moisture with the funnel, then strongly reinsert the drawn tube.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 Then the moisture will enter inside and go to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 And this is the form of a subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder.
si est ci:	 Here it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 It is made of silver or copper and its head is higher.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 And under the breast where the chain falls.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it that you wish to enema the bladder with, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and warm this moisture on the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 Then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has entered, so that the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it all around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 Then insert a strong thread through these holes, then close the circle like one closes a basket, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And do as you did with the bladder, press to your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	 of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 We have already said in the division the types of stone and their extraction along with medications;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 And I have spoken about the difference between the rain-inflicted stone and all its signs, and in which stone one should work by cutting;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 and in the bladder, and in the penis.
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 I say that the stone which is inflicted in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 and it excretes sand, and it causes the patient to urinate blood, and he frequently urinates, and then becomes paralyzed.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 And to many of these jumps the foundation.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 And healing is swift in children until they are four years old, and it is very serious in the elderly, and it is of moderate difficulty for those who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 And the treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster, in order to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes interferes with seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 Then take the patient by the feet and bend him back and forth so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and sometimes comes out from above.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 Then let him sit between your prepared hands, with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 Then seek and touch it inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 If you feel the stone within, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 And if it does not fall upon touching the whole of it, then moisten your finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 and place it in his rectum, and seek for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it up to the neck of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 then press with your finger upon it, and draw it out at the place where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 And command the attendant to press upon the bladder with his hand, and order him to raise his right testicle with his hand, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the place where the cut is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; ›
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:
si est griés a issir;	 It is necessary to go out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And if it is under, similar to a bulge and round, its exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 For that one, therefore, where there are angles and edges, make the cut larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 And if it does not jump out, then you must pull with tweezers that are like a file at the top, to strongly pull the stone so that it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 Or you put under it a subtle curved instrument at the tip;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 And if you cannot trick it this way, then widen the pouch where the hole is, and if the vein tears, then pinch it with a caustic.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 And if there is more than one stone, first insert the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut on it, then draw it out strongly, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, it must be sewn, and a larger wound must be made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 Because two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 either he dies, or the urine always comes from there where the wound cannot heal;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 but nevertheless you must strive to draw it out, or to break it with pincers, until you remove it piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 and when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it, and put on top a moistened cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 then lay the patient on his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you dislocate it, wash very well the place with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of diafincaon and ointment of basilicaon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 And if such abscesses and corrosions come to the wound, and blood clots in the bladder, causing the urine to be retained in such a manner that it does not pass with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 Pour in the wound, then draw out that blood, because if it remains, it will run to the bladder and cause putrefaction.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then lift the wound with water and vinegar and oil, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 and it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind the two thighs together, and place the medicines on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 And if the stone is small, and it is in the duct of the penis, and stuck inside, so that the urine cannot come out.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 then the treatment that I have mentioned before, which you cut many times, is excused from cutting in this case.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already proven it thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 Take a rod of iron according to this shape, and let there be three sharp points on one end:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 Then take a thread and tie it around the rod under the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 then put the punch in the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 and turn the punch in your hand in the stone little by little, so that you can pierce the stone from the other side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 then the urine will come out, and press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 Then it is immediately broken, and it jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 and if you cannot do this due to any obstacle, then tie a thread under the stone and another one on top, then bend the rod at the stone between the two ties, then pull hard, and untie the thread, and clean the frozen blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and the treatment until he is cured.
de la piere des femmes	 of the woman's stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does happen, the treatment is difficult. It is forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 one reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 and the second reason is that one cannot find a skilled woman who will expose herself to the doctors, especially when she is virtuous.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a skilled woman in this hand-based art;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman is more deeply embedded than in a man, which requires a deeper cut, and it is very frightening. And if necessity demands it, you should seek a skilled midwife, and they are rarely found, and if you cannot find one, then look for a skillful and subtle chaste doctor;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 And it presents a wise midwife with experience in women's lives, or a woman who knows some of the art, and instructs her to do what you command regarding the investigation of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 and looks very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 then she must insert her finger into the anus and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 and if she finds it, she constrains it under her finger, and recommends that she insert her finger into the vagina of the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand strongly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 If she finds it, she must move it bit by bit from the entrance of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 then cut into the stone on the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the knee, in the place where it is convenient to operate, and feel the stone in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 and do not move your finger on top of or below the stone, and make the first cut small;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 then press the reed into the cut, if you feel the stone narrow the wound until the stone can come out forcefully; and know that there are many types of stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 that is to say, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and with furrows;
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you know the similarities in order to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if the blood flows profusely, then apply ground vitriol to the place, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 then return to your work until the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I have told you about for extracting stones in men to help you in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 and if the blood overcomes you, and it is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the spot and compress with bandages and cloths, and do not start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, for fear the patient may die.
puis cure la plaie.	 then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the place becomes cool, return to your work until the stone is weakened.
de hernie carnouse	 of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 Ramic acid is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white syrup that is beneath the heart of the testicles, which contains the semen.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 and it is called "syrup," and sometimes it is properly in the fabric of the semen, so that one might think it is another egg.  /> and when this occurs, it should not be done, but rather left alone to avoid harming the patient.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 And this is the leather of the egg between the white as we have said.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 And this does not happen if it is not a pox.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 And the formation of this collection comes from weakness in the kidneys, and that matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 And sometimes it comes from bruising on the eggs, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 or it is a yellowish color, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens most often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 and these are the signs to recognize this collection, because if it is in the white as we have said, the abscess is reasonable, the pox long like the shape of an egg, and the egg does not open, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if there is moisture in the very fabric, then the abscess is reasonable with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if the moisture is between the skin of the eyelids and the white surface, one feels it well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the surrounding area, from which its form comes before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 According to what follows the probe, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be bled according to our ability and the fullness of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 then place him on his back, on something a little high, and put many blankets under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 Then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod along one of the two ribs beneath the corner of the eye.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 Then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the eyelid lengthwise from the long part down to near the corner, and let your incision be straight in dividing the skin of the eyelid until the white surface, and delicately peel it according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 Then pierce the sponge full of water through a large hole, and drain all the water, and then put your fingers, and swell the sponge upwards;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 And do not touch the heart of the kidneys, but only the sponge.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 Cut all or in pieces, however, the sponge very carefully, that if you do not cut it well and wisely, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 And if the sponge jumps too much at your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the sponge's work.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then sew the two leaves of the kidney heart together with one stitch, then heal it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 And if you find the egg corrupt with another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 then cut the skin all around the suspended area, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 And if water is collected in two parts together, know that these are two veins;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 then cut the other part in the same way you did the first one, then wipe off the blood, and put a cloth moistened in rose oil on the wound;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 and put another cloth moistened in wine and oil on top of the two skins, and put double-layered cloths on top of that, and bind it all together with all the bindings as shown in this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 Then take two cloths, and fill them with wool in the following manner, and they should be sewn together at the waist of the breeches, and one of the ends should extend from the buttocks to the back, and the other to the elbow part;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 and the other two ends on the two angles, and let all the assembly be restricted in the belt loop;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 and sometimes this bandage is used in place of an iron caustic, and it is that you take a delicate cautery blade, cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white surface containing water is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 then take the cautery in this manner, and pierce that surface at the testicles, and scrape it with this hot delicate blade.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 Et pour couper dans toutes les manières que tu peux, autant que tu puisses.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 And ensure that the fire does not touch the eye;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 and know that this work is safer;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 and avoid excessive bleeding, and be aware of the operations for cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And if anything goes wrong, such as an abscess or excessive bleeding or something else, then treat what is going wrong, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And if the patient is frightened and does not wish to undergo this operation because of its horror, then you should make a perforation, as I tell you. It is that when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned that aquous humor is there, then let the patient sit on a high seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 Punch through the abscess at the base, all around as wide as possible, and place the puncture along the length of the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And let the openings be wide so that all the pus flows freely;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 Then place cotton on the spot, and bind it, and let the remaining pus flow out. Once the wound is healed, treat it until the wound is clean.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 And if the white cloth does not allow the pus to flow out of the wound's mouth, then you must insert a feather or an instrument used to draw water from hydropics, as described earlier.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And widen the opening of the wound, and know that the pus will return, and it will gather again after six months or thereabouts, and when it gathers like before, the patient will pass his days thus.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 You should know that in cutting this vein, there is fear in many situations, which is why it seems better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 and I will tell you the work and similarities of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 I say therefore that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the joints;
et c’est par mout de cas.	 and this is in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 This is to say, from an excess of acid or acute humors that spread to the joints, either from a blow; ‌
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 and the color of the abscess varies according to the color of the body.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 and if there is no pain, the abscess is serious.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 and sometimes an abscess is dangerous and painful, with a red color, and sometimes it comes from a nodule of artery, or from the swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 When it is due to a stoppage of an artery, it is known by the hot swelling of an abscess, when you press it against your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 And you should not touch it at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 That which is caused by an inflammation of the vein is known by its appearance upon being touched by the fingers, and one can make a cut in this manner, as well as in other cases.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 And it is that you cut the heart of the testicles, then raise the egg up, and make a strong incision in the white, and release the ligament from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 If the egg is already hardened with these scars, then you must draw out the egg and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 And if it is in the air passage, or within a vessel, then you must remove all that substance, and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 And if the base of the flesh is in the posterior place, then you must cut all of it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when your work is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until he is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a bud, with the softening of the kidneys, and the patient is very sick when he walks.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 And the treatment of this disease is almost as dangerous as that mentioned above, and nevertheless, we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspension of the kidneys down to your feet, at all the vessels near the bladder, and let the master take hold of them, and stretch them very strongly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 Then cut the sputum with a sharp blade across the vessels until they are exposed, and then strip each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 Then insert a needle with a double thread, and tie it first to where the vein is located, and then tie it again to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 Then cut them in half straight across, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupt moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 Then treat the wound as with others where bone is injured, so that no vessel escapes that nourishes one of the testicles.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 For by this no harm comes, and if all the vessels come with blood, then it is necessary to draw out the testicles for all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 if the bird does not lose its nourishment due to the cutting of vessels, it dries up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	 From the rupture of the shoulder
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The events of this branch are by the section that comes into the abdomen or the extension on the belly in the part of the groin, for which the intestines descend from this opening to one of the testicles;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 and this opening is in the abdomen or the extension of it, and these two types come from many causes.
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 by striking, or jumping, or falling, or lifting heavy loads, and by similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 and the signs when it is an extension of the abdomen are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 And the abscess is equal all the way to the bottom because the pus presses against the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 And the sign is when it is of the section of the hypochondrium, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears diverse, under the skin near, and this is for the exit of the intestine and the body from lack of the hypochondrium.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 And sometimes the intestines descend with the intestine and are held back, causing the patient to suffer great pain, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 And in these treatments with iron due to fear, for which it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 And the manner of working is that you instruct the patient to push the intestines back with his hand into the wound, if he can reach it;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 Then have him lean on his neck between your hands, and lift his thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 Then place the heart above, and cut all the skin of the testicles lengthwise.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 Then insert into the wound of the belly some hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and so that the intestines may come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 Then scrape off the pus that is under the skin of the testicles until the white hard pus is exposed on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 then place your finger in the hollow that follows the joint, in the one that is between the white fat that is under the skin of the egg, and between the second fat, and separate that which is behind the egg, and between the second fat.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 and then move to the right hand inside the heart of the joints, and stretch the white fat up towards your left hand, and lift the egg with all the fat towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 and instruct the assistant to stretch the egg upwards, and loosen that which is tied behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 and check with your fingers if there is any part of the intestines wrapped in the hard white fat, and if you find anything, push it into the belly below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 Then take a needle with a thread made of ten threads, and push it into the rear part of the sinus, which is behind the skin of the knees;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 below the waist, then cut the threads that appear from the needle until there are four threads remaining;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 then place them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the sinus, which we have said is below the skin of the knees, with a strong ligature made of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 then wrap the threads with more threads and tie them firmly with two parts, so that no foreign body can enter, lest an abscess form there.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 and place the ligature again according to the first one, two finger-widths from that one, and after these two ligatures leave the sinus which is below the skin of the knees open to the size of a finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 And then all the others according to the roundness of the egg.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 Then cut in the part that is under the skin of the knees, so that the blood flows and swells, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wounds, and apply the bandage that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 And sometimes the white flesh is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 For this happens often, and leave the bandage until it falls off on its own.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 And if it is slow to fall off, then it should be softened with hot water, and apply what we have said until it falls off.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 Then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	 of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 In this manner, I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 And the ancients said that it is done like the cord that is with the bolt, in such a way that you tie the vessels lightly from below after cutting.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 then chop inside, and treat the abscess of whoever works, until the patient faints.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and treat it as we have said, until he is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 Sometimes the infection reaches the veins, as we have said, and opens up the place.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 and none of the intestines should be cut as the kidneys, and if any are cut, it is bad, and they come back every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 however, if it lingers too long in this spot, the wound or ulcer swells until the intestines are cut.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 and this happens due to the swelling of the ulcer which is in the veins, as we have said, because it expands, then the place becomes softened and inflamed and open. abei
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 and let the patient lie on their back between your hands, then cut the swollen place wide according to the quantity of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 and then remove the pus that is under the skin with a needle, then take a bandage and place it on the visible part of the pus; ️
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 and press firmly on the belly, then stitch together the two visible parts of the pus at the top of the bandage, and sew one to the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 then remove the head of the bandage, and do not cut or spread the pus or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal hernia;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Then treat by treating the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 The syphilitic person is confined, and there is no appearance of scabs, and the cautery is moved to this place, and it is closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 Often the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the contents within are softened, and it can be seen like milk;
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 And it is necessary that when one wants to treat it, the patient lies on his back and cuts off the softened skin onto the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 then join the two lips with one stitch, and if you wish, first suture the excess of the softened skin at three or four points firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 Then cut between the stitches, and treat as with other wounds until it heals, and let the threads fall off.
dou chastrement	 Of the castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 Know that castration is abominable in our law, and therefore it pleases me not to speak of it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 et il n’est nécessaire de faire cela que pour deux raisons :
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 the other is that the physician knows how to answer when asked and knows how to perform the cure;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 and the other reason is that we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 Therefore, I say that castration is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In the method we use by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 then take them in your hand until they are removed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	 About the castration of the tail:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 It is necessary that you dye the animal, and press its skin with your left hand, then tie the suspension, and cut over each ear once, when you have well flayed them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 And leave some of the subtle fat that is on the vessels.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 And this method of castration is better than that done by attraction, because in attraction there may remain something of the skin, which causes the animal to desire lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	 Of hermaphrodites:
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 One way is that between the two testicles there appears as if by nature the figure of a woman, with hair, and sometimes it excretes urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other manner is in women, and it extends from the wrist like a rod and two fingers.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And the treatment for a man and a woman is that you cut off all the flesh close by, and treat it as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 in the second manner, of men whose urine passes through the skin of the scrotum, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	 Of the swelling
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 Tentigen is flesh attached to the natural part, as long as it is too unsightly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 It is necessary that you dye the excess of the tentigen in your hand or with tweezers, and cut it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 And at another place which is born at the mouth of the womb, and it fills up, and perhaps it jumps forth, and it resembles a cow, and therefore the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it becomes necessary for you to cut it, as we have said about the tendon, then continue the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	 of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 It is erratic when the woman's nature is not perceived, or the opening is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 and it is either natural from birth, or accidental due to a disease that has come upon her.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 Or it is caused by a nearby growth, or by a subtle or thick secretion, and it is formed deep in the womb, or on the side, or below, wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps even menstruation.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 And knowledge of this is by looking at the valley.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the swelling appears near, seek for yourself two or three [remedies].
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 If it is a subtle syphon, and it is close to two pounds, then hurry, and let it run thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 put your two fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 then let there be the two pounds strongly, so that the subtle syphon runs well, and beware of blocking;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 then take wool, wet it with oil, and put it on the place, and let the woman lie down every day, so that it cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the suture is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 If the blockage is of natural flesh, then suspend it with a hook and cut it.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 and have the medicines that stop bleeding, such as vinegar, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with plenty of egg; xspace
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 then bring a wide lead plate, so that the wound cannot heal;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 and thus it should be for a long time, and bring him a tent of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then he should be treated with other treatments until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when in the flesh comes a tumor, it should be cut according to this manner, unless it is an infected abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For an infected abscess that is in the flesh, one should not attempt to cut.
des emorroides	 of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually have no skin, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become hard;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 and we have already said in the division their similarities, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and thinning, when they are deeply embedded in the flesh and do not appear to touch, then the cure is not by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who are at the edge of death, which one can sense, are those whom one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the hard thing with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then sprinkle on powders that restrict blood flow, such as vinegar, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 Then put his feet against the wall for an hour, then place him in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 And if bleeding follows, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and galls and similar things; then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make one plaster on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if he faints, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 If not, apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without pricking.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 Then take linen, wet it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when the abscess has subsided, treat the place with onion ointment until it is healed.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 And that which is called “albathir” is red, and it resembles a sharp chief, so you must cover it as I have said about the tel.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then let the wound heal completely.
des apostemes de la marris	 of the abscesses of the buttocks
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many kinds of abscesses come in the buttocks, such as chancres and pious abscesses and herpes and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other illnesses that I have spoken of in the section on classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess which comes from the marrow, which is not one of the abscesses that swell up.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 And if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is sharp at its beginning and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 Then do not hurry to pierce, but let the abscess mature until the pain is soothed;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 And then make the patient sit on the chair, and have two small chairs where he leans back, and place it on his back, and bring his feet together outside the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 And let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 Then the cup is placed towards the right side, and the instrument with which one works the mouth of the wound, from which later comes the form.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 And it is necessary that when you see this instrument being prepared, that you first insert the probe to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 And if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause harm.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 And it is necessary that he places the tip of the instrument above, and that he dips the instrument in.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 And when the abscess opens, and one makes an opening with a soft hand, then it should be covered at the top, with warm butter.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 And when the abscess is emptied, then you should put in the wound cloths soaked in rose oil or in dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 And put the cloth firmly at the bottom of the wound, and put another cloth on top of the wound and on the finger a clean cloth soaked in water where mallows have been cooked.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then the treatment afterwards for two days of dressing until it is healed.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 And sometimes lift the skin and the wound with a enema of water and honey, and then with water and lily roots and long Aristolochia cooked
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 Then return to dressing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is festering in the flesh, then you must be careful not to use fire, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	 of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 It is necessary first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman push downwards and desire to smell air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 then the infant hastens to come out by force.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 then know that this childbirth is according to natural figure, and the issue is under its head, and the second twin with it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 And when you see these signs, then you must gently press on the stomach, so that the child comes out quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 because when it descends onto its head, then the afterbirth follows with it, and the mother is purged of her excesses by a good purging.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 and this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 Because sometimes it comes feet first, and forcefully hits the body or head, or the hands, or comes onto its stomach, or back, and is turned by chance onto its neck, or into other evil shapes.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in these things, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the positions how she should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 If the child comes out of its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth violently, and the child's strength is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, where women hold her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 and let its nature be of oil or fenugreek, which should be cooked, and then have the woman drink between her teeth the small spatula of this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 and cut open the afterbirth, and scrape at its nail until the moisture that is within flows out.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to administer an enema to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and castor oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 then have her drink and cough with condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 If one now extracts the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 And if both hands come out forcefully, then you must reset them lightly a little at a time.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 and if they cannot go back in, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 then take the seat to the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall when standing up.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 and if the hand cannot go back in, and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife that was placed before, and extract the child, and reset them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the child's issue on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When the child comes out on its feet, then you must push it upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 and then turn it little by little until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 Then take of garlic from the feet and stretch a little at a time.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 When it reaches the thighs, command to take it and make him sneeze from it;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 if it goes further, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 And if he does not jump further as we have said, then turn him little by little until he is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 For then he goes easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if it does not go further as we have said, then take mustard seed from alder tree, and oil of sesame, and melted resin, and grind all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 and apply this mixture on the woman’s genital area both inside and outside of this application, then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 And when she is soaked underneath, give her a potion of honey, and place it underneath her, and leave it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 then have her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press on her belly, for now the child jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 Of the child's birth on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When the child comes in this manner, then put the midwife's hands there little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 and let her be supported on her neck, and let her feet hang down, and let her lie on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 and bend her hands little by little, and then press the hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from below, until she is prepared to come out.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 and if the child does not jump, then take her feet and move them strongly, then move the belly upwards, then put your hands there.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 And breastfeed the child a little at a time;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 And command the woman to take hold of herself until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 Of the child's birth who comes sideways with one hand hanging
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 It is necessary to engineer the return of the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 If it cannot be brought back, then make the woman rise and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and spread her legs widely;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 Then bring the midwife that I have mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 And if she does not deliver, then make her sit on a chair, then study to return the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 And breastfeed the child according to its natural position, and make it sneeze, and command her to take hold of herself until the child comes out forcefully.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 from the child issuing on its neck, with hands spread and face turned towards the mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 It is necessary that the patient hold his hand, then turn it little by little, and wash it gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 And when it is healed, place on top the natural mucilage of althea and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move it little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 And when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to take hold of herself.
et la fai esternuer.	 And make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 of this same manner to all the second
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 When it comes out in this manner to all the mucus, cut the mucus with your nail until the moisture is emptied.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 And if the child comes up to his face and neck, cut it from the bottom so that it is not held back, and let the child die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 Then put the child inside, until you have placed him as is necessary, and instruct the woman to take hold of herself.
adonques si istra legierement.	 Then draw it out gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 And this is not an unusual thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 Two are an extraordinary thing, and they do not live, except for a few;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 I know that if there are many, they are separated by the placenta which divides them, and it is attached to the womb.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 And sometimes they come out just as naturally as a single one, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 And if they come out violently, then care for them as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, and do quickly and gently what she does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And make sure to do so for health.
de plusors enfans	 of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 Sometimes they are formed in the womb, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and all are perfectly formed like a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one. And it is necessary that the doctor knows all this, because perhaps similar things happen to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Do so accordingly as needed.
de l’enfant mort	 of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When you treat a woman for a dead child or miscarriage, as I have said in the chapter on division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 then you must know if the woman is of sound constitution and does not have any accidents or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 If necessary, let the woman be placed on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 And let the attendant place the cloth in two parts, so that she is tied to the bed and not moved during the birth of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 Then anoint the mouth of the woman in labor with moist oil, with a mixture of thyme and fenugreek and flaxseed, then let her wash her hands with these oils and mixtures.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 Then gently pour them into the woman in labor, then seek a place where she can put the ointments conveniently, and beware if the child is ready to descend onto her head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 If she puts the ointments in her eyes or neck or mouth or under her tongue or chin or at the navel or near the ribs, and if the delivery is breech, then put them on the anus and in the lower ribs.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 and it is necessary that he take the probe in his right hand, and place the tip between the fingers of the left hand, and thrust with all his hand gently, and insert the probe into one of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 and this is the shape of the probe:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 then insert against another probe, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 and then they are equally tensed by moving from one side to the other, so that it comes out easily, and let the probes be notched for better grip, as shown in this shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 And if part of it remains, then anoint the tip of one of his fingers with oil, and insert it into that part, and draw out the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if there remains not a single one, then place this ointment in a higher place, and do so until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned due to tightness, then you must wrap it in a cloth until it all comes out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 Then cut the nail at the base of the toe or with scissors, and so must you do for the other hand and the two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 And if the child's head is large and it is narrow at the exit, or has sharp pimples gathered on top, then you must insert the sharp tip of a stick between your fingers, pierce the top, and extract the liquid.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 you will use the instrument called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments in the following chapter.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 and do the same if the child has a large head naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 then draw out the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is held by the forceps, it should be cut open until the moisture that is in the worst part comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 and if it cannot come out, then chop it into pieces as you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 and if he is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce him until the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustment at the mouth of the womb is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 And if he is swollen in the belly or the bladder, then you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 And make a cut in the belly or the breast, until the moisture within is removed.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 And if other members are taken away and the head remains, then the bailiff should put his hand into the marrow, and draw it out to the mouth of the marrow.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 Then he puts in one or two more, and draws them strongly;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 And if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by the hot abscess that has formed there, then it should not be probed, but rather moist and fatty things should be applied.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And the healer applies plasters and sieves in softening and moistening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 And if the child is out of its position, and you can put it back in place, then treat it as we have said for a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if one does not have power to remove it whole, then draw it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the arrowhead.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 And when you have done this, if the arrow comes into one of those abscesses that come in the flesh;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 and if blood flows out, put it in boiling water to stop the bleeding, and apply other treatments to the arrow.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 And I saw a woman in whose womb one child had died, then another was born on top of it, and the other also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After a long time, an abscess came to her womb, and it swelled so much that it burst, and she began to have great stench.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I was called to the care, and there I thought for a long time, but the wound could not be healed.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I placed a strong attracting plaster on it, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I was greatly amazed by this, for the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 Then I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I explored the wound, and drew out many bones until the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 and the woman lived for a long time thus, and only occasionally did a little pus come out from the place.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 and I have included this chapter only because when the master finds something strange, he should know how to help with it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 To return the dislocation to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 Here comes the form of the press, to which one turns the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 and with two windings as two heads of two ropes.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the restrictor, and should be made of ivory or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 and the opening of the wood should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one finger, and in length a palm and a half;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 and between the two ropes should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are fastened on one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 and these two adjustments are pushed into the opening of the margin to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 A different form, more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 And it should have two heads and two adjustments, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 And when you see the instrument open completely, make the woman sit on the bed with her feet hanging and legs spread, then place the two adjustments together in the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Then work your hand on the entire instrument, just as you did with the tongs, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the vagina, until the cavity does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 This tool is all-encompassing, and its likenesses are many.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 And when the surgeon has prepared them, then the work is more swift, and greater for men due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 Do not destroy the instrument before you have prepared it, because its needs are not negligible.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 When the placenta is retained after childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze forcefully, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 And if she jumps because of this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 If not, then take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put in herbs that can open the mother's mouth, such as hartwort, rue, anise, chamomile, cascara, and southernwood.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water on the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 Then place a reed or hole in the pot, and the other end in the patient's mouth, and hold it until the steam enters the patient's mouth;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 then make them sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 Si il saute rapidement la deuxième fois.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 And if she remains after this treatment and is not cured, then instruct the patient to moisten her left hand in mustard oil or althaea mucilage, and then insert it into the vagina, and seek a midwife.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 and when she has found one, then take hold of it and pull it out little by little straight away, so that the patient does not twist during the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 But it must be moved gently to the right and left, then pull.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 It will come out and dislocate.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And if the mouth of the womb is narrowly constricted, we have said the treatment is sneezing and fumigating with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 And if it does not come out from all that we have said, take care not to be foolish in pulling.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 But it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the womb, you tie to the thigh of the woman, then give her an enema with four-substance ointment.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 Then she will fart and return it, and it will come out forcefully.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 But nevertheless, when she farts, it causes a bad smell in the stomach and head, and injures the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 Si therefore, it is necessary for appropriate fumigations to this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 any of the ancients have proven fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for retaining the flowers and the afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 And it should be like a sieve, with the fine part facing the patient and the wide parts over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 and let the fumigation be on the coals, and continue until the mange is destroyed, and then begin again with a new one.
de percier lou fondement	 To pierce the anus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 Many children are born whose anus is not open, but rather is obstructed by a fine membrane:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane with her finger, and not with an acute probe, and take care that she does not touch the intestine with it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat with unguent until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 And if you doubt that it will not heal properly, place a lead plug in the hole, and leave it for several days, and have it removed when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 And sometimes this obstruction comes from the sudden healing of a wound or abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	 then it is necessary to cover that sudden occurrence:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 if it is treated, as we have said about the resin of fir.
de la fistule dou fondement	 of the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 Fistulas that come under the anus are nodular and swollen, which come near the anus or in the space of the two parts, if one has a fistula or several;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 and when that nodulation is old, it works, and in addition, moisture produces white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 And they are known by this: that there is vomiting or flatulence when the patient vomits, and sometimes it may be a stone.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and halfway down the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 and they reach as far as the hip joint, and even to the testicle.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 And thus one knows the fistula penetrating the anus, and not penetrating:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 and it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 And if there is tortuosity, then insert a thin tent of lead, or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 And if you do not feel it, and there is no excretion of feces or flatulence or bile, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 know that it does not break through;
si te haste dou curer.	 if you hurry to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 And when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the passage of the urine, then the urine leaks out and cannot be healed by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 If it breaks through to the hip joint, then the tendon comes to its place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 if there is twisting and the sensation of pain around it, then it will always protrude, and neither medicine nor suturing by sewing helps;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure except hard work, and the foolishness of the doctors who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 In those that are not Persian and not old, there is hope of health by iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 And let him raise his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 then put an iron tent, or of lead if there is torment, so that you know where the tent comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your index finger there, if you feel that the tent has pierced through;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 and is revealed where you feel between your finger the pus or flesh, then know that it is perforated.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 if one does not travel there, for it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 One says however that some can be well healed, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 and the aid that one does there is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 And he pours all hot into the fistula, until it reaches near the anus;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 And do this two or three times, so that you know these hairs are burned, which resemble a bird feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 And then treat it with moist compresses of butter, so that this hair comes out, then treat it with a greasy ointment and seal it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If he is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 If so, it cannot be healed in any other way;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 And if the tent enters and does not pierce through to the finger that is in the anus, and there is a thick covering of hair or silk between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering ends;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 if at the beginning of the fistula, and always push the tent forward, and then after the cautery, until it reaches the end of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 and the tent will be released, and it will fall;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 then remove those charred parts that resemble a bird's feather, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 And if the blood flows, and passes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with astringent medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 Because the fire cautery combines two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 that is to say, the burning of those charred parts, and the arresting of blood and drying out of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 then treat wet tents with butter or powdered substance, until the place swells up, and the charred parts come out of the swelling;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Then heal the wound with immediate, quick-acting remedies that harden the flesh, and these remedies are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 Car when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 And if the fistula reaches completely to the anus and is separated from the body, then push your finger into the anus and seek for it there.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 If you feel the tent (and between II is the fabric or silk or cloth), where it is close to piercing, there should be no holes except for a path of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the III ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 Or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut to the bottom, or if you can, put tents there and treat as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 And do not go too deep, lest you cut the tissue that holds the foundation, and uncontrolled bleeding occurs.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 Then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 By chance, it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut near the foundation, either by tent or by another suitable instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 then cleanse that foul flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 then strive to restore the wound and to close the fistula in the part below the foundation.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 this would be less painful for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 And sometimes there are fistulas according to this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 and when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the tip in this manner:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 And put a twisted thread in it, and push the tent along with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 If it is going through the edge of the foundation inside, then draw out the thread of that hole, so that you insert your finger into the foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 And pull the head of the thread, and gather the two heads together, and press them against each other, and leave it for one day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 And restrain it several times, until the thread cuts these sutures that are between them, and fall out;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 then heal the wound until it is healed and cured.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 If the fistula does not break through, have it pierced in every way that you can, unless it is too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Because it is not appropriate to cover the wound for the binding if it is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 The form of the thorny cautery with which one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 and on the other side not, so that one does not cut that which should not be cut, as you see here.
des emorroydes	 hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 There are two kinds of emorydes:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 either they are inside the anus, like seeds of pine, and there may be small or large ones, and blood always flows from them, and there may be one or several, and they protrude outside the anus and at the opening of the anus.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 But those which are without have little moisture, yet still sometimes a little green water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 And the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is such that you instruct the patient to strain himself to go into rooms until the anus excretes them, and the threads appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 If you are quick, then seize it with tweezers or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 And if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with a small cloth or cotton, or a piece of camlet.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 And pull them with your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle some hot powders that are available for cautery on top.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then continue with other treatments until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 and if the fundament cannot pass, then give the patient an enema with harsh and bitter clyster to cleanse what is in the fundament, so that it may pass freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 when the patient takes it, and if the feces are hard near the fundament, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 and it is that you take them with your nail or with tweezers, and cut them, then treat as we have said, until they are healed, and that they avoid cutting with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 So you must apply the treatment in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 Pull I thread twisted, and put it in a needle, then draw the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 And hold the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave one for draining the excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 Then place a wet cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the wound, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then leave it until it heals, and when it has healed, treat it with ointment and other treatments, until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 Of dryness of the intestines or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 Many times there is dryness in the intestines due to natural constraint and when the illness is old and medicine is of no use.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 If you must, use the tip of a spatula or your nail to scrape off the scab on top, so that it does not become wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 then cure it until it is dried as required;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 and if it cannot dry, then renew the scraping more strongly than before, until it bleeds profusely and is scraped clean;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	 Of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 An insect is a small creature found under the skin, and goes very deep into it;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 sometimes the cold finds it, and one feels it as if frozen to death with shivering, and this happens throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the treatment is such that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong ox feather, and place this quill on the shivering, so that the circle of redness surrounds the shivering entirely;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 Then turn your hand along the whole chain until you cut all around the trembling, and put it in completely, and pull out the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if you see it this way, then do so with a cane of brass or iron in this form, and let it be sharp below and drawn above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 Do not pierce, to hold it at two, and press it together.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you see it, then cauterize the trembling as described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	 of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 Sometimes a clyster is made of silver or gold, or melted bronze or iron.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 And sometimes these instruments are made in small and large sizes, according to those for whom they are intended.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 Therefore, those [instruments] that are prepared for the treatment of children who are weak and in pain are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The shape of the small and large enema is thus wide at the top, where the stomach is tied like this:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 And if there is a rupture where the stomach is tied as you see, and the head is pierced inside;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 And let there be on one side two holes, and on the other one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 And let the bag where the medicines are placed be made of an animal's bladder or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and let there be a finger's width between each hole. Then put into these holes a strong thread of twisted silk in the shape of an X or O, and gather the bag like a purse;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 And when the medicines are inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then enema.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 and this is the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 then the minister should press with both hands together until it is completely empty; then extract the enema, and have the patient raise their legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, hold it as long as possible;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And if he sleeps all night through, the aid is even greater.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you enema him in illness of a prolapsed belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 And if there are hemorrhoids in the anus or abscess, let the enema be as fine as for a child of one year.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 and this is the form of the subtle enema which requires the skin to be tight:
des plaies	 of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 We have already said in the section on wound treatment;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 or we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 Les blessures peuvent être causées par la chute de pierres, ou par des coups d'épée et de couteau, ou de lance, ou de bâton, ou de flèche, ou par des choses similaires.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 ou qui dépendent de la localisation dans le corps, comme une blessure sur le cou, ou sur la tête, ou sur les pieds, ou sur l'estomac, ou sur le foie, ainsi que d'autres parties similaires.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 Et je vous expliquerai le traitement pour chaque blessure, et je commencerai par les blessures simples de la tête, car leur traitement sera rappelé dans ce chapitre.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 Je dis que lorsqu'une simple blessure survient à la tête et que l'os n'est pas brisé, il faut faire attention si elle a été causée par la chute de pierres ou des choses similaires. Même si le cuir est rompu et que la blessure est grande, et que tu crains légèrement qu'un abcès se forme :
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 if he does so immediately bleed from the head itself, even if a little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be opposite to the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 and have the patient avoid overeating wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 And if he does not want to bleed, let his food be reduced, and he should drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 and place on the wound, if an abscess appears there, cotton soaked in rose oil alone, or in stiffened wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 and if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by the air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the fire has moved it, apply some ointments until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 Et si la plaie est grande comme celle d'une tailleuse d'épée et semblable, et les lèvres ne peuvent pas se réunir par tentes, alors réunissez-les par couture, comme je le dirai pour les plaies du ventre, de la couture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound is exposed to the bone, and hollowed out, and holds only by a little, then cut it off;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 then treat the wound with medicine, and replace the skin with hard flesh, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, likewise bones, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if you find rottenness in the skin, and it does not reach to the bone, then cut away all the rottenness, cast it out, and then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by cutting it off, and it cannot be stanched with medicines, then seek the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And it is that you put this powder in before the fire has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 And the manner of the powder is thus:
pren encens une partie;	 take incense, one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	 blood of dragon, two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 quicklime, three parts, and make the powder very fine, and fill the wound, and bind it strongly, so that it swells well and adheres to all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 And then bandage it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 And sometimes one does this only with quicklime, when one has neither frankincense nor dragon's blood, but the fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if the fire has moved the wound, even if it was summer, then do not put this powder on it at all.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 but apply some soothing salves, or poultices made from barley flour with water and honey, until it produces pus.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat the wound with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 And if there is a bone fracture along with the wound and it is small, then draw it out with fine forceps.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 and I will tell you about skull fractures later on.
de la plaie dou col	 from the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head; but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If it is a nerve, then there is no other treatment than to leave it alone and not put anything constricting on it, for it harms the nerves and causes them to recede.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water in soft water, and mixed with rose oil, and cut herbs likewise in soft water, and other small stones according to this manner, and moist onions.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the wound is large, sew it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 And if the wounds are deep and it is swollen and full of pus, then pierce it in a lower place.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 and if an artery is cut and blood flows out of it, then dry it up, bind it, and cauterize it if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 and if the windpipe of the throat is cut or the heart, and the passage is kept safe, so that food can pass through, then sew the skin over the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then he restrains it properly, and leaves it for some days, then treats it with dry onions until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then he should pierce it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 And if there are bone fragments, then extract them all if you can, and those that you cannot obtain, leave them until the wound suppurates, and let the opening drain and heal.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 of the lance or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 If it is a blow from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then see if there is any gas coming out of the wound as the patient exhales:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 Know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder in at the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that may bite deeply and return to the heart and kill the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 but put an attracting poultice on it and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 and if you do not have a poultice, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 then there will be no spasm, no evil trembling of the heart, nor swelling from the wound;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 And when you see the bones in their proper position, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Heal it then with tents and other treatments, until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 and if it cannot heal, and works, know that there is a fistula.
si la cure si com on doit.	 so treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it is simple, either worse or on the back, treat it as you would for one in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 if it is large, stitch it up;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 and if it is small, with powder, and if it presses against the bone and has splintered, seek the wound, and remove the foreign bodies if they are visible.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 And if they are not drained, let the wound fester, thus making the extraction easier;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And for other wounds in other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 Of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 The rupture of the belly is large and medium and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 of the large wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, come out, by which their introduction;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because it is harder to put the intestines back in, unless they are done one by one;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, and so it is harder to put them back in, and therefore the medium-sized wound is worse, because one moves the intestines to their place less than the other two.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 And know that belly rumbling is according to four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 the two common sutures occur in the belly suture and in the sutures of other wounds of the body, and the other two proper sutures are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 and yet they are more specific with the belly suture, and I will say each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 I say that when the wound is small and something of the intestines has come out, and this thing is difficult to put back in, it is by one of the two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 Soak a sponge or a cloth in hot water only, where you cook in boiling water with wormwood and hyssop and spikenard, and rinse the intestines until the swelling has subsided.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And sometimes make this wine constricting, and it is better to use alone for reducing inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 And when you see the swelling subside, then moisten the intestines with water where mallows and hollyhocks have been cooked, for by this means the entry is made easier by a little.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 And if it cannot enter, then make a small opening in the wound with the instrument used for removing hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 And the first treatment is better than cutting, because no one should cut unless there is great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 And this is the instrument to split it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 if you cut inside the curve and not outside, and see here the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is opened and the intestines leap out, then reset them carefully according to their natural form in their proper place, if you can, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 When the wound is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 and if it is in the lower part of the belly, place the head and the feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the wound of the belly is in one of the two parts, direct your attention so that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And thus you must proceed as I have said for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 In small wounds, apply what you have prepared, then have in your hands a skillful minister who can hold all the wound at his hand, and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 and that is the common manner of stitching, and it is that you take one or more needles, according to the width of the wound, then from the head of the wound leave two spaces, and there insert a needle with which to have a good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the hypodermis, which is under the skin inside, until you have it pierced from that part, and assemble the two heads of the hypodermis together in four.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 then pull a double thread around the needle of two parts, then gather the two heads of the wound together, and then leave two spaces, and there insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 then take the thread of the needle just as you made the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need for the needles, until all the wounds are constrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 and let the needles be of medium size, between fine and thick, for fine needles cut all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well;
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 therefore they must be medium.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 and it is not good to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and open the wound before the stitching.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 and then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not wound the patient while sleeping, and put bandages or cloths over the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them there until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 And this manner of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it requires only one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 The second stitch is common and is done by bringing together the two edges of skin and the two lips of flesh with one needle, threaded with a strong middle-sized silk.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 And when you have pierced all four edges together, then pull the needle back to the place where you began, in the manner that clothes are sewn.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 And leave a space between each stitch as thick as a minor finger.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 This stitching is approved by men, and I sewed up a wound that a man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and the intestines protruded about two palms, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 Je remis son intestin après qu'il avait été en dehors pendant vingt-quatre heures, puis je pansai la plaie jusqu'au quinzième jour, et ensuite je soignai la plaie, et il fut guéri.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 And the physicians had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 And I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 Take the needle and pass it from the outside to the inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 When it has pierced the skin from inside to outside, leave the tip of the thread or suture where you passed the needle, and have it pierce from the other side, from inside out.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 And the understanding of this suture is that you sew as the furrier makes the furs, and that you leave the thread on one side once, and take it up again on the other, until the stitch is entirely completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 The second method of suturing, which Galen calls properly, is like some do, who join the two parts naturally together and apply one end of the thread to the other end in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 Insert a needle into the nearer end of the thread and make it pierce only that spot, leaving the two ends of the thread;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part to the inner part at the two ends of the thread;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 Then make one of them pierce through from the outside part to the inside, in two other places on the mirror that are opposite each other.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 and this is the most common method of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 Galen said these words, and some testify to this, that one should stitch the belly with two needles, each having thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 and one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then the stitching is more difficult than in other places on the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 And it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the fire has moved it, then stop applying heat to the intestines and the skin.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 then apply soothing powder, and if the fire has moved it, then apply some ointment that is available, until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 and stitch the skin, and close the sinuses, and the intestines.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 and if you do not have medicine, then apply, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 For in many cases, no other medicine is needed when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 And if you doubt that the wound will spread to the main limbs, then you must wet a light linen cloth in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the joints and under the armpits.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 And if he feels pain or inflammation in the belly, which often happens, then give him an enema of warm red wine, and likewise if the inflammation reaches the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 And puncture it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the thinness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 And if the intestine protrudes from the wound, then replace it back in as with the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 And if the hairs are old and turned gray or black, then you must tie the blackened area so that blood does not flow there, because there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 Then cut that which is between the tie, and place the two heads hanging from the lower part of the wound until it is sufficient to ease the extraction when the hairs fall, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	 of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 When the intestines are cut and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some men, for I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became ulcerated and turned into a fistula, from which issued the excrement and the flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 I took care of it according to what I could, and did not stop until it was healed, and the wound closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 And when I saw that it was sealed, I feared that the patient had an ailment in his stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 and there was no illness there, but he remained in better health, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 take a bandage with large ends, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the bandage has opened its mouth, place it on top of the two lips, so that it pulls its mouth shut;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 and then cut the end of the bandage, and this holds so that it cannot be loosened, then place another bandage afterwards in the same manner as before, until the entire wound is completely covered.
et cout la plaie.	 and cauterize the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 And these heads, if they remain in the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, then one can tie off the intestines with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal, in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 take the head of this intestinal thread and make it very thin, then tie to the head of this thread a fine twisted linen thread, then put the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestines, and return it to its place;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 and this manner of stitching for fractures is nothing other than according to the way of trust and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the narrow intestines, there is no skill or sense, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 Of a fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it has healed, is universally called "fistula," and also when it has burst and flows with pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And a fistula is according to the truth a hard and white knot, where one does not feel pain, and it is as deep as the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 and sometimes it appears clear and shallow, and other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 sometimes it is hollow, and other times filled;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 And I have spoken of it in the section on wounds that every wound which is not healed and has no flesh, it is not cured except for one of the NINE causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 that is to say, by the scantiness of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	 or because of its defectiveness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 or because there is hard flesh within it, and on the edges, which prevents new flesh from growing; ?>
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 where there is too much moisture;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 where the place is rotten, and the substance is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 where the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 or because the corruption is a manner of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 or because the property in the region delays digestion and healing, and is swollen by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 or there are veins in the bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 Or it is necessary that I make you know the treatment of fistula which is made by handiwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the face, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spinal column of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; 》
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 And so it happens to some where it reaches the property of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of serious illness, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 And if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I have said, and you trust in the cure, and you wish to test it, then take a tent of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, then pierce it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 And if the fistula is crooked, then seek a subtle tent of pine, for pine bends more easily around the curvature.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot easily probe it with tents, then administer an enema through one of the openings, for moisture thus passes from one opening to another, and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 Then wisely and with all your power, examine if there is bone or nerve, and it is cut deeply. Ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 And when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the putrefaction and the corrupt flesh that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 And then treat it until it is healed. And if the fistula is well deep and straight, it is necessary that you cut deeply, as much as you can, then put moist tents in ague medicine, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then put on dressings of fresh meat, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize as we have said; and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it off.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 If veins or nerves trouble you in the main members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then clean it until all the corruption is removed, then treat with fresh meat dressings until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 and if it does not heal, and pus comes out again as before, know that you have not reached the source.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 search and dig until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then fill the place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 And if he is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 If not, know that the corruption is too far advanced, that you cannot help it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 and if there is a little rotten bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then draw it out with the suitable instrument, and if there are many bones, then pull them all out, leaving not one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 and if moisture hinders you and there is no mistake or fear, then cut flesh, moisture, and skin, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then apply a purifying agent to the wound, and let it sit until the place around the bones is rotten, and then the bones will be easier to extract; 
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 And if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, then clean away the corruption until all the blackness is gone, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 And if there is a large part of it that is corrupt and reaches to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 then you must cut and scrape all the way to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to an internal cause, so that the matter came out into the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no other reason for opening it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 But the doctors in their foolishness worked so much that they opened the abscess, and from it flowed much matter, and a fistula formed, and there came much pus that all threw off stench and moisture of the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 and many doctors tried to treat it for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine, so that I was called upon, and saw his leg and the medications with which he was treated, and what flowed from the holes in great quantity.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 and the young man's body turned red, and had a lemon-yellow hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 Je planted a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that one met the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 So I hurried and cut into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the rot reached the inside of the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I was that which appeared to me from the corrupt bone, and I thought there was no other corruption except for what I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 and I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but it could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I saw it, and then removed it, and tried to heal the place.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 but I could not do so until I cut around a palm's width of the bone, and then pulled it out entirely, after which I treated it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 and it healed and was joined quickly, and I did not need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and because of my fear of his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 Car for the evacuation of blood he often fainted, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, which had a good disposition and caused no harm or opposition at all, neither when leaving nor when arriving.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 Take a thread, and tie it to the end of the bone that is exposed, and instruct someone to pull it upward;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 and place another thicker wool thread above the first thread on the flesh above the bone, and extend the end so that you draw the corrupted flesh downward, and expose the flesh in the place where you wish to treat, ensuring that the thread does not injure the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 and place a hot coal or on a table under the bone to further burn the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 and one must treat until the corruption can be seen and felt, and then treat it again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 And if the bone is corrupt, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 Then place a burning coal underneath, and then sew from one part to the other where the corruption is, and let the suture be as long as the length of the corruption, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut away the corrupt joint and sew the bone where it attaches to the other part.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 And if the corruption is between two joints, there is no other remedy than to cut it out.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 And if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or in the ankle of the foot, this thing is very difficult, but nevertheless you must seek to discover how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 And cleanse it in all ways you can, but let not the vein or nerve do otherwise;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 And know that the incision tools and the brushes for covering these bones are many, according to the placement of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 And therefore it is necessary to prepare for each type of work its instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 And know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If you think of the instrument that you need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	 from fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 The head becomes dislocated either due to an internal cause or due to an external cause;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 and when you have treated that corruption with the remedy of medicines, and they do not profit at all, then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater evil of the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 and the signs of this are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corruption passes from one member to another, and spreads throughout the body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 so hasten to amputate, and if it is due to the bite of some venomous creatures, such as sea scorpions or vipers, and similar ones, if the corruption is at the top of the arm, then cut it off, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 And if it reaches the hand, cut it at the joint, so that the rotting does not reach the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 and if it reaches the arm, cut it with a knife;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 and if it goes beyond the knife, death occurs, and no other remedy is of use except in accordance with its power.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 and thus do you act when the rotting comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 if it reaches the first joint, cut after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 and if it reaches the foot, cut off the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 and if it rises to the leg, cut at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 and if it reaches above the knee, there is no other course than to leave the patient to die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 And the manner of covering or binding the limb is such that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister downward along one of the ligaments, and another minister upward along the other ligament, and you divide the flesh between the two ligaments into a broad spatula, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 then bind or tie, and place on each side a linen cloth, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy area, and the patient will have another injury and an abscess there.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 And if blood begins to flow when you work, cauterize the area quickly, or apply some restricting powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it heals.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 And I will tell you what happened to a man on his feet
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 There came a blackness upon him that seemed like a burn from fire, and this corruption first came in his big toe, so much so that it spread to the entire foot
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 And when the man saw the corruption, he hurried to cover the foot, and was saved
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 And a long time after the corruption returned to the toe of his hand, and he came to me, and I put on repressive things after the cleansing of the body, and still the corruption could not cease  :
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 And he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, because I hoped to suppress the matter
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 And I also feared that if I cut off his hand he would die, for the man's vitality was weak
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 And he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and covered his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And I have not told this account except for what one does with another part, if one needs it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 Sometimes an abscess comes to a fleshy place, and stays there so long that it causes a great swelling;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 And then it breaks through and bursts, and the swelling jumps out, and the place remains hollow, like a vessel.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 And the skin that is above it is as thin as a well-woven cloth, and does not extend to the bone or the nerve. Such an illness is called "sinus", and is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusques à l’os en parfont, si est appelée «fistule»;
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 et li cuirs s'est endurci de telle manière que tu dois couper ce cuir tout autour, et même quand il est fin, comme un ruban.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 et ne s’aggrave pas à cause de son infection.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 And if you believe that the skin is getting worse, and the infection is not severe, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with an enema like this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 examine if the breast is large and the pus coming out of it smells foul; then treat it with an Egyptian medicine enema made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 Take asafetida, oil, and lead oxide, in equal parts, and put to cook in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 And then take some of this according to your need, and make it into water or honey, and use it as an enema in the chest, and constrict the anus.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 And let the medicine remain inside for two hours, then remove it by pressing out.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 Do this many times until the chest is cleaned and the pus is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 And sometimes you should use an enema of ash water when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from vine wood, and pour water over them, then strain it, and use it as an enema until you know that the chest is well cleaned.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 And if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then enema with water and honey in which there is a little bit of lead powder.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 or you enema with honey and mulled wine, so that the honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the flesh drier;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 and when you have done this, and you are confident that the wound is well cleaned, then enema with what causes flesh to grow in it, and that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 or you enema with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties in the treatise on ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 And if the opening of the breast is small, and the pipe of the enema cannot enter, then widen it a little with an iron, and place inside a tent of Egyptian ointment or Basilicon ointment, until it is widened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if the wound is too large, then sew it and leave an opening only where the enema can enter; and if the hole that the intestine exits is high up, then cut it lower down where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 For when the intestine is in its entirety, do not let any flesh enter.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 And if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, then prepare it in such a way that the intestine runs to the lowest part of it; for when the intestine is whole, do not let any flesh enter. And if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, then prepare it in this manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 What li bowe means
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 Et puis metez sor le plaie un drap de lin pur,
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 puis coveint que tu face tant de drapiax come tu veux ainz que tu aies mangié ne béüs;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 et s’il est venimous ou malade, ou trop, ou digeste, ou non digeste;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 et se li sieins est apert, et li santés approchiers.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 And then unbind it in the morning or on the third day; and when you unbind the wound, change the dressing and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 And if the chest throws out undigested matter after many days, know that the chest is not well-aired.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poison comes out after a long time, do not despair of your health, for the health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 For there are men in whom it takes a long time for flesh to grow over their wounds, and others who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 And if undigested food comes up from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach does not open.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 And if the stomach is slow to open and is constipated, use drying medicines that are moist in nature but dry in action, such as refined ointment, for it contains a great deal of vitriol, and this is the last medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 Take refined ointment, and make it with rose oil, and mix it with equal parts of old wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	 Then crush it and use it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 And the same thing, when onions are not present, you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and crush them, and sprinkle the powder over honey when it is on the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 And then put it in a cloth and place it on the chest, and sometimes add a long clyster, and roots of heavenly iris, which are like vetch flour and fenugreek.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 And use either simple or compound medicines:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 Crush them, and make into powder, and put on the honey that I have mentioned, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 And if the cure is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and has made an impression on the bone, or on hard members, or on joints.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 If the cure of the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 Panarice is an abscess that occurs beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or sometimes in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 and when it is neglected, and one does not take care of it, then an abscess like this forms, and it runs and throws pus so much that it runs to the root of the nail, and sometimes it runs all the way through.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 and the corruption reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the tip of the finger or toe is swollen, and its color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail with an iron instrument, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 Cautery is very helpful if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 And if the nail presses into the flesh and begins to prick and wound it, you must place a reed under the nail that touches the flesh, and push it upward, and carefully and lightly cut off the flesh, and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then cure with onion until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and draw strongly, for as long as the corrupt bone remains, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if you see the finger corrupted, cut off one of the fingers as previously said, then cure it until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 and if it is struck or bruised and causes great pain, you must first heal it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 Then cut the nail of the big toe obliquely from above, and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if it happens, place something on top to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 The pain of the shoulder of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The two bones that grow in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is one with bone, and sometimes there is a claw; and sometimes they grow at the root of the joint, where the growth appears on some fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 He who is born under any knuckle of the toe does not move, and he who is born at the toe's joint, perhaps moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 The cut of one who is fleshy is light in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 Cut it at the root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to cure: xspace
si te tien dou coper.	 so hold yourself from cutting (it).
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes primer la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 The sudden meeting of the two [bones] occurs at birth, or from a wound, or from burning with fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 You must cut that suture in such a way that they may be reconnected according to their natural shapes. xspace ‌
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 Then place between two tents or wet cloths with rose oil, so they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Or you put between two thin pieces of lead until the place is healed as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 If suddenly it happens to one of his fingers with the palm, then strike that knot as is necessary.
des vils	 Of the filth
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 The veins are large wounds full of excessive black bile, which come to many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 It is therefore necessary that you administer some purging of bile to him, and then heal him with basilicum.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 The treatment of iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 one is that they are cut out and strong black blood is drawn from them.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 And the other method is to raise the wound and draw it all strongly.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 The cut is according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 rose the first the leg of hot water very strongly, so that the large vein be made subtle, then hold the leg of the patient from above the thigh to below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 then cut the vein in one place, or in two or three, with a wide incision, then lift up and draw out strongly the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the patient can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 and then bandage it, and command him to eat blackening foods.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 and repeat the evacuation and cautery when the veins are full, and benefit the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The raising of it is according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 Pull the hair from the patient's leg if there is much of it, then place it in a bath, and wash the leg with hot water until it turns red, and open the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 And if you do not have a bath, then heat it over the fire, and then cut towards the vein along the length of the leg from the knee to below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 Then cut through the skin with scissors, and scrape the vein from both sides until it appears when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 And one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 Then push the blood downwards so that it is raised from the skin, and then cut it lightly with scissors, then cut in another place above three fingers.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 Then peel back the skin on the vein until it appears, then lift it with the razor, as you have done, and attach it to another hook, as you have done first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 Then make another cut, or several if you need them, then lift it and cut to the foot's big toe, then draw it and lift up to the second cut;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 Then pull it from cut to cut until it comes out completely, then cut it off.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 And if you cannot pull and lift it out, then thrust a very strong double-threaded needle into it, tie it off and pull, place it under the skin, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 And watch that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot draw or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 And when you have drawn it all out, then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound site.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And tend to it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 And if the vessel is twisted and bent together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it obliquely, but do not cut it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And draw it out as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 The shape of the iron used to cut the vessel is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein; ‌
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 And it is of large size, for if it were fine, it would cover the vein; but let it be thick as we have said. Here is its form:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no grass or tree grows, and on dry land.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 And perhaps it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes under the skin, just as snakes and worms appear inside the body, lodged between the skin and the flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is such that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to come out like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When the head opens, it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of cloth from one and a half cubits up to two and a half cubits, and the knot, and leave the cloth hanging on the leg. And every time that some pus comes out, wrap the cloth around it and the knot;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 And if it is too long, then cut off part of it, and wrap the rest, and do not cut it at its root, until all of it has come out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 for if you cut it, then it enters the flesh and causes an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 because of this thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the head, and nothing remains in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 and sometimes this vein when treated is fifteen palms or twenty long, and a man came to me once whose it issued twenty palms long, and when you cut it, then it spurts out one or two streams, and pierce it until the bottom, so that all of it comes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 And let the matter that is within be emptied out, and apply to the place medications that prevent putrefaction every day, then treat it as you would with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 And sometimes this vein is smaller, especially when it appears in the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and there is much pus, causing swelling.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 Treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This disease is called in our land "ox disease," because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, traveling throughout the body up and down, and one feels it well as it moves from limb to limb until it desiccates the skin where it goes, causing swelling.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 And is infected by putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, serpents, and roundworms or ascariasis in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 And one doubts his wickedness, for when he goes through the body, and he rises to the head, and he comes to the eye, perhaps he enters, and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 And this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When you see him cured and drawn out, one cannot avoid it except when he goes away:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 Then it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong bandage very tightly, then cut into it and pull him out strongly, and if the worm is deeply in the flesh, and you cannot find him, then cauterize him with fire until he dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 and the greatest harm that it does is that it affects the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 and if you see it coming near the eye towards the head, hold firmly beneath it the bone, then cut above, and pull out the arrow forcefully;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 and it is necessary to use the patient for body cleansing with dissolving medicines for bad humors, and to abstain from foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes in certain limbs, and then moves from one limb to another;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 and I saw what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 And afterwards, the wound swells up on the shoulder like a worm, faster than anything else, just like quicksilver when it changes place.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 The pain leaves that spot and lodges in the shoulder, and then a little afterwards it runs throughout the body until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 Then she told me that it continually moved around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 Je me merveille beaucoup comment elle se déplace ainsi d'un membre à l'autre, car je n'ai jamais vu cette maladie de cette façon auparavant.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 However, I had seen many who had well experienced pain moving from one place to another, but I had never seen it as I did in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, and for this reason these windy constriction appeared.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 And do not follow this method for those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and full veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 And when you see that this disease is being treated and the patient feels this pain, if it appears as we have said, then apply quickly above and below, and then cut into it until that windy pressure forces out from its place.
et cauterize le leu;	 And cauterize the place;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those that expel windiness, such as stinking pills and pills of serpentaria, and similar others.
des saiettes	 of the arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places on the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The diversity of them is such that there are some with large tips, and small ones, and hooked ones, and joined ones.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 And of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are parts.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 And that which falls upon any member does so in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 Or it falls upon a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 When it falls therefore upon any place of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you afterwards appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death follows in many dispositions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 And when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 And the signs of the brain when an arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and jumps the sutures that are on the brain, are headache and stupor and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 and perhaps there is an issue from the nose or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 and perhaps speech and voice are lost.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 and from the wound comes white moist substance resembling pus, and it also spurts like boiling flesh.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And if these signs appear, then tend to the wound, and remove the arrow if it is still there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer = The signs of the stone when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple and feels as if it were embedded in something hard, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz = and perhaps the stone moves like the finger, and there is black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent. = know then without doubt that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 And the sign of an arrow that never leaves a foamy spittle from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; = And if the stone falls into the bladder cover, it is near the small ribs.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; = and causes great pain and great sighing.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And all the limbs from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 And if the arrow falls into the stomach, by chance some undigested flesh may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 And if the arrow falls into the belly, and a little feces come out through the anus, there is no hope for the cure or the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 And if an arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels strong pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and pelvis and hips and legs, and similar members, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 It happened to a man, an arrow fell on him in the armpit at the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I pulled it out and drew it from the other side under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And shot with an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye under the membrane below, and the arrow was broken off, and he could not reach anything but the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large for a Turkish bow, all iron except for the light feathers.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 The youth was healed, and no evil accident befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 And he drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian in shape.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I shaved off my beard, and acted so skillfully that I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 And I drew an arrow from a man who had it in his belly, and thought that he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 and after passing thirty days, his condition did not change at all.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I cut around the arrow, and pulled it out, and drew it out strongly, and he had no evil accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 And I saw a man upon whom an arrow fell in the back, and the wound was sutured shut;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural disposition at all, nor found harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And I saw another man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound was sealed;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 and remained thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	 and many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And he drew an arrow from one of the king's leading men, which had fallen into his nose, and it was slightly slanted to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 and the arrow was completely bent.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I was called to tend to it after three days had passed since it fell.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 I recognized it as a subtle arrow and did not feel it at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 And he felt a prickling pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was the tip of an arrow, so I applied a plaster that is astringent and healing to prevent swelling.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 And the place of the arrow appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 I put the plaster on for fewer days, and the wound healed again, and the patient remained thus for a long time until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose.
et il le me dist.	 And he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open, and then I probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow which had settled in place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 then I approached the opening of the wound with that sharpened instrument until the head of the arrow became clearly visible to me.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 and the wound healed well for three months, and then I opened it where I placed the forceps, and pulled from one side to the other, but it would not come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 then I did not stop trying and devising ways to use tools until I grasped it with well-made forceps, as described at the end of this chapter, so that I could pull it out and close the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 I then closed it and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you may focus your care on what I do not say, for the book cannot encompass everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 but the wise master considers well a small thing, and that which is present and failing, finds new work, and nine instruments, for the resolution of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 I say that arrows should not be removed from the members into which they are fixed except according to two methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 either through the place where they entered, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 and the one which should come out by the way it entered is an arrow entering into fleshy places, and this should be done at times.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 And if it does not heal now, then leave it until the flesh is rotten all around, and the exit is healed;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 and so if it is lodged in the bone, and cannot come out, then leave it for some days, and move it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 and then it heals, and if it does not heal, then pierce all around with the finest awl, until the place around is enlarged, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 And if the arrow is lodged in the skull bone, and reaches one of the brain's chambers, and some of the symptoms I mentioned appear to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 do not draw it out, but leave it until it becomes even after some days, for if the arrow reaches the brain, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and does not reach as far as the marrow, and the patient remains for some days without any bad incident, then use the device to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 And if it is very lodged thus and cannot come out by force, then administer cauterizations around it, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then heal the place until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 And if the arrowhead has returned to its place in the body and cannot be seen, then seek it along all the course.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 and if you feel it, then draw it out with some suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then widen it until the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 and draw out the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has barbs that catch, then remove as much flesh from around them as you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow until you can draw it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And be careful not to break the arrow, for you would draw it out more harshly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 And if you cannot do it all at once, leave it until the place around is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 And if the flow of blood goes against you, then use what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and devise a way how you can carefully draw out the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 and put the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest help there can be, and if you cannot do this, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 The arrow that comes from another place, or where something protrudes from it, or the skin is swollen in that spot so that one can clearly see or feel it:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 Cut away until the tongs can grasp it, then pull.
si saut fuer maintenant.	 If it leaps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 And if it is lodged in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, widen the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 And if it cannot emerge, then leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it emerges;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 and if there is any shaft left, push out all the shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 and if the shaft falls out, and you see that a pushing tool is needed, then administer the pushing tool, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the groove of the tool;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 and then push strongly, and if the arrow is grooved, then push in the pointed tool, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 And if the arrow falls into the chest or the stomach or the bladder or the side, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut through, then cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 And guard against cutting the vein and nerve, then extract it, then suture the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And tend to it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 The shape of the pincers used to remove arrows is like a bird’s beak, and see here its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 And there are many kinds of them:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the arrowhead is like the feather of a bird, to insert into the tip of an arrow, as here is the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 The shape of the pincers for inserting and extracting is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	 common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 There are 31 veins from which one can bleed, and there are 16 in the head, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 Two that are behind the ears, which are called the "herb" veins.
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 and the two arteries that appear in the temples;  />
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 and two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, which are called "aspirs";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 And the vein which is within the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 And the vein which is at the top of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 And the two jugulars which are in the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 And the two veins which are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "aujugularis";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 And two veins which are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 The veins that are commonly bled are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 one is the cephalic and it is on the left side, and people call it the "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 and the middle one is called "fastus", and it is made up of the cephalic and the basilic veins, and people call it the "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 and the bladder is on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the pubic bone, and it is that which is healed, which appears clearly on the vulva.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 And the little vein is the one between the auricular and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 and in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 one is below the pubic bone on the left side, and the second is the saphenous vein at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 and the vein called "greater saphenous" which is in the other ankle;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 and in the other leg there are three veins below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 The bleeding of wounds after the ears helps against old fevers and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 And the quality of the bleeder, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head and rub the place where the wounds are with a rough cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 Then have the patient clench his neck with a rope, so that the two wounds appear behind the ears in two hanging places from the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 Then seek them out with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, sign there. 
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 Then take the lance and thrust it under the vein until the bone, then raise your hand to the top of the vein, cut through both skin and vein well twice across, and let out as much blood as you wish.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 then hold and bind it until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 And I have already spoken of incisions and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 The bleeding of the two arteries located in the two temples is good for chronic migraine, gout, and habitual blindness; and for violent weeping of the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 And the qualities of the bleeder are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 and it is that the patient should hold his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 and feel with your thumb beneath your finger, and then press down on it.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 then place your heart on the vein above your index finger, and insert the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 Then dislocate the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And then tie it tightly, and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 And we have spoken of them in the beginning of this book, concerning their tying and removal.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 The vein of the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 And its quality is that the patient should twist his neck until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 then take the instrument called "fosseur," of which here is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 And place the tip on the vein, and strike with your hand or another object, and allow blood to flow according to the amount you wish.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Then untie the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healthy again; sometimes use a wide flame for the work.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 Nevertheless, it should not be that the flame is too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 and the saw slantwise, because the bone is close by, and perhaps the flame breaks when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The sawing of the two veins that are in two temples is helpful for the eyes, and for ringworm, and for redness, and for the little vein in the eye, and for diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 and the qualities of their sawing are such that the patient should twist his neck with some cord, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Then heal it, and let the wound be from the crossbow, a little long and a little wide, for there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 And if the flame is delicate, perhaps it will break.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 Then make it bleed with blood, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The wound of the vein of the nose is worth against fever, and madness, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 And the quality of the wound is that the patient stretches his neck, then presses his nose to your left hand, and takes the delicate, long flame, and places it in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 And do not go too deep, let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night, for it is very quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 The fennel of two kinds also helps in the constriction of the nostril, and in the beginning of headaches, and in many illnesses, and in ringworm, and in corrosive sores, and in shingles;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 and the quality of the fennel is that the patient should tighten their neck under both [fennels], as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 and let the master be standing over the patient's head, and the patient sit on one seat, then cut the vein of the arm widely for a short time, then draw blood moderately, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 then make another incision in the other vein, then release the ligature, and gently compress all the veins so that the patient is not strangled;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 and leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 de la saignée des veines
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 The bloodletting of the veins of the lips above helps to cool the mouth, and to heal gum infections, and lip cracks, and of the nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 And the quality of bloodletting is to have the patient sit before you and compress their neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is at the right lip and the other at the left, and they are recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 therefore cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 of bleeding under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 The bleeding of wounds that are under the tongue also helps after bleeding of the cervical [region], and this is for narrowing the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 and the quality of bleeding is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and he raises his tongue, and looks under on each side at a black wound.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 bleed then one and the other, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The wounds of the knife with which one commonly bleeds are bled according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 either by pricking at the entire flame of a large myrtle leaf or an olive leaf that is thin and sharp like a cutting knife, and it is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 And they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 The form of the merlin flame is very renowned, and it is broad as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 And it is necessary for opening large veins full of large, visible blood, and which contain coarse and troubled blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 and this is the form of the olive-flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 And it is more subtle in its aim, and it is for healing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases under the throat, in the neck, in the chest, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 and it is necessary for the bleeder to bleed wisely, and to beware of the artery which is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow, then he must staunch it, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And the flame should not be piercing, but cutting like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 And if the blister does not open clearly, then you must press it and change another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 or where you want some veins of it, or you heal in its place the vein into the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	 it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 and cut with the knife like a blade, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 And if you want to find the vein, then first press on the arm so that you touch the spot until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 then mark the spot with ink, and then tie off the arm, and cut the vein with the knife like a blade.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 And beware that you do not strike an artery when you see the spot swollen, for it is of the artery.
eschui la donques.	 then avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 And if you see it protruding like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 then hurry up, and place your finger on top for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 if it is in an arm, leave it like this, and let the patient not move it;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 And if the bleeding does not stop, and you are alone, and the physician is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, for the head of the blood will retreat.
et estainche li sans.	 And bleed the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And take a piece of fig bark, and split it, and take one of the halves and tie it on well until the next day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 if the wound is bled, that is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 if not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that bleed.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 and bleeding is not good in many conditions due to the small area of the wound, and the power of the ligature around the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The bleeding of the vein in the middle thus helps that it draws blood from above the head, and from below the body, because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 And it is necessary for the physician to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deeply, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the wound becomes inflamed, and perhaps it cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 And this nerve often breaks open, and if it does not break open in some men because of its subtlety, then you must cauterize it with the silver instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 And avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 And if there is a vein between the two nerves, incise it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 The vein of the head is useful because it draws blood from the head and helps with vision;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 And it is necessary to cauterize with the olive or myrtle flame because this is the safest of all veins because there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 Indeed, one must look for the most suitable place, and if it fails the first time, do not worry, and try again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 And perhaps the place swells in some men, when it fails the first time, but do not worry.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of the bleeding depends on your judgment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is practiced only to maintain health and to prevent future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 And let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are on the wrist.
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 that is to say, the cephalic, fast, and basilic veins.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 And one should bleed at the beginning of spring for children, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 And one must cauterize on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 The cautery that is administered for illnesses has no fixed hour, but when the need arises during the day or night, at all hours and at all times;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 And one should not cauterize children until they are fourteen years old, nor women who are pregnant from the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 The old who have passed LX years should not be treated.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, they must cleanse the intestines with a light enema if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw the harmful excess from the intestines to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 And he does not heal at all who is too excessively fed with foods, or drunk, as long as he remains intoxicated, nor those suffering from dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 And if he purges himself after suffering from colic, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and increased sexual activity with a woman, and from labor, vigilance, and fasting, and those who have completely lost their strength, either due to weapons or bodily injury.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 Then refine the humors if the blood is thick, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 Then enter a bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and heal from the vein on the third day, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 And guard yourself that day from work, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 and be happy and joyful, and let the healers be higher than those who are being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then pull the ligament moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 and then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 then moisten the healer's hand with a little old oil, then place his left hand thumb over that vein below the spot where he wants to heal, so that the vein does not catch fire or break when pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 For there are veins that flow like ropes in a basket, and there are such that are full of windiness, so that when one brings up the flame, it draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 And if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for this reason it is necessary that the surgeon be wise in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 And if the vein opens on the first try, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 but if not, then again a little lower in that place or quickly above, if the spot is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 And if the spot is swollen and the patient is frightened, let him wait one or two days and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 par aventure i venra apostemes chaus
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’ele li plait;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 car ceo avient maintes foiz, quant li plaie est petite.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 And thus administer the juice of oil into each wound that you open the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 and the same acts as a triple drug and cures them when applied to the place.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 if it thins the blood and disperses when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, especially when it is not opened except at that time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and place on the spot a sponge moistened in water and a little hot salt, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if some blackness or greenness remains on the spot after several days, it does not harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if you see, apply some aloe or myrrh mixed with calamint juice, mustard, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 And often there occurs an abscess and swelling at the wound of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 Then place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft under pressure from the hand, then that swelling is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 Therefore, do not apply anything of what we have said, for it may be coming from an artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Instead, make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 And draw on each according to the amount of its virtue, and according to the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 For if the blood is black, let it bleed until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 And if you see it thick, leave it until it is thinned.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 And it should be for the full and robust person who needs bloodletting, that one make a larger wound for him, and the flame should be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 And for the weak person, do the opposite, and one should bleed little and often, and one must bleed by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And this manner of bleeding is safe from bleeding too much and cutting a nerve, and it is worth more than the long or wide bleeding.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 And for the one whose body fails at bleeding, it is necessary to give him soaked bread in pomegranate juice;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 If it is inflamed, draw blood three or four times; and if of a cold complexion, eat before the wound bread soaked in syrup mixed with mucilage, or honey-flavored syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if he faints from blood loss after a great deal of blood has been let out, then it is necessary that he drink broth made of meat and subtle, fragrant syrup, and use the other things we have mentioned in the section on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 And if he wants to bleed from the arm and bleed again another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great blood loss, that he be bled little by little according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 And if one wants to bleed from the arm after the first bloodletting and he has a strong body, then let him be bled seven hours after the first bloodletting, or after nine o'clock.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 And who wishes to heal from another place, must heal on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 For it has much blood inside the body which is already inflamed, and causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 so a large quantity must be drawn from it, and enlarge the opening until it reaches the bone marrow;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 then, when you have considered all the conditions of wound treatment, and place your hand over the patient's pulse while it is bleeding, so that death does not occur from bone marrow exposure, which happens often when the physician is careless;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 And it is not necessary that when you see the arm dislocate, and make blood come out a second time, and the hole is closed, that you press very hard.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 Nor if it is crooked, that he extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 But let him be until he heals the second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 Or you prick with the tip of the flame until the frozen blood comes out of the vein's hole and put on a little silk soaked in water and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not compress it until the abscess is calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And if there is a need to bleed a second time, then heal it in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The vein in the arm is healed in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 And the way of the healing is such that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the scar tissue turns red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 Then let it be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal now across, not wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 And let the opening be wide, and let it be pricked well near the joint of the hand, and if pus does not come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 And if it is summer, do not put the hand in hot water, for it is more needed in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the pricking of this wound is safer than any other wounds, for there are no veins or nerves therein.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 The pricking of the little finger of the right hand is worth all the remedies for liver disease, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 Press the hand, and put it in hot water until the wound swells up if you see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 And if you cut it diagonally, and you cut all of it through to the other side, then it is not harmful.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 And do not go too deep into it, for the nerves are bare under all the skin, and then put your hand in hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 And when you have drawn blood as much as needed, place oil and salt on the vein to seal it quickly, and do this for each time.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 The bleeding from his left hand is as valuable as the illness of the mouse, and does everything similarly to what I have told you about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The bleeding from the saphena is as valuable as all the illnesses that are below the body, such as illnesses of the stomach, and retention of urine, and diseases of the kidneys, and of the thighs and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 And the quality of its bleeding is such that the patient should bathe his feet in hot water and rub on the wound until it opens, and then tie it over the foot joint.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 And the wound is at the ankle, and above the foot go many nerves;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 Therefore, cut it then in the widest nerve, or at the ankle, because that is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath, and heal from side to side like in cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 and let the flame be slow.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and allow the wound to drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 And if the healer fails the first time, then start again the second time a little higher, for the place is burnt.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 and do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and so do with the sole of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 The place of the sciatic wound is at the ankle on the outside, and its cauterization is worth the pain of the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 And the quality of his healing is such that the patient enters the bath, and pulls on the ankle four times while twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 and if it opens, then heal in all ways that you can, and by crossing over;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And it is better for you to cut it off, because the place is empty, and it is very abundant in many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 And if you cannot find it, then incise some of his flesh that opens onto the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 and let the blood flow as much as you wish, then release the ligature, and apply cotton and bandage it;
ele est maintenant sanee.	 it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 of cupping bleeds
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 Cupping glasses are made of horn, or tin, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 and cupping is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 And this cupping, which is done without pricking, is done in two ways: 
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 Or it is all fire, or without fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 And scarification, which is done by cutting and extracting blood, is performed in fourteen places on the body, one of which is entirely at the top of the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	 And another is in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 And two others on both sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 And the cupping beneath the chin.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 And the cupping at the shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 And the cupping on the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 And the cuppings in both arms.
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 And the cuppings of the two legs.
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 And the cuppings of the two ankles.
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 And scarification does not draw blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it weakens no one at all, unlike venesection.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And it is not appropriate that it be administered, by any fire or without fire, in any illness caused by fullness, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 And if it is necessary to bleed due to illness or habit, then we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, in the middle, and at all times;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And there are some who dream of blood, wounds, death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 And when we see these signs, especially when it is mid-month, we order them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 The bleeding of the nose helps with the lightheadedness of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 and this venesection is in place of the bleeding from the head, and it is not necessary that those who are of cold temperament use it, or have catarrh, because it does great harm to them;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 and therefore the old should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 And those who bleed often become stupid, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower out of fear of becoming stupid.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 The venesection in the neck is in place of the bleeding from the head and the basilic vein, and for this reason it is good for constriction of the chest, and for fissure of the esophagus, and for coughing, and for fullness;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 And there one should put a little, for if it holds too firmly, it injures the stomach and the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 The ventosations at the two ribs of the neck are good for the pains of the head, and for migraine, and for suffocation, and for the pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the incision of the basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 And you should instruct the surgeon to press with his hand while cutting, so that he does not cut the artery, and blood does not flow out continuously.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 The ventosations under the chin are good for diseases of the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 And it is located at the junction of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 Ventosation on the shoulders is effective for illnesses caused by heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 The cauterizations of the ribs are worth as much as those of three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 and instruct the physician not to strike too deeply into it, for the place is bare of flesh, and underneath are nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 The cupping on the rump is worth for hemorrhoids of the fundament and for diseases below, and it should be large and made of brass, so that it can draw well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 and perhaps, if it were delicate, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	 and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 The cuppings on the legs heal openly, for they draw blood from all over the body, and they are worth for old pains of the reins, and of the womb, and of the bladder, and remove the humors.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 And they are in the place of the two spleens and the two ankles; nevertheless, they weaken the body after long use, and bring on paralysis in many parts of the body.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 The manner of placing the cupping glass is such that you first place it empty, and then suck immediately, and place it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 then fire, and replace the cupping glasses, and pay attention to the condition of the body, for there are those who have thick flesh and clear pores;
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 thus it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and one deep hollow.
et suce legierement.	 And suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 And if the blood is thick, it must be struck twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 The first time to make the path of the thick blood finer.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 And if the blood is very thick, it must be struck a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And when we want to draw blood little by little, we only need to strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if we want a lot of blood, then we must strike often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 And if the blood is thick, strike deeply, and the ends should be such that the heart is suddenly pierced, and for those who have thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, you must anoint the places of the cupping glasses with opening and dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 If it is inflamed, use oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cucumber seed.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if it is swollen, use oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or any similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 And if the excess is large and cold, then take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the one whom we heal has tender flesh and large pores, then no oil should be applied, but it should be washed after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or mallow water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar waters.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 And the one who has much moisture should be treated with easel, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 And those who have large superfluous growths should rise from old wine, or water of juice, or decoction of dill or chamomile, or other similar ones.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 And it is not necessary to use a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he washes, both when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 Et (and) warde (beware/take care) se (if) cil (that person) qui (who) se (himself) saine (heals) est (is) coleriques (irritable), et (and) se (if) li (the) sans (blood) est (is) trop (too much) agus (sharp/acrid) et (and) enflamez (inflamed).
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 If it is necessary that he take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in vinegar, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And minced partridge, and lean meat, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 And if one has a cold constitution, let him take syrup of honey, and wine that is moderately fragrant, which is between old and new, and minced peacock, and minced partridge and small birds and thrushes.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 And on the day he sweats, he must drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 and it is necessary to give some men some tricat or muscat before sweating, or after, to strengthen the main members.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 and let the blood be thinned, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 The cupping glasses that are placed without cutting are those placed on the liver, and on the bladder, and gout, and on the stomach and the navel and the kidneys and the hip, because these members do not tolerate being cut over the eyes, and it is only done to draw blood from member to member, as we place on the breasts when the baby sucks;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 for to remove the stickiness that is on the limb, just as we place cupping glasses on the abdomen and on the buttocks to reduce the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 and removes pain, when there is a blister or stone, for perhaps by its attractive power it draws out the blister, or moves the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 and thus it does when placed on the liver and on the bladder when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to draw out only as much.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such manner that the cupping glass is filled with only hot water or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 And let it have two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and let there be on the side around the middle a small hole, just like for inserting a needle, and let it be of bronze, soft at the front so that it does not hurt the patient when placing it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 and let there be in the middle a crossbar of bronze or iron, to place a bandage wrapped around it, both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who use them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 because the cupping devices for children are different from those for adults, and for thin people than for fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 And one should place this cupping device on the limb in this way:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 take a cloth of wax or linen, and place it inside the cupping device across the crossbar that is inside the cupping device, so that the heat source is at the bottom of the cupping device and does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 And then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be over the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to, the vapor goes out, and remove the cupping glass.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And apply the poultice again as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 In the cupping glass used for pleurisy, there is no rod or hole, and it is not applied until it is full of water, and is placed only on the limb.
et c’est li forme:	 And this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 Leeches are not applied except in places where one cannot place a cupping glass due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 And in naked flesh, such as a finger or nose, and other similar areas.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 And the quality of the cautery is that when you find blisters that are in clear, clean water without any impurity, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 And put them into a vat of clear water until they become familiar, and have nothing in their stomachs.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 And then have the veins and vessels bled with a cupping glass, then rub the member until it is red, and place the blisters upon it.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 And when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where one can put a cupping glass, then put it there, for that is very effective afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 If not, lift the place easily, and then with water, which is good, and then press it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 And if the healthy flesh swells too much after the leeches, then moisten the linen cloth in cold water and place it on until the leech is exhausted.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 And if there are many leeches, then place ground vitriol or gallnut, and similar things on it until it is exhausted.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 Or place half of the shelled beans on the spot and leave them until they dry out in place, it will exhaust now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 And if you need more, then take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 And if the leeches do not want to attach, then rub the spot with fresh blood or stick a needle in it until the blood comes out and then place the leeches on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will attach.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And when you see that they are falling out, then sprinkle a little aloe and celery on them, or ashes, and they will fall out now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and it is for the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 Know, dear son, that the foolish physicians of this chapter threw away all ancient books and read none of them;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 And for this reason the science is strange in our land, because I never found any good ones.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 And I know nothing about it except for the knowledge from ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have learned the skill, and by experience, and by the practice of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 And I have already described in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 Il is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 Je dis que quand brisure ou dislocation ou torsion ou fracture arrive à quelqu'un, il faut que tu te dépêches de soigner le patient d’une manière et d’une autre, si aucune chose ne t’en empêche entièrement, comme la faiblesse du corps, ou l'enfance, ou la vieillesse.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 ou si le temps n’est pas très chaud, ou trop froid ;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 et ménagez des aliments froids, c'est-à-dire des soupes froides, et du fromage d'oiseau et de chèvre, et ne buvez pas de vin, et mangez aucune nourriture grasse, et ne vous remplissez pas trop de viandes qui remplissent les veines de sang, jusqu’à ce que vous n’ayez plus de doute sur la chaleur de l’abcès, ni sur l’expansion de la matière dans le membre.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 If the patient returns to his original state of health.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that promote heavy nourishment and have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, heads, feet, calf's pancreas, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 For with such nourishment, the bones heal better and more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 And know that old and frail broken bones cannot be well repaired or fused according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor can those which are too soft, such as the bones of young children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 but do not worry, reset the broken bone with strong ligaments that hold and bind the limb together until it is as strong as before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 and do not completely deprive him of his work, and for this reason he should be fed with rich foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 For there is a fracture that goes awry, and another in slanting, as the cut of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 And so there is a fracture with wound, and a fracture with all a small cleft.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 And each type should have its own device and proper tool for restoration, according to what is remembered in its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 And it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because the place is twisted, and it becomes well apparent by feeling, and sounds when pressed with the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 And when there is no twist or sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 But it can well have a twist, or split, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 If you do not need to move it by hand, but apply medicines that come hereafter, and then hold it delicately now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And know that the fractures that go awry, and are the two parts disjoined, it is now necessary to set them equally in place, lest abscesses come there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 And if hot abscesses come there, leave it alone for some days, until the abscesses are appeased.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 then make it equal to the bone that you can easily and wisely adjust, and know that its restoration is more light than that of one where there are parts.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 then hold it, as will be explained later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 And if there are broken pieces in the bone, then hold it with two hands, if it is the foot or hand, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, then adjust all the additions in their places to the bone as you can, and be careful not to cause the patient injury or pain through your work.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 And feel it well with your hand if you think that it is not right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 If it seems well to you, set it beautifully, and do not squeeze too much or press as those who cause hot abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 And when the limb is set, advise the patient well that he does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 and take care that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 For when he feels any pain, it is not set right, and one must put it in such a position that he feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 And take care that it is placed correctly, so that crookedness does not occur when it is reset.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 And the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 For there are small members, such as arms and fingers, and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 so it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 and those that are large, such as hips and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 so it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the entire large limb and holds it equally on all sides, so that there is no gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 then bind around light padding, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little all over the bandage, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break moves away a little from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy area, then take the other ligament and turn it around again on the broken place.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 Then return to the part below the fracture and fasten it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first ligature above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 Then place linen wads or cloths between the ligatures until they are all even, then tie everything together with a bandage on top, and then place your splints well on top, unless there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 And if there is swelling or abscess, place something that soothes the abscess and removes the swelling on top, and leave it this way for some days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 then draw up thy hands on thine shoulders, and let them be of half the width of a thick rope, skillfully made, or of wood from which one makes cleavers, or of palm fronds, and let them be according to this figure
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 but it is necessary that the splint placed on the fracture should be a little larger and wider than the others
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 and let it also be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 then draw up the splints in the same manner as you did at the first time, then tie over it a thread evenly, as at the first time upon the fracture
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 tighter is above, always less
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 and it is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and let it be made of soft flax
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 for if the threads are thick, as I have seen done by fools who make their ligatures from twisted linen cord, and this is a great mistake, for the ligature cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not be that there is less than two finger widths of space between each knot.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the stars after being drawn into healthy places, place cotton or shredded wool under them so that they do not become bloody.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 When the wound is with a fracture, and the heart is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 And know that it is not right to draw out all the broken members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 for when the limb is large, it is not necessary to place ligatures stronger than after five days or seven, or more according to your surety of a hot abscess occurring;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 and see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torse;
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 and it is that you take the flour that adheres to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and place this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and apply it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring fracture in many conditions, especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 Another manner of plaster restoring the fracture, dislocation, and twist:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 Take three parts of barley and ladanum, helenium, asafetida, gum Arabic, and mastic; in total, twelve parts.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 Honey and aloe, five parts each.
alechil VIIII З.;	 Garlic, nine parts each.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 And make it into powder, and mix with the white of an egg;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 if the man's constitution is warm, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and it is valuable to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another manner of plaster that is good for twists:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 Take mastic and mallow, twelve parts each; iety
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 myrrh and aloes, nine parts;
acaice VI З.;	 ginger, six parts;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 mastic of Armenian bole, ten parts. Grind well and mix with plenty of egg white, then administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another method for a plaster on dislocations and displaced bones, which relieves the resulting pain, and is used for bone fractures and breaks:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Take new linen, soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the site.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This plaster does not restore [the joint/bone], but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and effectively relieves pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 Another method of plaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Take dried fig leaves and wild peony leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method for plastering to restore bone fractures and to soften the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take root of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, chickpea flour, of each one part.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, then mix with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take roots of mallow, and linseed, mullein, melilot, ivy, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 and grind, and mix with salt water or fresh water or wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 Ypocras says in his book that one should not put anything over a broken limb to restore force except for wax made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 And it seems that Galen says one should put over a broken limb, to restore it, dry and slightly warm things, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Another method of plaster that is good for injuries and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Grind poppy seed and henbane, or bird feathers, and madder root, and celery equally, and pound them, and make a poultice and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 And then dislocate the joint again afterward, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 if it is not dislocated by hand.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 And if pain or itching comes to the place, without rest or swelling, then hasten and dislocate again, and remove the poultice now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 and take light cloth, and wet sponge of the sea, and dip it in water, and lift up the place, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 then let the member rest for an hour, then place on it a dry linen cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it onto a nut, until you are sure of a warm abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 and the inflammation of the member will rest, and the pain will be removed. Then begin again with a delicate bandage, and a little poultice, and do not bind it as tightly as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and continue gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 And if you see that the abscess is swollen and red and painful and inflamed, I have removed it all, and you need a plaster and a bandage, begin again as you did first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 And if nothing happens to the member as we have said, do not untie it until after three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on what is seen, until the break heals, and the union of the flesh approaches;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 then he will be constrained more than before, and his flesh will swell, as I have said earlier;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 and if you see the place drying more than necessary, know that nutrition cannot reach there;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 then apply hot water poultice every time you release him, and this should be every third day, and loosen the ligature a little;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 by this procedure, nourishment is restored to the limb, and it quickly heals as if done by foolish physicians who incorrectly reset the limb;
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 this is harmful, and such practices are fearful, and I see nothing in it but to let nature take its course and work properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	 Of the various types of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 Many types of fractures exist, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 because it has fractures that are caused by the impact of a sword, and the neck removes all the bone down to the marrow which is beneath the bone, just as an axe or log does.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 and for this reason this manner of fracture is called "axe-cut.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 Or if the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this manner of fracture is called "simple.
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 and the wound from these two fractures is either large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 And if there is a blunt impact, or splitting, or blow from a stone, or falling on a rock, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 Et si il a fracture penetrante, qui atteint jusqu'à la toile qui est sous l'os, ou elle est sur l'os, et cette blessure peut être grande ou petite.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 And there is a wound that is as fine in the bone as a hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "hairline.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 and if the wound is caused by being struck by a stone or by falling or something similar, and it causes the bone fragment to go downward, and the place is sunken in like how blacksmiths do when they hammer on cauldrons;
si entre li piere dedens.	 If between the stones inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their heads, like a child's head;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 and it occurs with all these types of fractures where small fragments are separated like stars;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 And let us recognize all kinds of fractures by the drawing out from them, and the inquiry with probes, and by the corrupt flesh that is on top.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 The similarity to a hair is known because when one has uncovered the bone and rubs over it, a black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 In the treatment of a fracture, beware of the patient's accidents, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, seizures, fainting, fever with chills, and eyes coming out strongly and reddening, and other similar things in many dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 And if you do not see a frightful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 And when the wounded comes to you first, and this is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 And if this is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh under the bone does not become corrupt, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the part to be split like this:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 and it is that you should take the patient's head and uncover the bone in all ways possible, especially on the wound's shape as gently as possible. And if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone or if there is an abscess, then aid him with what is necessary. And it is that you fill the place with linen cloths moistened with rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 and let the wound rest until the abscess is appeased, and you are sure of a stoppage of blood;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of working:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 one way is that you cut with a narrow incision at the front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 And then there is another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 And the second way is that you have several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 and work lightly to avoid injuring the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must first bore around it before you administer cuts with scrapers, not so deep that they do not go through the bone of the skull, and there should be a margin or circle above the point so that the point does not pass through the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 and you must have several of them, so that each one comes into its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you may have tests for all.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 and there are three kinds of probes:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 The quality for piercing around broken bone is that you place one probe on the bone and turn it with your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 then place the probe in another spot nearby and do this all around, then cut with incision tools the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly and lightly than you can, as we have said, until you draw out the bone into your hand or with any instrument you have such as pincers. ︎
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 And beware that you do not touch the brain or the spleen.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 And when you have pierced and removed the bone, it is necessary that you clean the remaining debris from the bone with another instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other chisels.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 And if there is any remaining small bone fragments or scales, remove them lightly with an instrument;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 then treat the wound with linen and onions as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 And another way of working is that which Galen says is safer;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 and he praises it greatly, and these are his words.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone where the break appears, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place under the head of this lancet-shaped scalpel, which has this form.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 And do not cut from one side only, but the cut should be on both sides, so that the cutting instrument is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 Then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is below.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 If it is close to the bone, lightly remove it, for it can be removed well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the skin, and the bone is broken only on top, and there are small pieces, then you must smooth over that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper which you should have in various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 First use large scrapers, and then finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 In each of the other hair-cutting incisions and delicate fracture, you should apply treatment according to its location;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 And this is something that cannot be taught to one who has studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 And if the ulcer is exposed, then you must take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 Then take another cloth folded into two or three layers, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 And do this more lightly than you can, so as not to weigh down the sponge. Then place another bandage on top and do not tighten it too much so that only the wound is compressed.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 And leave it this way for a day or two until the abscess subsides. Then remove it and administer medicine such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, and similar substances.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 And from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer medicine that is soothing without any irritation.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 And ensure that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow any pus to gather, because when pus gathers on the veil of the brain, it will run and spread, causing great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 For when you apply a stinging substance, it hardens from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 Pren warde donc, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 And if blackness occurs due to the medicine applied, then take one part honey and three parts rose oil, make it into a plaster, and apply it on the stinging substance.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then continue with the manner of treatment until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 Know that sometimes both parts of the nose are broken, or one alone, for these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 And those beneath are cartilaginous, and they do not break, but only cause a swelling or twisting, and then heal.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger or probe through the nose, and bring the break even with your index finger, and outside at the thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And do this gently, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach the place, then you must place a small amount of thick cloth at the tip of a reed.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 And if the break is in two parts, do the same again, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then insert into the tip of the nose a piece of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 Where you push one against another, if there is a fracture
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some say that one should moisten the tents with butter, and change them daily.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 It does not seem good to me, but they must be moistened in the preparation of an egg white and flour mixture.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 then leave the tent until the bones are healed, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And sometimes, feathers are put in the nose instead of tents, and there is a soft cloth around it, and if there is a fracture, the patient blows through it.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 Or do whatever you want.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 And if such abscesses come to the nose while you work on it, put there a salve of cotton moistened in rose oil or in a little bag of diachylon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 And if an abscess does not form, then apply an external plaster made of flour of linseed and powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then place light bandages on top, and do not tie the nose.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 And if the break of the nose is small, and it is broken into many pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then sew up the fracture, and care for things affecting flesh, and healing, such as suitable plasters and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and place leaden weights there until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	 of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the jaw is dislocated downwards, and there is no wound on it, and it is only broken apart, and not broken in two, except for a small piece inside, then it is easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 It is necessary that if the break is on the right side, you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 and if the break is on the left jaw, then insert your right index finger, and gently push the break inside, and align it with your other hand from outside, and set it straight.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 And if the jaw is broken in two parts, then you must provide traction in both parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 And if there is movement of the teeth or loosening, bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw cataplasm, and put on a double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And place on the cloth a well-made large strap, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above the mouth as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 And if you see that the swelling changes, then release it on the third day, and then set right what has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 And place a plaster on it, of the powder from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the cataplasm.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 And put on a light woollen poultice, and if the poultice dries out, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 many times it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 Et s'il vient des abscès semblables, alors agissez comme nous l'avons dit plusieurs fois.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 And if there is a fracture and wound together, be careful that no piece of the bone has been removed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 then remove it with instruments suitable for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you have removed all these pieces and nothing remains, then sew the wound if it is wide, and place suitable plasters on it to promote healing until it heals completely.
de la forcele	 of the trepan
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The collarbone has been broken many times before, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three types:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 or it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are parts, and this is the easiest to restore. ️
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 or there is a break with a wound. ️
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 And the work is thus when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the fracture feels strong.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 and the other extends the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 then place the break evenly between your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor displacement of it.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 And if you need to extend more, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth or wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 and stretch and lift the fracture, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you place the break evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 And if you cannot pull the head of the bone out due to its depth, it is necessary that the patient lie on their back, and place under the shoulder a medium-sized pillow, and let the assistant push the shoulder down until the bone of the fracture is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 And then bring the break to your fingers, and if you find it is displaced, it is necessary that you split open;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 And draw forth the bones lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to some obstacle, then strike it with one of the chisels you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 But place under the trestle this instrument, to prevent slipping.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 And it resembles a spoon, and is not hollow, and should be as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 And it should have two heads, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound that you made when you drew out the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And when you are sure of a hot abscess, then close the wound, and if the shape is small or you doubt a hot abscess, then fill the wound with lint and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 And if abscesses come here, then soak the cloth in rose oil and in ashes and in wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 The compression of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fractures, is to place on the bone a plaster made of milled powder and egg white, and put light wool on top, and place a sphere under the saddle, if you need one.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 Then take a very wide bandage of about four fingers wide, then place a double cloth on top of the wool and the plaster;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 Then take a fine linen cloth of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 And place the cloth over the break, and turn the bandage up over the healthy side, and under the saddle, and under the unhealthy side.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 And there you reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the star does not move on the broken bone, then you splint it daily, and when the ligament loosens, then you bind it again;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 and make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under their head when they sleep to lift the shoulder upwards.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 thus the fracture will heal more easily due to the relief of the shoulder, where you bind the arm to the neck, and do not unbind it unless a bad accident occurs, for up to twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 then begin the plaster again, if you see that it is necessary, and bind and leave it thus until it heals.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 And she is restored within twenty-eight days, and less so for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	 About the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks in a wide place or in the middle, and it is noticed only by touch;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 so assemble it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 then place on the site powder of a mill with plenty of egg, and light dressings, and put on two cloths;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 then put on a broad and delicate bandage, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there are creases under the bandage in any part of the shoulder, fill those creases with linen dressings so that the bandage sits evenly;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 And then he binds it tightly with a large bandage firmly, so that the bone does not move from its place, and checks the bandage each day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 And every time it loosens, he binds it again and sets the bone straight if it is out of place, and the patient lies on his side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 And the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 And when this number is complete, he unbinds it and be assured, for it is not the bone that easily goes out of place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward and touches under the heart, it causes pain, extracts, and does what we have said in the case of breaking the rib to treat a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	 of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 But it often breaks at the toe.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken in the middle, it shifts downwards, and the patient feels great pain, weakness of breath, and convulsions, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the passage in the broken bone, which can be felt well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on his back, and he puts one pillow between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and aligns the ribs from the second rib down to your hands, and carefully ensures that it is set straight in all ways possible until the bone is properly aligned;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 then place plasters and stuffing on top of a subtle layer of salt, or another light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and bind it onto the broken bone so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 and turn the bandage around to the back, and secure it firmly, and check every hour if the binding is still tight, and if it loosens, then tighten it;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 and if it is necessary to unbind him, due to suppuration or itching that occurs at the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and unbind him, and remove the plaster, and apply what has come of the methods of treatment.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then reset the plaster and bind it until he is healed.
de la brisure des costes	 of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 Know that rib fractures only occur in large places behind the back, and inside the head, and they break only because they are slippery.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 and one feels it well during the examination of two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the treatment is to set the fracture evenly, as is necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply a plaster and bind it with a bandage if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 And if the rib fracture is slanting inward, the patient feels very great pain and sharpness, as from a punctured lung, because the bone pierces the flesh.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 and breathes with difficulty, and coughs up large amounts of blood, which is a sign of serious illness, and the ancients have given it great thought.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And there are those who say that one should administer foods that inflate the belly to push out the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 We do not do this, lest hot abscesses come there, if they have not already done so.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 And if they have come, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 And some say that one should put cupping glasses on the place to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 nevertheless, there is doubt whether the cupping glass attracts excess humors to the place due to the weakness of the body.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 And some say that one should cover the place with wool cloth dipped in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the bandage even all around, then treat it with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and with medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to a bone that punctures the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument below to prevent the pus from spreading.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then one should cut the bone and gently pull it out, and then sew together the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 And if an abscess forms in this way, place wet cloths soaked in rose oil on the spot.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat the area as if for an abscess, and let it lie on the side where it should be until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	 Of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and it often happens that they bend;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 and likewise to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, take note if you see their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that he is mortal in many situations, and if he moves them and feels well when they are strained or pricked, know that the articulation of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one applies a remedy there.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 And if something similar happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is whole or not, then take heed if the feet are paralyzed, and if there are injuries in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary evacuation;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 and when one turns it over on its stomach, there is involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when he is placed on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 Know that it is fatal;
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 unless you labor very diligently in his care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 And if these accidents do not happen to him, then the case is more mild.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And the treatment is that you investigate if there is a hot abscess, then put on the spine oil of rose or oil of yolk of egg, until it is soothed;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 Then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and secure it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 And if any bone breaks out, then it must be covered with wax;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and remove the bone, then join together the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large, and treat it with a healing salve until he is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 And if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "bone head", then press your little finger of your left hand into it and make it even with the other hand to your power, then apply the poultice and bandage on top, if you need it.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Then hold it [still], and if there is a shard of bone, remove it and heal the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 It sometimes happens that the hip bone breaks, and if it does, it is usually only a small loss at the top.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 And it stretches along its length, and slants towards the outside, causing pain and soreness in that spot, and swelling like a bruise.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 The treatment is to extend your hand over it until you are above the break;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 and know what kind of break and shape it has;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 And if the break is only at the top, then set [the bone] evenly so that it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 And if the break is lengthwise, or it declines inward, then make the patient lie on his stomach, so that you may be prepared to restore that break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 And when you have set it evenly, place the poultice on it, then put a wooden or poplar splint over it, and hold the fracture steady so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 And bind it under the ribs, so that the ligature is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and then put on what we have said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 And then return to setting it, and hold it as needed if there is no bad outcome.
et c’est li maniere.	 And that is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 The shoulder is what is between the armpit and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be set according to one of the two methods.
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 whose one is that you take a stake of moderate thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 And tie two stakes with two straps, and lift them up, and make the patient sit on a seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 then you throw his broken arm onto the stake, until it reaches the armpit, and has in the middle a curve of the stake, then pull up some heavy object where the assistant stretches downward;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 then have the helper hold the fracture level with his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 And the other method is to have the patient lie on his back, and tie his hand to his neck; then command two attendants, one to hold what is above the break at their hands, and the other to hold below all the length, and each extend to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold firmly the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the instruments to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 And if the fracture is near the shoulder's head, then you must place one strap midway under the armpit, and another towards the side, under the fracture;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 And thus if the fracture is towards the bone, then a ligature should be placed lightly, without effort, until the fracture is equal on both sides and on the bone.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 Then set the fracture as it should be and bind it tightly, if any abscesses occur there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 And if such abscesses occur, do not bind it for seven days, and place moist linen on top with rose oil until the abscesses subside.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 Then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you place a poultice on the fracture, then raise the arm to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 And put the bandage, and hold it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in the position of the stars, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 And if you doubt that the bone will move, use stars, and place on the break a larger and stronger star than the others, and let there be two fingers' width between each star, and each star should be so large that it passes the break by three fingers on each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 Then hold on the stars as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the break, more tightly and less widely spaced.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if you see the base of the stars and the tightening as we have said in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 Then look at the bandage every three days, to prevent itching or swelling from occurring in that place, as this can hinder healing due to excessive tightness.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If you receive it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 And if no such incidents occur, do not remove it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 and place a cushion full of wool equally under the bandage, and every hour of the day or night check that the shape of the broken limb does not change, or that the bandage is not loosened;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 if it heals through the power of medicine, and give him the food that we mentioned before, in such a way that the food is first finely ground;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And when he begins to recover, he will be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset within forty days of everything.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 Then one must free him and administer baths and medications with onions to direct the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, it takes one day or two months to heal.
de la brisure du bras	 of the arm break
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "two phalanges," one of which is small and follows the wrist.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 And the other is large, and it is the one that is below, near the little finger.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 It may happen that only the large phalanx breaks, or the small one, and it may also happen that both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 When the small phalanx is broken, the setting and healing are easy;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 And when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more serious than if they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is only the small scapula that is broken, then it should be stretched slightly and made straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 And if it is the large one that fractures, then it needs to be set more strongly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 And extend it on a cushion, and hold the little finger of the hand higher than the others, and the small toe lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him, higher so that the patient does not suffer any hardship.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 Then let the ministers extend their arms to the part below his hand or to the limb, and another minister to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then the physician will set him straight, according to his best ability.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if there is a break with pieces, place each one in its proper place; and if any of them sticks out and touches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, cut above and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter;
si pren la cure.	 Si pren la cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 Si pren la cure. Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 Si pren la cure. Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 Si pren la cure. Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 And know that it must have six stars or arms in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 whether the break is in one of the bones or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 and holds more firmly on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less by lengthening, as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 and let the cloths that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 and let the thread used for binding be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And wrap the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 And if any bad event occurs to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must rinse the limb with hot water until that itching is calmed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And let the member not rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the binding, and if the ligament is weakened and the bone dislocated, or similar things, treat it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 And if you notice that nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it with a poultice and leave it like this for some days, until the nourishment reaches it, and then bind it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things we have said happens to the patient, then do not unbind them for up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 or in which case, he should put his hands on his neck, and let his neck be equal, and take care of movement and jerking, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the nature and constitution of the powers.
de la brisure de la main	 of the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 Know that on the back of the hand and between the fingers there are few breaks, and only swelling occurs many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, then the patient should sit cross-legged, and sit upright in front of him evenly;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 then place his hand on the spread cloth, and let the caregiver straighten the broken bones, and let the surgeon align them well until they are joined properly.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 And place the poultice and the wool, if an abscess does not form, then put a needle according to the size of the wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 And if the break is around the waist near the belly of the foot, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken foot.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 And then bind it with a long cloth, and let the needle be as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 And if the fracture is in the finger, you must place a bandage on top and another underneath the limb, so that the hand remains open and straight; then bind the whole hand, and secure the ligament between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 And if the break is in one of the toes, if it is protruding, set it straight, as needed.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 And hold it with the sole of the foot, and if you see thus, place a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 And if the fracture is in the other finger, such as in the index or one of the others, place it equally, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 Or you bind all together in one bandage, which is better, or you place a splint on top, like in a pocket.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And take care in the restoration and arrangement of a hot abscess, and heal that which comes from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	 Of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 The thigh bone is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 And the restoration is as follows: one ligature on top of the fracture, and another beneath.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 And the patient lies on his back, then each assistant extends their ligature equally to their side;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 and this is when the fracture is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the thigh, let one of the ligaments be towards the knee, and the other ligament below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 And similarly if it is near the knee, then the ligature should be at the knee, and the extension downward.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 Then the surgeon should put the bone back in its natural shape with his two hands, and then apply the poultice, and bind it, if pus does not come out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 And if there is hot pus, leave it to drain first, then return to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 The incision is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 It is necessary that you wrap around the break II or III layers of thick bandages, leaving some excess, then turn the leg until the heel reaches the base of the big toe, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg, near the knee below, and the ends of the thread should come out on top.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 then turn the bandage around the leg and the thigh, then place splints on the break, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to make the bandage even, then begin to tightly bind III or IV turns around the break.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 And when more goes above the break, and less it holds;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 then place two fingers of the thread that you have passed between the leg and the thigh, and in it place three needles that are above, then go back below to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 and hold it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, since there comes neither abscess nor swelling nor anything similar.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address whatever comes, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then you must remove them, if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 and if it is not possible, then one must split the place, and pull strongly;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 and treat as we have said, until he is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 And sometimes the thigh is broken like one puts needles in it, as in the shoulder and in the arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 nevertheless, in such a restoration the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 And know that the hip is restored within 40 days or a little less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	 from the calf of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is only a split or a hole, and this happens with any wound, and without a wound, and everyone feels this.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 And the restoration is like one places equal to what is round on its two sides, so that it may be assembled together as one can.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 then apply the plaster, and place a round needle in it if you need to, and hold it as necessary, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as treating an abscess and similar.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 apply to each incident what is needed for it, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	 Of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 You should know that in the leg there are two bones. One is called by its right name "muscle," and the other is called "fibula.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 And there is the same kind of fracture as in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and all the operations are the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 And if the smaller bone is broken, it turns to the front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well.
et torne desoz.	 and turns downward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 Then apply traction, and set it evenly, and bind the splints evenly;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 however, if the fracture is ugly and there are several fragments, then the traction should be gentler and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 And align according to your power.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 And when you have completed your work, take two splints of wood that fit the leg from one side to the other, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee downwards.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 Then wrap two of them with a bandage on top and bottom, and bind it in the middle as well. At this point, the leg will not be able to bend to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 And some add a splint the length of the leg, and it is made of wood. They place the leg inside to prevent movement. This is done properly in the case of a fracture where there is a wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 And move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	 Of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 At the ankle, there is no breakage, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and the two feet, and only fragments are found in many cases.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 And if there is a break in the foot bones, and you see these bones surpassing each other, then put this patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and now put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 then put a poultice and bandages on top, and place beneath the foot a small board with two full nails, then fasten it firmly to the foot, after which you will wrap cloths around, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 Et lorsque trois jours ou quatre seront passés, alors délie le ligament, car tu trouveras les os égaux, qu'ils soient cassés ou disloqués.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 And if there are any of the fingers broken, set them, as we have said for the fingers of the hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 Then place a splint on the broken finger according to its length, and let it be a little wider, then place under the foot the table that I have mentioned, and bind it securely.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 And if there are two or three, or more, broken fingers, place on each finger a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the table under the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 And let it be standing at the head of the table, outside the foot's belly, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said before;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 And treat each incident as necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 of the bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 When the bone of a woman's natural structure is broken, have her sit with legs spread, then lean her towards the back, and let her be held from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 then fill the woman's natural cavity with cotton, and place therein as much as a fistful.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 then have the woman stand up, and lift her back bit by bit, and thus the cotton will jump, until it comes to the entrance of the vagina, and the bone will return with the fist.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or thereabouts.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 Then the fracture will be healed, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and tie a string to its neck, and insert the entire bladder into the vagina;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 Then breathe strongly into the reed until the bladder is inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 the fracture will heal on its own;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then fill it with cotton and leave it thus for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 And when the bone of a man's hand or a woman's is broken, restore it as we have said for the hipbone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 and these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who apply themselves and their skill, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 For the fracture indicates in several dispositions the correct way of restoration:
enten le donques.	 understand it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 Then wrap it with cloths around, and leave it for three days wrapped around, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	 with break and wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh bone or the shoulder bone or similar, that he be cauterized now, so that the cauteries we have spoken of testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the wound heals, then close it with vitriol, if you do not have anything else, then begin again to restore the breakage in that same hour, or that day, if abscesses like these do not come there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 And if abscesses like these come there, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause evil to happen there.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 And if the broken bone is protruding from the flesh exposed, then it is necessary that you place it lightly with your hands, with a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 And if the extension is not ready to be applied equally to your hands, then reset it with this iron instrument that has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the size of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 And for this reason it is necessary for the physician to take three or four [of these], according to what he needs in each fracture cure.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 And it should be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend at all when pressed upon the limb during your work, and it should be pointed in front, and thicker from the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 And it is called "palanche," because the curved head must be placed above the exposed end of the bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 and strikes once, so that it returns and both ends are equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the end of the bone until the instrument can hold it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then cut with an appropriate instrument, either a scalpel or scissors, according to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 then remove that which remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 Do this until it is in its place, then moisten a cloth in black stiptic wine, and cleanly if it is in summer;  /> ici le couvres d’un drapeil, et puis de laine, et puis de bande, et puis de laigature de fil.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 And do not put any ointment or other oil-based substance on the wound, lest it cause decay and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 Then apply bandages after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not strained with the fracture;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And often the foolish physicians do this, and cause the patient to die or be consumed by decay.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 And let the strain be gentler and softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then do not put bandages on it.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 but wrap around it, in place of needles, hard rags, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one day or two enlarging the wound in the place, then remove everything you have put on at once, and apply a healing salve to the wounds, such as tetrapharmakon salve and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 And you should unbind the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 And the limb should be prepared in such a way that the wound drains easily downwards.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 And if many days pass and it cannot heal but rather breaks open again, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a tent, and remove all the loose pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if an abscess or other form of corruption occurs there, you must cure it according to what is said in the previous chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 And when the bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the thigh or shoulder bones and other similar large members, do not extract it, for many times death results; but leave it until it rots.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 perhaps it will fall out after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 and if you cannot, leave it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 of the wounds that come upon the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 We often see health return after the fracture, especially when it is near the joint. It is a ugly sight to behold the shape of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 Take care, therefore, if the nose is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 if you administer styptic medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, take one of these things or all together, and mix them with styptic wine or plenty of egg or honey;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 and place them on the nose in cloths, bind it well, and do not release it for many days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 and then remove it, and begin another, until the swelling is gone;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 or bind it on a well-made piece of lead;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 for the property of lead is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 And if the swelling has already turned to hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut off the top of it, and make the excess apparent.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 or cut it with some scissors until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 Of the limb which is weak after the cure
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 When the fracture of the bone is healed, and afterwards the limb remains weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 because one reason is that it was bound too tightly and was not bound as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 or because there were too many bindings and the nourishment could not reach the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 or for excessive application of ointments;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 Or for too great a movement, not at all in its hour;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 Or because he has little blood in his body, he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and make the body tender, until the blood is abundant in him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 and give him a bath, and bring him joy and cheerfulness;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 then place pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws great nourishment to it, and irrigate it often with warm water, until the nourishment flows into the limb.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 of a twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 When the limb is twisted after the treatment, and the broken bone is exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 if not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb completely, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 and these works are blamed, and great evils come from it, and perhaps death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are recent, they must be softened with hot water, or cooked with softening herbs, such as mallow leaves, roots, mullein, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 and make a softening plaster, like well-made diachylon, and take the marrow of mallow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and apply the plaster on top; ・
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 You take fat figs, and grind them with colocynth juice, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes dislocation is removed by continuously and extensively rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And the member should be gently moved every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 And if the swelling is hardened like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut down to the bone with a sharp, light incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And put cautery and poultice on the wound.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 Dislocation occurs when a joint is displaced from its place, so it cannot move, and the limb is deformed, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 When dislocation happens to someone, they must immediately be brought back to their senses.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 For if one delays, the place swells, and perhaps it is only barely reset in place.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 Therefore, one should not move it at the time when it is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 often causes spasm and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 nevertheless, when this happens, have the patient bled, then leave it alone until the abscess has subsided.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Then soak the limb in hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as it comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	 of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 It sometimes happens that the jaws are dislocated together, and the dislocation of both is according to two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 or they are a little removed from their places, and softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the chest, and the saliva runs from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 When the dislocation is small, it returns through many positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 And if it is whole and complete, then you must quickly reset it, and do not delay at all;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 And in such a manner that the assistant should hold the patient's head, and the practitioner should insert one of his fingers into the pocket of the mouth at the root of the mandible's dislocation, if the dislocation is of two parts.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 And let the other two fingers be outside, to balance.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 And instruct the patient to relax his jaw and move it in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 And the healer balances it until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 And if the joints are stiff, whether it be both jaws together, then soak them in hot water and oil until they loosen slightly.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 But do not force the joint, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 And when they are equally realigned and the patient's mouth closes well without loosening, then place moistened bandages on a poultice made of rose oil and wax, and bind it lightly with soft bandages.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 and let the patient sleep on their back, with their head resting between two pillows, so that it is not moved to the right or to the left, nor should they try to open their mouth, but let them eat light food, until the pain subsides, and the jaws are sewn shut;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 and then let him chew lightly what he wants, without trying to open his mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is well sewn and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 And if the two jaws cannot be set correctly within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and sudden faintness follow, and perhaps diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 And when you see that, know that it is a dangerous situation;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	 of the jaw
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 The jaw cannot dislocate from the inside or from the end of it, and sometimes it is dislocated downwards, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies frequently on their back, with their arms extended;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 And then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 Then apply the poultice and bandage, and bind it tightly.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 And the head that is towards the knife cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 If not, and if it dislocates even once, reset it to its place, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then apply the poultice and bind it tightly with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest until healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And in the same way is the shoulder joint reset when it has dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 Know that the shoulder is only dislocated in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 One of which is that it dislocates towards the lower part of the armpit; xspace
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 And the second is at the part of the foot;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 And perhaps it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 And it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 And many times it dislocates downwards towards the ankle, especially in those who have little flesh, for to them it jumps quickly.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 In those who have enough flesh, it hardly jumps and hardly returns.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 And it happens to some men through a blow or break, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 Therefore, you must test it until you are certain of it.
et adonques encomence la cure.	 And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 And the dislocation is known when it is downwards towards the ankle, and make a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear difference;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 And the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor make any movement;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 And also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly under the armpit.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And this manner of dislocation is not easy to reset when it is new, or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 And the way to do it is for the attendant to lift the patient's hand up, then place your fingers under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upward to its place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 And the minister raises his hand, stretches it upward, then places it below.
si venra hastanment.	 It will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 And if it does not come as we have said in fewer days afterward, then the patient must be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 And the assistant should gently soften and soothe, as with a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and mallow in water, and it should be administered.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 Then let the patient be made to lie on his back, and under the cushion place a cloth of wool, not too soft nor too hard. Then let the healer place his heel upon the cloth, and lift the chief of the sound shoulder vigorously, and pull the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 And another minister shall dye the patient's head, so that it does not move downward;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 that shoulder returns immediately, and if you see this, then reset it in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 And it is necessary for you to have a man who is taller than the patient be present.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 And he should stand straight by the patient's side, and push his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit up, so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And another minister shall pull the patient's hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too light, then put with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 Or one can also reset it in this other manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 And that is to fix a long piece of wood into the ground, so that its head be as round as a pestle, and neither too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 Then let it be placed under the patient, but that he has soft cloths above him, and the patient should be standing along the length of the beam.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 Then let his hand be stretched downward on the other side strongly, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 Take a brand of two spans long and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded to enter deeply under the heel, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 Then place soft cloths on top of the head of the beam, so that the beam does not hurt the patient, then put it under the heel of the patient.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 And stretch his arm along the length of the beam, and place the shoulder on the beam, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on one step of a ladder, and let the body hang downward on the other side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 The joint swells now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 And when it is inside, in whatever manner, you must place under the bottom a round piece of wool, then apply the plaster prepared with flour from the mill, with incense and egg white, over all the shoulder and around it, then tie it firmly under the bottom, and twist the ligature over the plaster, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hand remain so.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 And it is necessary that he eats little, until the member is comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 and then eats more after 5 or 7 days, and moves it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is moved out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply three cauteries to it, as it is said in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not stay in place, and he cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 The dislocation that is towards the foot and ankles, or from behind, is done by pushing and stretching of hands, and another method is used there.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal until he is cured.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	 De la dislocation du coude
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and at points returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 And if it has dislocated from all sides, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, because one sees and feels it well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 And it dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the sick member with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 And you must reset it before any abscess develops there, because if an abscess were to form, it would be difficult to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 It is worse than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and perhaps death may follow.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 And the restoration is such that when it is possible to bring it back, you stretch his hand with your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 and his arms are spread, and the hands of the mirror according to the cut around, above and below, and push the joint together at its fingers or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and strike with the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 and two assistants extend the arm, and hold it in place with two hands so that it does not move during extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 and when the mirror has rejoined the joint to his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint strongly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And when it is in place, apply a dry dressing with some egg white, hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the patient's neck, leaving it for a few days before releasing it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 And if you see that the joint does not hold well, then renew the dressing and the bandage, leaving it for some days until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	 Then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 And if the patient feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, pressing until the pain subsides.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 Or place a greasy sheepskin over the joint, leaving it for one day and one night, then remove it and have him enter the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 And when he sweats, wipe the joint quickly, then put the ice back on, and then enter the bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this two or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 And if you see [pus], put moist, heated cow dung with butter on it, and keep it covered.
si revenra a sa disposition.	 It will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	 The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The joint of the hand is dislocated, and the relocation is lighter than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 However, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the very hour that it is dislocated, before the place swells or a hot abscess forms. ¨
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 And the resetting is done by placing the injured hand on a table, and having the assistant extend the hand, and the physician places his hand equally, so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 Yet, you must check if it is properly in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 Then have the patient put the back of his hand on a table during extension and flexion.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and the physician should place their hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 If it returns now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If not, apply soothing poultices to the affected area, and leave it thus without reattempting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 And if he cannot tolerate it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the joint will remain dislocated.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 And it does not harm the patient in any way except that while the hand is wet, he cannot grasp anything at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 Then know that the nerves or vessels are cut.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 And when the hand is in place, apply the poultice we have mentioned, then restrain it and leave for V days, then release it and let it be thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he cannot move it well and there is some stiffness, soak it in hot water and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the wrist.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 Then stretch out the fingers and push the dislocation back towards you until it returns, then support the base of the finger and bend it towards the side where it is dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 And let it be for two days, and then make it equal on the third day.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 And apply a bandage as we have said, and unbind it by day, and make it move, and reapply the bandage at night.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this frequently until it is healed, and do the same if it is dislocated in the wrist of the hand, and act as you did before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 And do the same when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 When the shoulder blade or neck is dislocated, and there are multiple dislocations, then there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 And the signs are that the excretion comes out without will or control, and many times some members are softened, such as the two thighs or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 And often the spine moves in four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 that which moves to the back is called "gibbousness":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 The treatment for this is that you should reverse it if the gibbousness has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 If not, there will be no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancients used to describe the methods of healing in great words, where there is not always much benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 But I have summarized it according to my intention, and I have created instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that in the jaundice which comes to the chest beforehand, neither intelligence nor health has it;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 And likewise that which comes directly into the two ribs, and one cannot cure except for that which specifically comes to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 And it is that the patient should be lying on his back in one equal place, and have restraints under him, so that he does not injure himself.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 Then drive a log into the ground at the head strongly, and another at the feet, and tie one cord beneath the patient's shoulders, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 And two assistants know the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two logs.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 And let them be well tied, the logs as we have said, and the surgeon places his palms firmly on the spine until it heals.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 And if it does not heal with this treatment, then take a table three fathoms long, and place it under the bed, and let the patient lie on his side, and push the end of the table under the bed, then place the middle of the table on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 And let the surgeon place his feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if you see it, do the same for the vertebra that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 And it is that you place two faggots at the head of the patient, one arm's length long, and towards the feet, two others, and there should be between each faggot, above and below, a hand's breadth in length.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 And let there be one hole in each faggot, where the rope passes through, and let the faggots be firmly planted in the ground, so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 And between each two faggots there should be one turning faggot, on which the rope turns, and in the two turnings there should be two small faggots of a hand's breadth in length, to turn the rope.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And then tie the rope that is among the horses to the rope towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other rope, and each of the helpers turns his rope all the length of the rope, and the master places the spine equally as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when it is healed, place a desiccating plaster with an abundance of egg, then the wool, and then the bandage of a tablet of three fingers in length, which should cover the place of the yellowish color and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a thread, as we have said, and the patient should use subtle nourishment until he is cured.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 And if anything comes at the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the bandage that we have mentioned before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 And sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower spine of the back, and it is thought that this is dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 And this is the bone that opens, which is why one should not have presumption about it.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	 of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 Know that in the joints of the hip and in the joints of the shoulder, only dislocation occurs, and not as in other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 And the hip joint is dislocated in four parts.
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 within and without, and before and behind
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 and more within than elsewhere, and rarely dislocated in front or back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the sign of its dislocation within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee opens more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his knee as much.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And it is the place which is near an abscess that is hot, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 And the sign of those to whom it happens as a result is that this event is contrary to the previous ones.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And the sign of the one to whom it happens in front, is that he stretches his leg according to the accomplishment;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 nevertheless, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot go forward, and holds his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he steps on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 And the sign of those to whom it happens afterwards is that they cannot extend their knee or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in the place below the hips.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 The remedy for this kind of dislocation is that you return it if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, then there is no treatment; ‌
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 and he should not have any presumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 And in that which is the recent dislocation, and this is of the four types of dislocation, so hasten that you turn the joint, and push it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 perhaps it will return [to its original place], and no other treatment is necessary.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or one strap that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 and another assistant should extend his hand on top in such a manner that he places his hands underneath the soles, then pulls with a soft strap around the thigh;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 and another holds the end of the strap;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 and they extend upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 This manner of extension is common to four similar things, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If not, then one must apply care to its likeness.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 When the dislocation is in the hip, it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the ligament on the root of the thigh, and the place that is below the ankle, then extend the ligament upwards towards the ankle and towards the shin.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 Then take other assistants his arms, and embrace the thick part of the sick thigh, and extend it strongly with force.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 then it will return to its place now.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 And this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 And if you cannot set it in the manner we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligature above the two ankles, and above the two knees, and let the diseased leg be stretched two fingers' width more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 then let them hang from a pole over the head, and let them be about two arms' length above the ground.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 then command one attendant to grasp the thigh above the joint, and let another attendant hang with the patient, who grasps the thigh firmly, for the joint will now return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 And when the dislocation is over, let the patient lie down as we have said for one who has paralysis, and tighten the ligature properly around the diseased leg, and also around the foot.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 Then put two tapers, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert a taper between the thighs of the patient in this manner;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And let it be surrounded by moistened cloths so that the patient is not burned, then let each assistant approach him, and the doctor align the dislocation with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, lay him on the table and press as we have said in the dislocation, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 And when the dislocation is forward, then it is necessary to straighten the injured leg quickly, as I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And let the doctor place his weight on the injured ankle, then press with the other hand and straighten down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 And if the dislocation is backward, then it should not be straightened downward or lifted from the ground, but rather the patient should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said about lying on two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 And let it be on its face, and the ligaments extended as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 And it will be ready when the patient extends his legs, and they are equal.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 Then join the thighs, and place a poultice, and restrain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 And rest for three days or four, then dislocate it again, and place the poultice on top.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 And if you see that they are equal, then restrain as before, and leave for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Then dislocate it again, and have the patient walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	 Of knee dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 that is to say, inward, outward, and backward.
et ne desalue point devant.	 and does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not bend at the thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 And the restoration of all (three types) is that you make the patient sit upright and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 Then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee strongly.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 And another assistant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he can bend his leg at the thigh easily. xspace
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 And place the plaster on it, and bind the leg to the thigh, and keep them together strongly for three days or four, then unbind it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And let the patient not try to walk until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not perfectly straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	 of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 The ankles are sometimes moved and sometimes fully dislocated, inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 And the sign is that the ankle is swollen and protrudes towards the dislocated part.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 The reduction should be gentle, and it should be stretched gently with his hands when only slightly moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 And when it is completely dislocated, you must have the patient sit upright, and have one helper hold on to the leg above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot upwards nicely.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 And do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 if it returns, that is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 but if not, then begin the work again, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and drive a stake firmly into the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around it, so that it does not wound the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 then let one of the assistants hold the thigh, and another assistant extend the foot with his hands or with a strap that he ties above the ankle.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 then let each assistant extend equally, and the stake should always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when stretching.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 Then let the doctor reset the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when it is well set, then place the bandage and cloths on top, and bind tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch out for the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ligature is not too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage loosens, bind again;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 then unbind on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 and if he walks before this time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if a boil comes here, you must soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	 two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 When the fingers are dislocated, they must be gently stretched without strain, and this is a light task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 Et si la dislocation est dans une articulation du dos ou du pied, il faut que tu fasses asseoir le malade sur une surface plane ou sur une table droite, et mets ton pied sur ce qui dépasse de ces articulations, puis presse fortement avec ton pied jusqu'à ce qu'il revienne à sa place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 Et quand il est de nouveau aligné et que rien ne dépasse, alors place sous la plante du pied une planche avec deux chevilles. Ensuite, serre fortement et laisse reposer pendant trois jours, puis desserre.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et fais-le reposer jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 Lorsqu'une blessure accompagne la dislocation et que l'on veut la réparer, il arrive souvent que le patient meurt.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 If you are not skilled in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, do not be presumptuous in the cure; and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and patient, do not be bold;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 Use at first things that calm a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you do not see hope for health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And when you see hope, then reset the limb in place immediately, before the hot abscess comes.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 And when the limb is in place, administer things that calm a hot abscess, and treat the wound as needed with dried onions.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 And if there is also a fracture with the dislocation and small bones are displaced, remove them and do as we have said for simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 And beware of entering into a state of fear, as I have said, for it is worthless according to your Creator, and for the skill of your weapon and your body.
