O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its completion, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its clarifications.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 And because the work of hands is lacking in our region and is foreign from beginning to end, the knowledge has perished and decayed, and nothing remains of it except for small descriptions in the books of the ancients which have been changed by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 And from this come errors and vanities, and intentions are closed off, and knowledge is distanced.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 Or it seems to me that I wish to bring life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation, declaration, and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And I will bring together the forms of the fire tongs for cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 And it is necessary for those who undertake this to be proficient in the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so that they know the arrangement of the members, and their shapes and connections and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of holes, and the movement and rest of the veins, and the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 And therefore Hippocrates said that the name with the name is very much, but with the work it is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	 and likewise in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 In the beginning of this book we tell you that if one is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things, let him beware lest he fall into error and harm men;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 So I have seen many times that some who engage in this science abandon their knowledge and judgment through experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 For I saw a foolish physician who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and also cut the arteries of the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 causing so much blood to come out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 And I saw another physician who removed a stone from an old man, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 and he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well if one cut it off he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 And I saw another physician who took into his care a duke of our land whose leg was broken and had an open wound; ‌
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 and the ignorant physician, using strong force, sets the fracture on the wound of the stars, leaving no trace of flesh on the wound, and leaves it thus unfinished.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 and he ordered that she not be released at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 and so it remained until the leg was completely swollen, along with the foot, which became gangrenous.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I was called to come to him, and I hurried to go and release the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 and when I had released it, she found peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But still, corruption was already established in the limb, and it could not be healed.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 and the corruption did not stop spreading through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 And I saw another physician who pierced an abscess and then ignited it due to the wickedness of his practice.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 Because when a cancer is purged of black bile, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corruption can be completely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 Et pour cela, très cher fils, il vous est nécessaire de savoir que l'œuvre des mains est divisée en deux parties :
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 et oevre ou n'est pas de peril, ne de danger.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 Et ou il n'a mie paor ne peril, mais ou il est biaus et saluables.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 car mult es garceus qui n'ont pas l'art, mais se font savoir, et font plusors mauvaises oevres, einsi comme il n’i aient mie, por ceu que il n'entendent mie les choses.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 et li pueples vous aimera por vos bons fais, si que nus ne puet faire mesque bonnes oevres.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 And let the frightening diseases go away from serious illness;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 And remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 Galen says in some of his warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 “Do not take on the care of serious illnesses, lest you be called a foolish physician.”
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 The first chapter is about fire cautery and hot medicinal cautery, and this chapter is arranged from the head to the feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 And of the shapes of the instruments, and the handling of the cautery, and of all that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cups [for bloodletting], and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things. ️
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 And this chapter is organized and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 And it is organized from the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 Thus, as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to speak of the quality of the help and of the harmfulness of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I say that the qualities of aid, and of harm, is the longest speech and the most subtle science and secret response;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 And on this many of the wise have spoken, and they agreed upon it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 And I am ashamed of my words, for I fear length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I say that cautery universally helps all complexions where there is matter, except two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 That is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 In a hot and dry constitution together with matter, some have said that fire cautery is of great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 And others say the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 That fire cautery does not benefit diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat hot diseases by heat, nor dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 And those who say the opposite claim that fire cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that occur in the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 For I have found it true by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 Nevertheless, no one should interfere with it except for those who have experienced it, and know through long practice the chapter on fire cautery, and the diversity of human constitutions, and the predispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and the passage of time;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 des autres complexions n’avons nous point peur, principalement en maladies froides et humides.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 And know, son, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and more beneficial than cautery with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 For fire is simple, and does not spread to any other member except the one that is burned, unless it can.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 The hot medicines spread from one member to another and cause serious illness in the affected member;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 And perhaps kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The fire, due to its power and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 And this I have found through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, which is based on the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 And for this reason I apologize for the length of my speech, because it is not pleasing to me that I should reveal the secret which lies in fire and the quality of the work, how it removes diseases from the body, as the philosophers say when they demonstrate.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 Or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prietens.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harm that occurs is suppressed by the help of cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 and especially if the cautery is necessary to alleviate pain quickly, before the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 And never think of it like this, dear son, as foolish doctors do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 because the disease that is healed by cautery does not recur;
et il le dient ensi;	 and they say it like this;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 but it is not as they think, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the temperament, and dries up the humors which cause pain, and is more effective than medicine for its quick action, and for the power of its work and its dominance.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And it is possible that the illness may come sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the place of the disease and its power.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 And the superfluous substances are gathered in him by the consumption of food and similar things, unless there are cauteries administered in places where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	 but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and that is true.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 but they do not believe that cauteries are worthwhile after medication, but their intentions are false; and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in some illnesses and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 The ancients said that cauteries of gold instruments are more beneficial than those of iron, and they only said this because of the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 and they said that the place of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it is true in some men;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 and gold cauteries are more beneficial than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 And yet when you heat a gold instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 and if one heats it too much;
si font au feu;	 it melts in the fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 And thus there are many hindrances.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 And for this reason, we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that it may be easier to find the path.
dou cautere olivaire	 of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 This cautery is used for moisture and coldness of the brain, and there are two types done for this reason: one caused by an illness called "soda," and another caused by many humors descending from the head to the eyes, ears, and due to excessive dreaming, toothache, sore throat, and especially all illnesses that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a solvent medicine, cleansing three or four times, according to what the patient's strength, age, and habit allow.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 And then make the patient’s head bald.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his knees;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes.
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 And there, where your fingers will be, cause the blood to flow first; then heat the cautery which is called "olivare," and this is its form.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And place it on the designated spot with ink, and make descending and constricting your hand little by little while turning;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 then lift your hand immediately, and return to the spot if you see the bone move slightly;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 and if you do not see it, then begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 after that take a little bit of silk, and put inside soft cotton, and place it on the spot, and let it remain for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 then apply a moistened cloth in butter;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 and leave it until the burn is healed;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmacon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And it was said by the ancients, that when the wound remains open longer, it drains more.
et por ce si aide mues.	 and therefore such movements are helpful.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 And some of them said that one should let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burned, and then scrape off what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And others say that one should let the cautery stay so long, and push it in so hard that one digs into the bone as wide as a spindle that women put in their distaffs, so that the humors may be moved out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 and one should let the wound remain open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 afterwards, one should cure and sew it up.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every way, except for certain people where there is fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 and it seems to me that I should leave it alone.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 car the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 and likewise when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and beneficial for me, I use this work together with healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 When chronic pain comes to the whole head and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and of purging the head and oils and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 and if one makes the cautery that we have said before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 Take care if the head of the patient is very strong by nature, and if it is too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Then cauterize under that cautery with a little bit that we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 Then make a cautery on top of each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place that is called "vessels".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 And this is the place where one applies cupping glasses.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 And lift your hand so that you do not see the bone at all:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 The patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 And the cauteries of the horns should be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	 of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When a sudden pain comes in one part of the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the eye is purged by purging medicines, and other cures that I have mentioned in the division of illnesses are done, and none of this helps:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, that is to say with liquid medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 The cautery with liquid medicine is done by taking a cup of aloes, removing the bark and pouring the cup into two cups of water. Then make an incision in the place where the pain is such that you can respond to the aloe juice under the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 and when it has been applied, then bind it well and leave it thus for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 And then unbind it and draw out the aloe juice, and leave the wound thus for two days or three.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 Then apply a cloth soaked in butter on top until the pustule emerges.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the treatment of swelling until it is healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 and if you see this, make some of the burning medicines that I have written in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery of whatever shape it has.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a nail with a hole for a pin, and in the middle there is a small opening.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the iron a little lightly, until half the thickness of the cure is burnt.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 and lift your hand so that the part outside does not burn, and let there be an abundance of blood flow out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 Afterwards, place cotton in vinegar, and put it on the spot for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then I place moistened cotton in butter, and then cure the swollen area until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cutting," do so at the tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	 of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 When you cure a migraine as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the previously mentioned cautery of medicine and iron does not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cutting" until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 and thus on the painful place a line of half two in length, and remove your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cut the artery and do not come to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 And guard against the jawbone that moves when eating, and the nerve should not be regarded so that it does not move or cause spasm in the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery when it is cut, where there is great fear in the cutting, and likewise for those who are unfamiliar with it and are not students or experienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 And leave the work halfway;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it belongs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient can endure it, cauterize in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 And if you see, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction, along with a cautery that has two knives.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 of the earache from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When there is ear pain from cold, and one has tried medicinal solutions and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "puncture", of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 Then prick all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 And let there be ten pricks around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterwards, treat the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	 Of the mouth's torment
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 The torture that must be cured by cautery comes only from those caused by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 And do not perform cautery on similar ones that come from drying out or numbness of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When you cure this kind of torture that comes from fever of the liver and purgings of the head and gargling, and it is not effective, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 one at the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third between the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and have him cauterized at the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 and let the cautery remain until half of the head is burnt;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And it resembles the knife that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary for the knife to be a little larger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after curing the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 When the apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the place called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 And let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	 of lead
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 For this disease, one must give the patient large doses of purgative pills to cleanse the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 then wash the patient's head thoroughly, and place on the back of his neck a mustard plaster as described in the treatise on plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 and this is the way to apply the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 If you do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If he is healed in this way, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 and if he is not, let him make three cauteries on the head, descending to the neck, with two fingers' width between each cautery;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 and treat it as the others, and if you see a swelling, and the patient is tolerant, make one cautery in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if necessary, two more on the two horns, and care for it until it is healed.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 And let the cautery be called an "olivare," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	 of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hair and what we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 after shaving the patient's head, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is able to endure it, and the disease is severe, then make four cauteries on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 And let it burn until the most of the heart (wound) is burnt, and then lift your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 Aprés le cure tant qu'il soit sanéz, et soit li cautères qui est apelez "olivare" que nos avons devant dit.
de l’epilempsie	 of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 The epileptics should not use the cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and willing to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If the patient is a child, perform the subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 When due to melancholy the superfluities or corrupt moisture and thick phlegm are present, then use the cautery of hot irons as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And if due to melancholy the superfluities are inclined towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that will cleanse his brain according to what was previously mentioned in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After lifting the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 then make a good linen tourniquet, like a circle, and place it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 and let the patient sit cross-legged, and be well held from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 then bring the linen cloth, and use old sheep butter for it; ›
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 and heat with gentle fire, so that the two may be poured into it without harming.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 then empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and do this to the patient once every week with other good treatment until he is cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 In performing cautery, make several incisions throughout the entire cautery process.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This method of moist heat balances the brain equally; › ›
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 And then apply cotton soaked in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	 from the fear of pain
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 When fear first comes to the eyes due to the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 After that, instruct him to turn his head back, and make a cautery in the middle of his head, and make two cauteries on both temples if the descent is in both eyes together, or one if it is in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 and cut all the veins and arteries that are beneath the skull, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temples.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 And beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, staunch it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 And I will teach you in the extraction of the artery and at the incision, the precaution with which you will staunch it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 And sometimes one performs cautery or hot iron underneath the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	 from the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When tears from the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the outside of the head;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 And if it is seen that this is from cold phlegmatic excesses, then make the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of the eye, descending to the eyes.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 I make a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two hot iron cauteries underneath the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 And if more is needed, then cauterize it wisely above the eyebrows with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 from the body tears inside the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not benefit from it at all, then give the patient three nights of cooked barley.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 And after the king, the head, and he performs a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped burn.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 And makes two cauteries of the type called "clavilis" on the two sore spots, a little below the eyebrows.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 And beware of the artery so that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 To what form here is this?
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 And if you see this, make two cauteries on the two sore spots as long as the sore spots are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And do not leave your hand there except until a third of the skin is burnt, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	 The hair that stings the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eye is turned toward the eyelid and pricks the eye, and in this case one makes cauteries in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 This is to say by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 Or instruct the patient that he should let the hairs grow long and even.
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 And if they prick at their base, let him hold his eyes still so that they do not move until they are born.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 When they are born and are even, then put the patient in your health.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 After that, on the skin of the eyes place a figure that is like the leaves of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs. PERTY
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then put a piece of cotton soaked in egg white and powdered pepper on the eye, then heat the cauterizer which has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 After you have cauterized on the face where you have punctured a little at a time many times, let the heart be burned in that spot.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the skin drawn back, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the burn is gone.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 And if after this the hairs come back and the skin is softened then begin the cautery on that same spot again, just as you did before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 and if the hairs are lacking, then cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural place, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 The burning medical cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even. Then make a form of paper in the shape of the myrtle leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 then take French soap and alive coal, each one third, and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the form you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelids.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 And if the disease is in one eye only, then one should work on that one, and if in both, likewise.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 and place cotton soaked in egg white under the eye.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 and the patient's eye should be in your healthy hand, and place your finger on top of the medication, and press one time and lift all the times that the patient feels burning from the medication, for they feel burning as if by fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 And when the biting is over, then lift the skin with a needle, and look to see if the skin is raised as it would be by the constriction of fire or by an incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 If not, then apply more medicine to the place until your workings are equal and your eyes focused.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place a piece of butter-soaked cotton on the burned area until the heart of the burn is cooled; afterwards, treat the wound with ointments called "diaphenes" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you need to be very careful with your work so that not even a little bit of the medicine gets into your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 And if the skin becomes soft afterwards and the hair pricks inwards, then begin the treatment again on that place which is softened by the skin, just as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the treatment until he is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 and this is the shape of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and in smallness, according to this should be your constraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 and may not be answered the right way to him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When you cure a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures do not benefit, then it is necessary that you make a cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Instruct the patient to place his head in your hand;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 and let the assistant hold the patient's head between his hands in such a way that it does not move, nor remove his head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 then place moist cotton soaked in egg white or juice of parsley on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 then heat the cautery which is such:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 and it is carved at the tip like the shape of a peacock feather, along with the handle being the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If you see it, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see it, let it be like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 But nonetheless, this one that is chosen is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After pressing the fistula if it is open, extract the pus and dry it out;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 And if it is closed, then incise it, and draw outwards from below.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 Then place a very hot cauterizer on top, and hold your hand on the cauterizer near the nose below the eye, so that your hand does not slip.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 And put the cauterizer in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you proceed with the cautery to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 If not, then begin the cautery again once more, or another one if you need to, and leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 after which he puts on a moistened cotton swab with butter, and the care of the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, then he puts on a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 and the king according to what he would find in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a manner of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 Cut into an abscess, and open the place;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 then put into the slit one subtle mixture of this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 and make it in the quantity of one third of a pound;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 and hold your hand firmly on the mixture, and let the patient not move at all, until the melted lead runs to his eye.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 and it is necessary that one puts on the patient's eye a cotton swab moistened in egg white or water.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 The arrow sinks so deep into the place of the fistula, and the vein by a marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then one must administer a piercing to the nose, and return the fistula to the body of the nose according to what is proper in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	 from cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 Much often happen crevices in lips called "hair", and likewise in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 When you treat these crevices as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 And quickly put it in those crevices until it reaches the bottom.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the place of the wound until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 Of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the mouth, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, afterwards it causes putrefaction and rot and becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 and you cure it as we have said in sections, and it does not help at all:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 then it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the size of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 after the opening or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron goes to the bottom of it, and in the rear place.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this once or twice after the treatment of what we have said for treatment, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 and if it is treated thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	 from the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that does not work, then place the patient's head in your lap; ︎
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 after heat the cautery whose form will come here next in such a way that you place a reed on the tooth; ︎ ︎
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 and put inside the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 After, lift your hand and renew the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 After, let the patient fill his mouth with salted water, and hold it for an hour until it is rich in juices.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 And in this manner the tooth that was moving is thus made firm, and the softened gum is restricted, and the moisture that was corrupting it dries up.
de la dolor des dens	 of tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 When toothache comes from coldness, whether it is true or imagined, and medical treatments are not effective, then there is need for cautery in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 And cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 Cautery with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and put the tip on an iron or copper spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 After take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent (i.e., a needle or similar instrument), and moisten it with boiled butter, and place it quickly on the aching tooth, and hold it until it is cooled down;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 And thus it often happens that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see it so wet, put cold butter on wool and cotton, and place it on the aching tooth, and apply hot iron until the fire reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 The cautery with fire is such that you should take an iron or copper rod, and let it be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 After heating the cautery, from which the form will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during this cautery, and then rinse strongly;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and it is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 And make a cautery with whatever head you want, according to what you have power [to do];
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 and this is the form of the caustic [substance]:
des scrophules	 of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 When the scrofulae are of cold and moist phlegm, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the caustic made from what follows is the form, and let it have two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side of the cautery; 》
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 and place the hot caustic on the abscess once, or twice as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 And if the abscess is small, apply a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it there for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 And place a damp cloth soaked in butter over it until the burn is gone;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 afterwards, treat the area with onion and honey until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the dog:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When moisture prevails over the channels of the brain, and especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged by purgative medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 afterwards, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go as far as the throat, but only a little way.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 Afterwards, make another cautery at the junction of the neck with the top of the spine, and let this cautery be called "clavicle," from which we have the form before;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat the place as we have said before, until it is healed.
de la toust	 of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 When all and the disease of the stomach are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or heat, and the disease is chronic, then make two cauteries on the stomach in nearby places.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 And another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 And let the cautery which is called "clavicle" be according to the shape that was said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 And if you see fit, make a cautery by pricking the entire cautery which is called "point" in the form that is shown here before for the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And let there be as many as thirty points, or however many are needed.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the area according to what has been said before, and let the cautery be at three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 And because these cauteries are lighter, therefore you make them in three doses.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 Afterwards, instruct the patient to lie on his back and on his side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 afterwards lift up the heart which is inside with your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has two nerves where it looks like this:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 and cauterize the heart until you pierce it to the side, and there will be four cauteries together with the figure of the cautery;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 and because of this, the cautery is made with the three-nerved cautery, so that the figures of the cauterization are six cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the three-nerved cautery:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 Afterward, place the cautery on the surface and grind it with silk.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 Afterward, make the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated on top, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery, or make many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 Because the joint is healed and the moisture is removed and the patient is cured.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture to the point that it draws from his complexion, and he has many catarrhs, and in the usual manners of treatment he does not improve at all, then it is necessary for the patient to be turned on his back, and extend his legs and his hands. xspace
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 After this, make three cauteries: one under the heel of the foot by the quantity of a thumb, making the entire cautery flat, and two cauteries on each side such that the shape of the cauteries forms three angles, with enough space between them that they do not touch each other when they drip pus.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 and the cauteries should be so deep that they pierce the two parts of the heart, and the shape of the cauteries should be according to this form without touching each other.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 And if you see someone cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and pressing on the stomach at this point according to the quantity that you see of it;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Après le cure de la cure que nous avons eue devant, tant qu'il soit sané.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 When it comes to the liver, pain comes from cold and moisture and great flatulence, so much so that it is removed from its natural complexion by excesses; xspace
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 and the patient is cured of that which we have said in sections, and it does not benefit him at all, then the patient must be purged on his liver;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 And make a sign of three cauteries in this form and shape and quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondrium, where the ribs of the man come.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too much on all the cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 And only burn half of the cautery, and let the patient stand on his feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 And if he cannot, then let him be lying down, extending his legs and raising his arms;
et c’est li forme:	 And this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 And if you wish, then cauterize these cauteries with a surgical instrument, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn all the way through, for you would dry out the entire body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And let it not reach boiling point, for the heart is very delicate in that spot, and you should know this well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain, but not too intense;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 And if it is in the membrane, the pain is madness-inducing.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 And then, when this treatment should be performed by physicians, the patient must lie on their back.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And then sign the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a grape, as shown in this figure:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 And he cauterizes with a cautery until the heart is burnt, and it reaches up to the spleen, so that all the flesh is burnt out.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until he is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 and it is not fitting that anyone use this cautery except one who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and through whom many of these diseases have been cured at some point.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can boldly work, yet it seems to me that it is better to leave him alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	 of the fire brand for treating wounds
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 The ancients said that one must make plasters with cauteries of the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your thumb.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 And the wetness with oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the collarbone and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the part that is under the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning slightly behind;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 And one cautery in the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the ribs of the chest opposite the cautery that is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 And do not press with your hand, but make it openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 And some ancients said that some people use a fire-cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And suddenly, a pain outside, as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work there is fear that the patient dies immediately or a fistula develops which cannot be healed.
de la mice	 of the bladder
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 When you treat the bladder disease as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 Of which there is a manner such that you should make three or four cauterizations, in rows according to the length of the vein, following the pattern of the liver cautery that we have mentioned before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 and do not press your hand over the entire cauterization, and let the patient be lying on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 and another manner of cauterization is that you heat the double-pronged cautery, as we have shown in the case of shoulder dislocation;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 and lift the skin that is above the vein, or let the patient's hand come towards the left, and let the elevation of the skin be according to the size of the body, and the cauterizations should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 After that, he pushes in the two burning nerves so that the heart is pierced from the other side, and then draws them out through the cautery, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 And if you see it, cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 Après le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens,
de ydropisie	 Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Fire cautery is not suitable for a patient with dropsy, except in the manner known as "ascytis".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 When you cure according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the bladder, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the chest;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 And let the cautery be very close to the heart's tip.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 After that, leave the cautery open to release pus for a long time, and do not neglect the patient's care after the cautery;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 And healing would hasten, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the one we previously showed;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 And the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as shown before.
de l’enfleure des piez	 for the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are full of yellowish water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 And lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply, so as to draw out the watery fluid, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 Then do two cauteries on each leg at the little-toe joint;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 And the longer cautery should be one under the knee in front and the other behind it, in the middle of the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 And leave the burns open for a long time without treating them, until they heal on their own.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 after the treatment of other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	 of the injury
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 When intestinal problems come from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be treated by conventional means;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 and you see the patient suffering greatly and has strong virtue, then make a large burn on the stomach according to what has been said before in the section on stomach burns, in the circular burn.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 and four subtle burns around the navel, at each one-sixteenth of an inch, and two burns on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 And if you see that the moisture is abundant and the patient enduring, then make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each eye, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	 of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 When hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and they are old and from thick, cold, and moist corrupt humors, and they are treated as we have said by division, but it does not help, then perform cautery:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 Three on the spine of the back, placed one after another in a triangle, and one cautery below the anus, two fingers.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 And if you think that his stomach is cold, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face make one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the bladder with all the cauteries closed.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 And leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Aprés cure, wait until the place is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 of the skin condition called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you cut a furuncle, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it all ablaze on the furuncle that has been cut.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 And leave your hand there until the cautery comes to the base of the vein from which the blood flows;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 Do this once or twice, and if there is much furuncle, then cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 After the curing of the furuncles is beneficial until they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 And if you cauterize with a large cautery on furuncle, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	 of a poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nous raconterons en son leu, si vient tel maladie que ne puet estre sanee fors que par cautere.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tout une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tout la tente combien elle a de parfont.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity in which the tent is inserted, and start again with the cautery until that rotten and corrupted flesh is burnt, once, or twice, or three times, according to how much is needed;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 And guard against stretching the nerves within, and from large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, guard against these places, and do not perform this procedure except on flesh, and know that it is not persistent;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 after curing the place until it is healed, and if the place is healed, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 and if the matter is not removed, know that the place is torn, and the bone corrupts at the base.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 and similarly as one of those which we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	 of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and from great flatulence, and a woman does not desire intercourse, then you must make a cautery on the kidneys from one side and another with the cautery we have previously mentioned. 
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 And if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and they will provide greater assistance.
de la vessie	 of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a cautery on the part above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as a thumb's length;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 And make one cautery on the back, or two if you need to;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 and let the cautery be cleaved according to the shape mentioned before.
de la marris	 of the chest
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception, and the menstrual flow is corrupt and delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 And when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 Then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the shoulder, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 And let the cautery be made carefully, as we have said.
de la hainche	 of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When the mucus descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 and the place of separation is found, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hip joint with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And so let the cautery be such as that which has been used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 And if this cautery is not available, make three cauteries from a large olive, and let the cautery be as deep as all the fingers.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and heal it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	 de la douleur de la hanche
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 When pain comes to the hip joint due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the illness is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 then you must purge the patient of thick humors with stinking pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 After that, make a cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 This is to know together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 Fire cautery is done in many ways, one of which is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 that you cauterize on the hipbone three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make them deep and large, and let there be between each cautery a space the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-sized;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the hipbone, for which there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 And if you see it, then cauterize with the circle cautery that we have previously mentioned for the hip dislocation.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 but do it in such a way that the circle includes the entire hip, and all the bone's surface is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the manner in which one proceeds with sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 And if it reaches the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers' width, on the left side a little.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 And let the cautery be cupped, and let the thickness of the scar be burned;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers from the foot or close to it, make three or four cauteries where he feels the pain in the cautery which is called "finger".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 And if necessary, do more of them.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cupped or circular cautery, and take care in all your cauteries not to leave such a large scar that you burn the nerves and major arteries, so as not to cause greater harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and the entire foot became perforated and corrupt.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly ache from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 And the wise say in the cautery of the hip, this is the manner: make such an iron and let it be at the end as thick as a penny, or a little less, and let it be between the teeth and from one tooth to the other, the length should be the size of a hazelnut.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 And let the teeth be set in two parts, and also like nuts, and there should be a good handle of iron.
et c’est li forme:	 And this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 And it should be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then put it on the hip of the sick person, and turn it on the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 And after cauterizing once, cauterize again, and leave it for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 And then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 And yet this is one of the good cauteries, which can be tolerated where it is needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 The cautery of burning medicine is such that you should make an instrument with teeth in which the margin of the door descends, and it should be made of bronze or iron, one side long, and in the height there should be two noses, and between each should be the width of a finger. etti de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 And let them be open from within and without, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 Then place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and then press your hand very much on the box of the hip;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 Then put between the two circles of hot iron that have been heated in the fire, and leave it there for an hour, allowing the patient to bear the heat and burn of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 For it works as if by fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 and when the burning sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip from the soft iron, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until that which is blackened by the burn is removed;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 And let it remain for three days until the pus exits.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds, until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make one instrument that will fit according to what you have done in the hip equally;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 and this is the way of the hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take quicklime and live coal, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 where there should be one small hole outside so that the point of a razor can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 and place on top of that pot another well-lidded pot, and put alkaline and hot and sweet water on top, until there are two fingers' worth of liquid above the powders, so that you have it well in your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 and let it sit until it descends with water and dregs into the pot, then take all that water, and throw it onto hot coals and lime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 And then it will be very useful and is administered in many medical works and in the cauterization of other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 For it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can well cauterize the hip thus as sesame and honey from anacardium and hot coals with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a treatment by which a man was healed from the pain in his hip and the sciatic vein, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other treatment was done, and that he was cured after one treatment, and then he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 And it is said in such a way that you take fresh and dry green vitriol and grind it very finely with a little fat, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and let it sit;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he lets it [be] for three hours, and by that amount that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then have him enter the bath so that his body becomes slightly warm, and put him to bed, and all the pain will leave, and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use such a cautery, except after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with sheep's wool, it helps greatly.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 and the cautery should be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the depression that is between the big toe of the foot and the other one called phalanx.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 Afterwards, take dry sheep's wool and put it to the fire until it becomes coal, and place it on the fleece, and let it stay until it is stained.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 And do so again, and do not cease to do so until you feel by sense that it reaches the hip, and that the pain is relieved.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 and this manner of cautery is called "sheep's wool cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	 de la dolor dou dos
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 Of back pain, whether it comes from falling, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, or from something like cold spread matter, none of these is suitable for cautery, except that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 It is necessary that, after the patient has been purged with foul-smelling pills or other similar things, three lines of incisions are made on the back where the pain is located, each line being nine inches long, and in each line five cauteries or more, according to the strength and quantity that the patient can bear.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 And let the cautery be made according to the method called "point";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 And if you wish, make three or four cauteries in a medium-sized "clavicle" cautery in this manner.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow forehead when they wake up, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 And you will find at the back of the spine, and with us, the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see this, and you want to cure it, then cauterize it with the cautery of that type according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 So that the cautery burns each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, beware that you do not administer cautery in a nervous area.
de la dolor des jointes	 Of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 When pain in the joints is from moisture that has spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which doctors call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures by medicines cannot heal it, it is healed by cautery in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-sized according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary that you make an incision on the sole of the foot, then make a cautery over the entire area called "punctum".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 And if the pains reach up to the knees and other joints, as often happens, then make three or four cauteries on each knee, in total three or four olive-sized cauteries on each side;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand outside for longer than it takes to burn the length of the heart.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 And if the pain is in the hands, then make two incisions around the wrist.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then make an incision above each joint and on the back of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 and if the pain reaches up to the ribs or the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and give them medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you give him good care and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	 de la rupture du sinus
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When diarrhea comes suddenly and the bowels descend to the kidneys and this is recent, then it should be that when you see him being treated, he should not eat anything that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 And that he uses things which loosen the belly, so that the excrement descends from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm until the bubbles are healed, and bring them to your fingers, and sign from underneath the flesh onto the bone of the wrist, and all in one sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 then heat the cautery which has this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 Till he is white and has his hair cut off.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 Then reset the bubbles in their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 and the minister should hold his hand until they do not return again.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 and work well on the thighs of the patient, and place a pillow and a sheet under the thighs, and another one on the foot which holds his hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 Then place the cautery on the sign as long as your hand can reach, and hold it straight and steady until you touch the bone. And if you do not reach the bone on the first try, then repeat it again until you reach the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 And be careful that the boiling does not overflow when you apply the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	 So that you do not burn yourself.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 And so that by this the patient is not burned or any other harm comes to him.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and also large enough for adults according to their size.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 After three days, cure the place of the burn with butter until the scalding is gone.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 After the treatment of other wounds until they are healed, and the patient lies on his back for forty days until the wound is well closed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that his nursing be done for a long time, so that the blisters do not burst when he tries to get up and walk around.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made brace and wear it for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 And let him have good rest, that he works little and guards against overindulgence in drinking and eating, and against too much laughter.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And when he follows this advice, then he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	 about the opening of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 When ulcers appear in other places and are painful, and you see that they no longer grow, do one cautery after another according to its size, and burn the third part of the heart.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 According to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 and any of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-pronged cautery like this:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the place of entry and make a line across the width above the opening, and another one below it, and then keep your hand steady throughout the entire cauterization.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, from falling or striking, and this pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and let the cautery be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its strength and location of twisting and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 if it is healed from the first cautery, it is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 if this is not the case, repeat another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it must move to the nearby member; therefore, you must perform the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	 of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The humors are sometimes aided by cautery with great help, and likewise the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 Cannot you see it being cauterized? Take care if the disease is at its beginning; and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither diminishes nor stays, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 I enter the head at the nape, and the other towards the forehead at the hairline.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 And two on the two horns, and one behind on the occiput.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 And leave your hand in such a way that the cautery reaches the bone, and as much that scabs come out of it so that the fumes of the gross humors can exit from there.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 And cauterize on the nose according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 And if the mixture is spread all over;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 and it clearly spreads, then you must cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, one cautery on the nose, two on the spine of the neck, six on the spine of the back, one large on the buttock and another nearby, and two on each shoulder.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 And two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 And beware of the nerves that are beneath the heel, lest you burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 And sometimes someone performs cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the stomach bone, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 And know that when you do more cauterizations, the more help you give, and the more it benefits him.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as much as the healthy person feels it, because his body is already completely corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it is necessary that the cautery be great or small according to the members and the joints, as you will find them in various shapes of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Afterwards, care for the place with flour made from vetches mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it does not heal, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 And let the cautery be a little deep into the thickness of the heart.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then continue with the treatment until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 And sometimes one does cautery both on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 nevertheless let no one interfere with it unless he is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	 from the bladder
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed and medical treatments are of no use, then cauterize it with a cautery a little deep, according to the thickness of the heart, so that the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 Then take flour of vetch and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of a pigeon and blood of an almond, each one part;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it all be mixed together, and bound with a cloth, and placed in the spot until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 The cure of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When cancer begins at the start, and you see it stop, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the circumference of the cancer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 Nevertheless, the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 nevertheless this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupt, and I have seen it happen sometimes.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 and a more appropriate thing is that it be cauterized around it, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 from the swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it takes too long to die because of the excess or the old age of the patient when he is feeble (that is, too old) and has little blood, or because of the time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 and you want to hasten his death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 then cauterize him with many small cauteries by pricking.
aprés le laisse ensi.	 after that, leave him thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you see her pierce through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery with this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the middle of this disease that is called «adubelati» until the cautery has pierced through to the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it outside in such a way that the course of the corruption is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment until he is perfectly cured.
li cure dou feu par fer	 The fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 There is another type of disease called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a consumption of the limbs, for it consumes the limbs as fire does dry logs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 If you see this disease in a place that can bear cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries very hot and large, according to what is needed for the place where the disease is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 afterwards, cauterize all around until you burn away all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupt is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for III days, and place on the cauterized places soft bread with oil until the burns of the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the cure of injuries producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if you see after three days that a scar does not form, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 and if not, then begin the cautery again on the place where the flesh has become corrupt.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 And this disease has sometimes been cured with cold medicine instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 but nevertheless fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already spoken about the treatment with cold medicine in the division.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 take what you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 of parsley that grows at the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often it happens that on the soles of the feet grows a disease called "closed" according to our intention, and it is a large warty thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cautery for this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 Fire cautery is that you heat one cautery as if it were a feather of an owl, and let it be made of good iron so that it can hold the nail on all sides, and that there are subtle edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 after placing it all hot on the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the head of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 and leave it thus for three days until it begins to exude pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 then make an emplaster of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the emplaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the place of burning by applying a plaster until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 And if they are turned outward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	 and it is done in this manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 take a reed of bronze or iron, or a quill of goose feather, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, on the pustules and warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 And place the chain above so that it presses all around, then put a pouch of hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and let the hot water find its way deeply to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 And let the patient endure the scalding of the hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 Then leave it thus, and it will completely remove all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 In this manner, do one after another, until you have treated all those that are in the body, then heal the burns that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	 Heal the shivering
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 When someone trembles from cold of the nerves or from quartan fever or others, it is necessary that you make four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra;
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 And in the cautery of the foot, and above the stomach at the umbilical cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 it will cause shivering, and will hasten the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	 of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes appear on the outside of the body, as stinking pustules, which come from large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 if it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery above each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 a subtle cautery of boxwood, of which the tip is gripped in the fire, or of long root of Aristolochia, or the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow from then on, but the excess which comes from them is destroyed, and they are healed;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 but this must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	 when the vessel is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 Often there is a great flow of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 and it is a very serious matter to stop it.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 And yet when this happens to someone, then hasten to put your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the blood is still under your finger, and no drop comes out anymore;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 then heat several small and large olive-shaped cauteries in the fire until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 Then take I, whether large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 And if it spurts when you lift your finger from the vein and the iron is extinguished, then take another hastily from those that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stopped;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 and know that when blood flows from the artery, one cannot stop it well, even if the artery is large, except by one of the four ways that we have said:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 either by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by medicines placed on that have the power to stop blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 And let it be tied and bound securely.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 Whoever will administer clotting by tightly binding with cloths or by placing burning objects on top, or other similar things, it will not benefit if possible.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 And if this happens to someone and he does not have a mirror or medicine nearby, then he should put his finger on the vein's wound as we have said, and stretch it well until it is sealed above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 And do not move the finger, but pour cold water over it often until it is very cold, so that the blood is frozen and swollen and sealed;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 and then make inquiries ahead for those who need cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 Here begins the second book on the cure of incisions
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which it is necessary to use fire or burning medicine, and the instruments and causes and shapes of cauteries;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 And I have placed this chapter from the head to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same path so that one finds more easily what one wishes.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 if they are of such a nature that they become so distressed with their illness that they die easily due to the insanity they experience from their illness, and the severity of their affliction;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 And one must have fear of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 And there are those who give you their mind, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 “wait, I am cured”;
et li maladie est despitouse.	 and the disease is stubborn.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater consideration on your honor than on your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely concerning those of whom you are certain, and from whom you can take and gain.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 and use prognosis and diagnosis in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 and this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and praiseworthy memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 Very dear son, may our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 Now I have arranged this chapter for you by sections, in the same way as in the previous chapter on cautery, which I have described to you from the head to the feet, so that you may find more easily what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 full of water from the head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 You should know that this illness often comes to children at birth, when the midwife pulls too hard on the child's head.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 And sometimes it happens for unknown reasons, so we do not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 And I have never seen this illness except in children, and all those whom I have seen were hurried to death.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 And therefore it seems to me that I should leave the treatment of such cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And I saw an infant whose head was full of water, and the head swelled each day so that it could not support itself.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 And the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone on the forehead, between the brain and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 And the procedure is such that if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a wide incision in the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 And it should be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 And see here the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, like this:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the seams of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out strongly when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not return to its place:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 then you must make three incisions in the head like this:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, draw out all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After closing the incisions with bandages and powder, apply wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Then dislocate it, and heal the wound with compresses and dressings, and allow the head to be steadily held, and give the patient dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 And another way to incise is that you look at where the pus of the abscess appears, and the gathering of water;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 for sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	 sometimes behind; 914
aucune fois en destre;	 sometimes on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	 and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and the gathering of water, and make an incision according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 and be careful not to cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 And let there be a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	 with a knife
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 When someone has a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or the bladder, and the illness is longstanding, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is to use cautery by cutting the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 Therefore, when you see them open, the patient must turn his head backward;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 then rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, and then let the patient stretch his neck with all his might against the cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 Then look for the vein where the blood beats, and the place of one is behind the ears and is not far away.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Then mark the places on each side, then open one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, so that the incision reaches to the bone, and let this be wide at the top.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 And if you see, insert the spatula underneath the artery and cut above it, cutting also as two must cross each other.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 And when the vein is cut, then the blood jumps up continuously outward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And if the surgeon does not open to the touch, then you must measure the space of three fingers, then sign the cross and cut down to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 and it is necessary to let out blood outside, and this should be six parts, or perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	 then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 if there remains a point on the bone of pus, then cut away so that such abscesses do not form, then apply pressure to the wound and bind it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	 Of headache
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 When a chronic headache comes and an acute catarrh due to the moisture of tears, heat in the temples, and old insanity, and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medicine, and none of this helps him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes his hair grow long on his temples, and he attends to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and it protrudes little outside except in some men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 And if it is swollen, let the patient strain his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and wash the area with hot water until the blood vessel appears clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 Then take the spatula of which there is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up with tweezers, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 And if the artery is subtle, then turn it with the point of the hook, and cut that part according to the quantity of two fingers' width.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 For if it is not cut, then the blood will not flow at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 And draw out blood for six times, up to three.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread to prevent decay before healing the wound, and let the blood flow out gradually.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 Then cut the excess that is between the two ligaments at that same hour, and then, if you see, use the cautery blade to cauterize down to the bone until the head is cut.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 And this is the mild work, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 For the cautery is used to remove moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 because it is of greater help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 In order to extract the artery, one must fill the place with old cotton and put a well-made compress on top.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when they are unwrapped, they should be treated with dry medicines that promote the growth of flesh, and with compresses, until they are healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if without the cutting of an artery as long as you work there, then hasten with the copper through cautery, where you apply the vitriol and hold it in your hand until the blood is stanched.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 And if you do not have this [vitriol] present, then place your finger on the spot until the blood is frozen, and wash the spot with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it as needed.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 And it is better and more suitable for the extraction of an artery that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery, in two parts, but let the cuts be well-spaced to retain their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 When the instrument is too blunt, it retains less of its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 And there should be one finger's width of space between the two knives, and then when you have brought the two irons together, and placed the hot iron on top until it reaches the bone, cut the vein in two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 And let there be a space between the two heads, for it is not completely healed by this cautery.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	 tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 When tears from the eyes descend into the veins that are on the head of fire, and medical treatment does not help at all, and you see the patient's face turn red, and there is a sensation of cold in the forehead as if shivering;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 And if the eyes are dark and moist to the point that the hair of the eyelids falls out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 And the ancients called it "treatment for contusions", and it is that you make behind the patient who has this disease, the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make three cuts in the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 And let one of the incisions be like two fingers' width in the middle of the forehead, descending down to the nose, and the other two on either side of the ribs above the nipples, and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on the sides above the nipples.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 And keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be three fingers' width across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping the blood, then apply the sharp instrument from two sides like this form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 From the incision that is in front of the temple to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 And peel off all the skin that is between the two incisions along with the fat that is on top of the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this instrument forcefully.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 Place in the first cut the instrument that is called "scalpel," which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other; this is its form.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And place the sharp side towards the flesh of the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 And cut all the vessels descending from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the heart, and then make another cut in the middle slit up to the other side.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 And then bleed equally, and press the place for the blood taken out.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 Then put in each slit a tent of old cotton, and place on it moistened cloths with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no abscess comes there.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And on the third day untie the bandage, and apply a large amount of warm water, then perform the dressing with a basilicum ointment mixed with rose oil, and other dressings used for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	 Of the inflammation of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When people commonly come down with an acute catarrh, and you see the eyes dim and small, and the sight weakened, and the lids burnt
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 and the hair falls out, and there is sharp pain in the head, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 then know by these signs that this condition and this catarrh come from many veins, and the remedy for it is as follows:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And do this: instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another one from ear to ear.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 And begin with an incision from the left temple to the right, extending to the bone.
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that control eating.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then dry between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen bandages there.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 Then lay over it moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 When it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow there, then treat it with drying agents that cause the flesh to heal.
En teil maniere:	 In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of resin, and make a poultice with them.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 And apply it to these wounds in order to heal the flesh completely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 Of ear stoppage
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 Or seeds, or a creature, or a stone from a mine, or similar things such as iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 Or seed, like peas, beans;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 If something is flowing out like water, and similarly things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 Quand quelque chose comme une pierre ou une autre chose qui n'est pas appropriée pour l'oreille tombe dans l'oreille et ne pousse pas à l'intérieur de l'oreille, alors exposez l'oreille au soleil.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see the stone, if any little drop of violet oil or sesame oil drips from it, then initiate extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 and make him sneeze with condiments, and plug his nostrils when he is about to sneeze, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 And stretch the ear outwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 Often there comes pus through this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 and if it does not come out, then initiate extraction with fine tweezers, of which the shape is described here:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 if not, then initiate extraction with a fine probe of small diameter; iento 12.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 And if it does not drain through the ear, make a tube of bronze and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole firmly. And stop up the ear around the tube with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the tube;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 then draw strongly, for often a strong force comes as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 and if it does not come strongly in this manner, then take some birdlime and put it into some pointed instrument, and put a little cotton around it.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 then press the birdlime onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw strongly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 And if it does not drain strongly from any of these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear before a hot abscess and spasm come there.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 And the manner of the cut is such that you should first cauterize the patient with the cephalic, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue. Then make the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fatty place or dependent area;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 And let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the stone, then remove it as best you can, and suck it quickly to your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And tend to it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 And if there are seeds inside and they swell, then administer an extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 And if it cannot come out, then apply a thin subtle poultice according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not do this when you think that the grain is wet due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 then extract it with fine tweezers and place it in a press, as we have said, so that the extraction may be delicate.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In the case where water falls into the ear, it is necessary that the patient first uses sneezing-inducing substances, and fills the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let him lie on his side, on the same ear where the water has entered.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out due to this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 if not, then take several stones according to the length of your thumb, light and soft, and heat them a little in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 and place one of them into the opening of the patient's ear, and make him sit on his feet from another side, and strike with another stone on top of the stone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 and do not stop doing this until all the water has come out, and so it will all come out.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 And if you see, take a reed, and put one of the heads in the ear, and hold the other head with fire until the longer part of the reed is burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 then repeat with another reed until all the water has come out, as we have said regarding stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 In extracting an insect, if it is of small body, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 but if it is of large body that can be felt, then perform an extraction with tweezers;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 In extracting worms infested in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 If there are any openings, draw them out with fine forceps. If none are found, take the cane whose form is here:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 And insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the intensity of the patient's suffering, then draw out all the cane.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 And if they do not obey and come out, then stop up around the cane with cotton as I have said in the stone.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 And if they do not come out strongly as we have said, then administer the distillations that the ancients have proved in the killing of worms, and you will find them in treating distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And thus drip your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, whose form you see here.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 And whether it is made of silver or brass, it should have one small hole at the bottom and an opening on top for dripping.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 And to press in the distillation, use an iron instrument well-suited for this purpose. If you wish, take a razor and wrap around its point some cotton suitable for this task;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 then cast your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish, into the funnel, with the funnel in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 then insert the razor with all the cotton into it and press your hand gently until the oil is completely dripped into the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 And let the patient feel warmth inside, and let the distillation be in a pot heated over the fire before it is distilled into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 and ensure that it is not too cold, for then the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 Of ear stoppage
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 No child is born without a hole in their ear;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 and the same thing happens to adults due to clogging of a wound or flesh born inside the ear, and this clogging sometimes goes deep into the ear, so that it cannot be seen;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 and sometimes it happens that the pot is empty of the hole, which one can see well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 Therefore, those that go deep and cannot be seen are of serious illness in many ways, and as for the ones that can be seen, it is necessary that you put the patient's ear in the sun;
et regarde dedens:	 and look inside
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 if you see the depilation obvious, then work all this spatula of which is the form here
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 And let it be sharp and cutting both front and back completely, so that it does not wound the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 if the depilation is of flesh born or of the body of the ear, then hold it with subtle tongs, and cut gently, so that all that flesh may be removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the incision is deep in the ear, take a fine, light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 If you feel the depilation from which the patient feels itching at hearing, prick gently, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 then put in the ear a plug according to the width of the hole, and wet it with Egyptian oil.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a cloth and soak it in red wine, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 And if you see the ear swelling, then remove the cloth and use another cloth soaked in ointment made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding, which are discussed in the section on distillations.
de la char des papieres	 of paper flesh
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 This ail that comes in paper on the eyes when they are wet and then dry, you should remove them with tweezers and scissors, and cut off their root with a small spoon.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 Then put powdered vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 And if it comes off, then cauterize with a fine lancet, and afterwards cauterize the incision well. embre li cauterizeir la place ou il fu remes.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 And many times they return, when something remains of their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	 et maintes fois repairent,
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 Many times in the eyes there come things that seem like hailstones in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstone," and it is a collection of moisture thick in the eye both above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	 The operations are as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 Take care if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and this is easy to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Then make an incision on the surface, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with tweezers and cut it off.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 If you cannot cover it without piercing the skin slightly, it will not harm the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 And if the split is large, sew it up with a stitch and treat until it heals;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 And if it is small, do not use any force, for the unguent will restore it quickly and generate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 And if the stone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the skin, and stretch the stone with tweezers, and cover and press on one side and then the other;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 And if the skin is separated by the incision, it does not matter.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And when the stone is covered, remove the eye of salted water, and treat the place with that which generates flesh until the patient heals.
de la graisse des eulz	 of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 Exinach is a grease that forms on the skin of infants more than in adults, and it greatly troubles their eyes. In the mornings, they develop catarrh, and cannot look at the sunlight because tears quickly form in their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 And because of this, they lie on their faces and sleep with their eyelids closed, and the skin under their eyebrows is moistened by the swelling and appearance covered in exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press on the place with your fingers, you feel the bone move between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 And the manner of working is for the patient to put his head into clean water.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 Then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, then place it on him.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 And press with your thumbs on either side, so that the ends of the bones come together in a circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 Then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a cut not more than half an inch wide, like the one made when bleeding a vein.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 And cut the skin through until you reach the bone.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And in many cases, bone fragments come out of the cut, resembling a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 Then extract it all in one piece with a cloth between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 And be careful not to push into the cut, so that you do not reach all the way with the spatula to the bone, and injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 And if the vein does not open at the beginning of the cut, then slightly widen the cut until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 Then extract it as we have said, then wet rags in vinegar and water, and place on the spot, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And there are such men who break stones and place them to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	 of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 When hairs grow on the eyelids other than the natural ones and become mature, they harm the eyes and bring about various diseases such as frequent tearing and softening of the eyelids and cataracts, to the point that it leads to the loss of sight;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 And the treatment is according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 Either by fire cautery, or by medicinal water according to what is said in the previous chapter on cauterization, and it can also be done by incision and suture, or by hooks, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 if it is torn, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 if not, then insert a needle with all the thread on top;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 and let it be at the edge of the paper where the hairs grow near those hairs, and draw the thread over all the paper, and turn it to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 then make an incision in the part under the paper, under the hairs, touching the whole spatula, from the large tear duct to the small one;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 then remove the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then sign on the paper the shape of a hook, like a myrtle leaf, and nevertheless it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity that you wish to raise the paper which is divided into all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 And for such a person who needs it, one should cut a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper is softened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 Then make the entire sputum into two lines that you have drawn, and begin from the large cheekbone down to the small one.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 And let one of the cracks be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the ointment into one of the two corners of the heart, then peel it all off.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 Then assemble the two lips with a seam of one needle along one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make the excess of the threads on the two eyebrows adhere to each other with some sticky substance, if you know how to do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 And if not, then do not worry about it; leave the stitching and threads for III days or IV.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 Then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, for the skin recovers by the closing of the wound and the coming together of it, but stitching is harmful (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	 And there is another method:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 It is that you trace the skin with a design that resembles the leaves of myrtle, as we have described, in three places that are exposed according to the form that follows:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 Then cut those who rise to small equal forces according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread in it, and insert it into the design;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 And insert another thread next to the large tear, and the second thread next to the small one, and gather the threads evenly between your fingers.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the leather over which you have placed a patch, as we have said, then gather the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is healthy.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar comforting ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 And sometimes it happens that the hair of the skin is turned:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 then you must use what we have said about the incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 But stitching in one place and another is more skillful.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The treatment of dogs is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 and it is that you convert the paper into a cone and place it inside as I have said, then make two dogs by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 and cut off the two ends where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 then assemble one to the other delicately on top of the paper around the eye, and hold the two dogs firmly from both sides;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is held will die and become black and rotten, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If it delays, then cut it with scissors, then treat it until it is healed;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 And when the wound has healed, and the scab has fallen off, and the hairs will no longer hurt.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 And this is the shape of the two cannulas that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity in length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 The work is such that you take a fine needle, and you put a thread of soft and fine silk through it.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 Then assemble the heads and tie them together finely, and let the length of the thread be one palm long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 Then arrange in the quiver another fine silk thread quickly, and tie the ends of the thread together.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 Then let the patient put his head on your shoulder;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 And it should be in the sunlight so that the work is visible, for this is a fine and small work. Then put the needle all the way into the quiver at the root of the hair, and make it pierce the skin quickly until you draw it out over the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 Then pull out the hair until it reaches the base, and push into the base that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 Then pull out your hand so that the hair comes out completely from the base to the skin with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 And if the base is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, then you will pull the base from below along the entire thread that you have ordered, until the base comes out of the hole above and you can see it with the eye's vision;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 then you will pull out the base and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows back;
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the hair is small, then take a long hair from the horse's mane, and raise it with that one you leave, until it is lengthened, and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	 of the eye's decay
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 When this disease called "alecrati" or the purulence comes in the eye, there are two types of it.
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 one is natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or burning, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And the way to work on it is that you cut through that adhesion, and sever its lips, and put inside linen tenths, and leave it until it heals.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And it is not appropriate to use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 For if you do this, then the disease returns worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 but in the work of softening things, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 and the root of water lily or flax seed should be cooked, and diachylon melted in some of the oils, and wrap it in a bandage, and treat this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal according to the shape it was before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 and this work that we have spoken of is not outside of remedies for this illness, so that it does not return according to the shape it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 Et la chair qui vient dans l'œil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 Cette maladie, qui est en dessous, s'appelle véritablement «axacrati», et elle est à la fois naturelle et accidentelle.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The accident comes from a wound and a tear and a burn and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 and the way of working it is that you take a needle with two threads attached, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left side to the right, so that the thread comes out in two places on the flesh.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 Then press the flesh above all the needle, and cut it to a broad spatula shape.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 And if the appearance of the stone returns as it should be, this is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 if not, then take a razor and place it in the cleft, and turn the stone, and make two clefts on the side inside the stone;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 and let the ends of the two clefts be at the two corners of the incision that you have cut, and let them be made in such a way that when they are assembled, the appearance is like the shape of a letter called "Greek";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are sharp underneath, following the stone, then join the two freed parts, and sew them together with a woolen thread;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then, regarding the treatment of those we have spoken about concerning softening medicines and tents, until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 And if the disease comes from a laceration or incision or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a clean incision under the hairs of the skin, according to what has been said before;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 then drain between the two lips of an ulcer, as I have said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 and the work should be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an engine with all his power to bring back the shape to its natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 and the patient himself, according to what is necessary in terms of treatment and instruments, in various situations.
dou soudement de la papiere	 of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When this healing occurs in such a way that the skin above is adhered to the white of the eye, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor underneath the skin, and lift it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 and use tweezers to hold it, until you cut that which is exposed to the fine spatula, which should not be too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient cannot tolerate the spatula being too sharp and damaging the eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 and let your cut, with which you peel off that adhesion, be light, so that the skin returns to its natural shape;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 and all that adhesion is healed, and sometimes there is salty water in the eye, and it is lifted with fresh water, and with chamomile;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye abundant wool soaked in egg.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And after the third day, use collyrium and suturing instruments until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	 of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 Know that the nail grows in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 one is nervous and similar to hard silk, and the other which is not nervous but is like white frozen moisture, that when touched with iron and tried to clip with tweezers, no one can.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 And both likenesses begin towards the large tear duct and grow little by little until they cover the entire eye and all its light and movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 And the manner of incision is such that the patient places his head on your shoulder, then closes his eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 and holds the paper in your hand, then winds the fingernail around small pincers, and stretches it upwards;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 then takes a needle, and inserts into it the hair of a horse, or cow, or ox, and makes the thread strong;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 and slightly doubles the tip of the needle and pierces it into the nail, and pushes the needle all the way through, and binds the nail with a thread and stretches it upwards, and completely removes the skin along the side of the nail that follows the vein and the silk from the hair to the root, then cuts off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with all the subtle spatula and small forces, and leaves the natural flesh in the tear duct, so that through the incision does not come the body's usual tears;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 And sometimes the nail stretches to the quick, and to the thread, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 then scrape off all the soft tissue, of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 And ensure that the soft tissue does not touch the flesh and break it, and that the tendon is not torn;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 and after the incision, put in the eye a little of burned silk, and made from lead oxide, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat him so that he is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 And if the nail is not prominent and you cannot insert the needle, and the quick cannot enter, often this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 and they are born as I have described in the section on childbirth. And if you see that it has been covered, then work on the eye of the patient, and take a small sharp spoon according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 and raise the eyelid gently. And if you see that it does not diminish and the reason presses on, then apply to the eye a collyrium made of lead and red chalk and sal ammoniac, ground together, and bandage the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 then begin again with the other eye according to this same procedure, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If there is nothing contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then let it be, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin again with the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid appears in the eye to a great extent, then suspend it with the onion, and cut off a part of it but not all, so that a body of tears does not come there;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 Then drip into the eye an angry red liquid made from quicksilver.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 Of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 In the eyes of some men there appears sometimes a red flesh, covering the pupil and extending onto the eyelids, turning them outward, and resembling a balsam apple.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 and the procedure is such that the patient puts his head in your lap, then you work on the eyes, and collect all that flesh into suitable tweezers for this purpose, and hold it with force;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 then cut off the first piece of flesh, and continue cutting until you have finished, being careful not to harm the eye during the procedure;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 and let the cut of the spatula be such as we have said in the cutting of the nail and small nails from which one removes a splinter, as is shown in the form following this chapter;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 and when the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, then fill the opening with oil of celery seed where you drip red colocynth or similar corrosive medicines, and place over it a piece of cotton soaked in egg white, so that it is assured to be warm against an abscess;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 and if anything remains there, and the pus begins to increase, and you suspect an abscess is forming, then leave the opening and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for a warm abscess;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do when flesh is joined in the opening by this means.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 But nevertheless you must moderate the treatment of each weak opening according to the natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 And from the way of accident, in ironwork.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can withstand the work.
des voines des eulz	 of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 If they are red veins that cover the eye, they hinder sight and weaken the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 Therefore, first you should look to see if the eye, into which the arrow has entered, is sound, and there is no other disease besides the arrow.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 then take the coal in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, then raise those veins as far back as possible according to his knowledge, and let the incision be subtle, double, like this shape: ️
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 Et soit deux fois onze degrés dans le corps, selon cette forme :
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 then, with the coal, incise those veins subtly and wipe away the blood hour after hour, until you see those veins moving out of the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 And take care not to wound the eye with the points of the spatula, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not cut more than those veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 And when you have done this, instill in the eye green and red choler to corrupt what remains of the scab.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you do not have the power to remove all of it in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of heat from an abscess, then begin again according to this manner which was before, until it is healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	 And this is the form of the strengths:
de la fistule de l’oil	 of the eye's fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 The healer calls "arissati" fistulae:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 when you treat it by cautery and hot medicine as I have said before, and it does not heal, then there is pus in it that you must open above the abscess, where it should be removed, and drain all the moisture from there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then clean it with all the instruments whose form I have described here.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 and it is called "sharp hook", and it should be made of iron, with a round head, and it should be pointed like a file as it is in the following form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And place on top of it the spot of the rotten bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 And do this several times, then restore the place with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If the place is healed and flesh grows, and the body of the wound is healed, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not reopen and is not suppurating, and no evil incident occurs, know that it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 If not, then there is no other trick than to bring the fistula back through the nasal passage in this manner:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 And it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take a drill in this manner, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be tapered to the end as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 Then place it on the bone near the eye socket, then move your hand away from the eye into a pouch, then turn the whole forest until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it because the wind comes out if he holds his hand to his nose.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 And then apply dry medicine to the place as I have shown you, and when the flesh grows and the place hardens, the matter goes to the nose.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 This is a lighter procedure for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	 Of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 When the eye is completely open and there is no obstruction or narrowing of the nose, you must bind the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 Then heal it, then apply cupping glasses to the temples without pricking to draw out [humors], then place on the eye a poultice made of alum and aloe and incense and frankincense, then press the eye, and bandage with strips of cloth.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 And the manner of applying bandages is such that you take bandages soft enough, and fold each one into fourths, then place one on top of the other according to the amount the eye needs.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 Then hold it in place with a very hard bandage, and resume using cupping glasses to suck without cutting;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 Then remove the cupping glasses and keep the eye bound day and night, and if the ligature weakens, it is necessary to bind it tightly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 Then remove the bandage after a day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good;
se ce non;	 If not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then resume applying poultices and bandages and the ligature and cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 of the breakage of a vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 When discharging comes into the soft cloth, it opens, and comes out of the papers like a drop of resin, and it is astonishing to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 Then if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the eyelid;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 and let it pierce through, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 then cover the place of the double thread and wrap part of the soft cloth around it, and secure it well, then remove the needle and put a damp cloth soaked in plenty of egg on the eye.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 And leave it there until the thread and the soft cloth fall off, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And sometimes the wound is bound with a piece of cloth from each side of a circle until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 And if the eye gives a great appearance of it, pierce it with a subtle surgical instrument through to the depth of the eye, and let out the cloudy moisture and descend the eye, and insert it immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then keep it thus until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	 of the white of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than a bubble that forms in the eye, appearing like descending water, but it is not water;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 and the manner of performing the work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the bubble rise to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 then it should be pierced through, and not descend, and let the light be extinguished, and may the patient see things as he did before;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 and if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descending of the bow is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and cut into the hard skin at the junction with the hard skin and the horn, until the bow comes out.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and when it has come out, then drip into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or hot water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	 of the eye's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have knowledge of the similarities of waters in their division, and those which are necessary for piercing.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 Perform it according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, out of the light from the sun, and tie the healthy eye shut tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 Then place the eyelid of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 Then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea by the thickness of a ray on that white part of the eye at the minor lacrimal duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and turn your hand until it pierces the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty place.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 And it is necessary that the measure of the almagda route be at the depth of the measure from the plummet to the end of the nostril.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 And this is the crown of the eye.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 Then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the horny skin, and then place the instrument to where the water is, then press it under one vein after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If water enters now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 After resting a little, and if the water rises up the second vein, place the finger with the instrument, and when it is stuck in and does not rise, then draw out the almagda gently turning your hand a little at a time.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 And then put in a drop of pure oil, and lift this eye up.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then place outside the eye cotton or wet wool in rose oil and plenty of egg, and bind with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those who are of our time, apply comfrey with plenty of egg on top.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," of which here is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 And pierce therefore only the membrane, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle, then put there aloes, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a warm sleeping place, where he sleeps on his back in a dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 and let him be free from all movements, and take light food, and not move his head to the right or left, and let him lie according to his condition until the third day.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 then unbind him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and show him some things, and then rebind him until the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 and it is not necessary that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate him, because the waters rise quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 If abscesses come, you should open the eye before the seventh day, and apply that which soothes abscesses.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 And when it is healed, open the eye and place on its face a border to cover for some days, and always keep it in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 Then leave the house gradually, and turn back to his habits;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And one came to us who was from the Yirach, who told us that in their land they do almagda surgery, where water is sucked out, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, so that he who does not know them may see;
et soient d’arain proprement:	 and they should be of pure copper.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 And their tops should be of this same subtlety, and the lower part in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	 Of the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 Sometimes there are born in them various shapes of snakes, so that some appear to have many legs like scorpions.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 And if there are such [snakes], they may be charmed with the color of fire, and some have a gentle nature of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 Therefore, for the snake that is gentle and not charmed, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 and open his nostrils, and throw the onion to those snakes, and drive them away.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 Pour extrêmement fines et aiguës, et ensuite soutiens la spatule
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 And if there remains anything that cannot be cut, then open it with very fine instruments lightly, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 And if the abscess swells or bursts before you have completed the operation, then support it as needed;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 And if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize until the pus is dried up and all the flesh removed; then throw it into a well-sealed vessel filled with vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If the vessel works, and moisture reaches the mouth, know that he is cured;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 And if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is flesh born on the bone above, which prevents the instrument from cutting.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 Then you should place there a little thick linen thread, and tie it with your hand, and each knot should have between them a finger width or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 And the patient should put the head of the thread into his nose as strongly as he can, and pull it until it comes out through the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 And often children do this in schools, and it is an easy thing for those who want to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 Then hold the head that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other by feeling the thread as we have described.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then draw out the thread, wipe off the blood, and dip the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded all that remains of flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 And then put in the nose some lead for a few days until it is healed, and if there is need for dry medications, then use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, in which one distills the oils and medications into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 And let it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the passage also.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 And if you see, make a closed reed, and let the instrument be full to cleanse the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 And have a handle at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	 Of the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 Often there arises in the head of the nose a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes very large, so much that it is a visible thing to behold.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 And for this reason, you must cut it off at the beginning and remove all of its strength, then apply the cautery or burning medicine on top.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 And if it is delayed in being cut until it is large, then take care if it is hard, of dark color, and poor sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 Do not touch it with iron, for it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts into it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 and if the abscess is of soft touch, not at all of red color, and you see that it can be completely covered, then let the patient bleed and the incision without fear, and treat the place with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 When the nose is struck and wounded
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when a solution for continence comes to one of these cartilage works, it profits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 It is necessary then, when this happens to someone, to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and then join the two lips together in one stitch, then treat it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 and if the lips are already separated on both sides, then it is necessary that you burn all their interior parts until they heal, then join the two lips together in one stitch, and bandage it, and powder with dragon's blood and ground incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place on top of the powders a piece of strong or other suture plaster, and let it remain until it falls off by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The method of stitching is to bring the wound together:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 or with needles, as we have said in the case of the belly stitching;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	 of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 In the hands of some men, there occurs within the lips a hard abscess, resembling barleycorns, smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 then you must turn the lips, and cut into each knot, and take it with tweezers and cut it in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 then fill the place after the incision of vitriol with grease, so that the wound may be stained;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and then apply a plaster of linen, and dress the place with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	 of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 Often occurs on the gums joined flesh, which the ancients called "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 so you should hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, and let the wound bleed out.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 then apply on the place vitriol ointment, or other restraining and drying powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 and if that flesh returns after being cut, which often happens, then cut it the second time, and cauterize it: ︎
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 If it does not return after cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 and these are the forms of the instruments to cover (the wound).
des sordens	 of the sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 And sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and rotten, to the point where decay reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 then you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and pull out the teeth or scabs until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 And thus do with blackness and greenness, and with jaundice and other stains, until they are cleaned.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 And if one removes what is there at the first reason, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 If not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have everything reset.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 And know that the teeth need various shapes of instruments for setting, according to what the work shows, because the file used for filing the teeth has different forms than those used between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 And these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain, you delay drawing it out as long as possible, for this should not be done. hline
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 Because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to draw it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Therefore, when the patient is forced to have the tooth pulled, you must be certain of the aching tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Often pain afflicts the patient, thinking it is a toothache, and he has the good tooth pulled.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 Yet the pain does not leave because of this, until the bad tooth is removed, for we have already seen this happen with these lords.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 And when you are certain about the aching tooth, it is necessary that you cauterize all around the tooth as far as possible to protect the gum from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 Then move it with your fingers or fine pliers, little by little, until it is well loosened, then secure the pliers firmly.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 And let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, if it does not come out forcefully, then take one of these instruments and push it gently into each side, and remove it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, then you must fill it with rags, where the holes are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 and if you tighten it gently with pliers, so that it does not break when tightening;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 and you must very skillfully work around the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And take great care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and the patient will suffer greater pain than before due to the evil of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 And take care not to act as the ignorant healers do, who in their haste and boldness sometimes break the tooth, and do not bring about what we have described.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 but sometimes they cause great illness due to the roots that remain or because of the tooth they break, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 And when the tooth is pulled out, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 And if blood comes from it, as often happens, then fill the place with crushed vitriol.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And if this does not work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The forms of the instruments that one uses to pull teeth first should be with long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull out the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	 And these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 And they should be of thick iron that does not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made and toothed to hold well.
de la racine des dens	 from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 When the root remains after pulling out, it is necessary that you place moistened cotton in butter on the place for one or two days, until the place is softened, then insert the tweezers called "algefri", so that the tooth appears to be a bird's beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 And let them be made inside like a file, and this is the shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", that is, pincers, into it.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 And let it be outside and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out from this, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 If not, then help yourself with all the instruments which are used in the forms that follow hereafter.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 And so one helps oneself with this instrument that has two teeth, of which here is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 and other iron tools that are at the front in the manner of teeth, and with this instrument that looks like large pliers, whose form is here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 And let this instrument be outside so that it cannot break, and know that there are many instruments of teeth.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 and also other instruments, which are not counted.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 and the wise master finds his instrument by himself according to what his work and the illness shows him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity and if one breaks the cartilage or other bones, where it can, then he seeks the instruments that are needed, which I have told you about, and helps with the actions, whose forms are here: ️
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 And let them be thick and firm to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but can be held and removed.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And then restore it with the appropriate medicine for this purpose. If there is decay in the bone and it is small, use all these tools.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 When the teeth appear not according to nature, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth is new after a tooth, and is not in the right place, and one cannot file or grind it.
adonques lou raie;	 Then pull it out.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 And if it is caught with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak and is made of iron at the point.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And the instrument cuts little by little each day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it appears that it can be filed down, then file it with a file like this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 and it is like the file with which one makes needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 and with a file the tooth is removed bit by bit each day lightly, so that it does not move until it falls out.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 then the plain at the end to any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, it is necessary to file away the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not wound the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	 When the teeth become dislodged
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 When the teeth are loose, whether by striking or falling out, and the patient cannot chew on what he eats without them falling out, and you have treated them with astringent medicine, and it does not work;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 then they must be secured with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And let the thread be of medium thickness, not too thick or too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you want to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then pass the ends between the misaligned teeth, whether there is one or more, until you skillfully reach the other healthy tooth.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 Then repeat the covering from the starting point, and gently and skillfully tighten your hand until it does not move at all.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then cut the ends of the thread with scissors, and gather them together, and place them between the healthy teeth, so that they do not injure the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 And then he leaves it so tight for as long as it can stay in place, and if it dislocates again or the string breaks, then he binds it with another string;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 so that it stays in place and serves him thus for his entire life, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when a tooth falls out, it should be put back in its place, from time to time, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 and let no one who is not wise and skillful interfere with it, and sometimes a tooth made from cow bone is shaped, and placed where the defect is, and bound as we have said, and stays and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 of copper to heal the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 Sometimes there is this ligament which comes under the tongue at birth.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 or by accident of a healed wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your lap, and raise their tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 then cut the nervous ligament wide, so that the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is hardness or a knot, and this is due to the suddenness of the wound, then push in the hook and cut widely that ligament;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 and be careful that the cleft is not too deep, because of the artery which is underneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 and when you have done this, lift the place with rose water and aloes, or cold water, then place under the tongue a tent of linen;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 And the patient should shave every night, so that the place cannot scab over.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 And if a bleeding comes out, put ground vitriol on the place;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 and if the blood spreads, then cauterize it with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 then treat it again until it is healed,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 and if you see it turning black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 and if it is inclined to become white, with moisture present, throw in alum, and open it with a fine spatula, and clean it from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 And if blood rises during your work, apply vitriol until it stops bleeding, then return to your work until you remove all the foreign body.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then lift it up with oil and silk, and care for other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	 of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 Sometimes there are lumps in the throat called "gland," and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you treat them, as we have said in the description, and they are not healed, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 If it is a hard abscess of small size and pale color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent bleeding;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 but leave it until it is ripe, and then you will separate it from there, lest it burst on its own;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 and if it is of white color again, and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument for cutting, but first look whether the hot abscess rests and is appeased.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his hands be in your hand, and he open his mouth wide and you take the tongue between your hands, and press the tongue down onto the instrument entirely, which is its form;
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 and let it be of silver or fine brass, like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 When you press the tongue against this instrument and see the abscess, take the onion and fix it in the almond paste, and draw it forcefully over the top as much as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 And draw out some object from the cloth with it, then cut off the instrument, whose shape seems like a forceps.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And yet the heads are curved, and one against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take the tongs, of which here is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 And let it be cutting on one side, and named on the other side.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and afterwards gargle the patient with hot water, and cold and salted water, and if blood begins to flow, then gargle the patient with water, in which cooked pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves, and similar things are mixed, until the flow is stopped.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then let the cure continue until he is cured;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almond-shaped ones, so cut them off in the same way as the two almond-shaped ones.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born within her throat, that is to say, one small abscess;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 and had almost completely closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, nor could she eat or drink, and would have died if she remained in this state for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so high that it had forced out two teeth through the two openings of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 I hurried immediately and inserted one lancet, then drew it out, and with it pulled out a large portion of pus;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 then reattach another part in the other hole of the nose, and he opened his mouth and pressed his tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 then inserted a lance into these abscesses, and took out some of it, and only a little blood came out;
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 and thus the woman's throat passage was opened up, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 and the abscess would always grow back and fill up the place that I had emptied, until it became very large again;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 then I cauterized it from within the throat;
ensi demora sens croistre;	 thus it remained without growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 And let this body be separated from these parts, and let it be as God made it after me.
de l’uve	 of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 When the pupil descends to the eyelid and is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 And if it is below, large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that this abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then you must cauterize it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 And the one which is round and assembled and is not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 And it is either bloody or of a dark color or black, then you should avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have spoken of, concerning its brightness and length, that you make the patient sit facing the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument we have previously mentioned.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out from below, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And you must not cut more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 for if you cut too much, it harms the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient is afraid of cutting, then you must use ingenuity in the cauterization to remove their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the manner of the cautery is sharp and keen.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and burns with lively water, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And use the application of this instrument, which has this form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 And have on the head a tuft where one places the medicine, as with the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 And let the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus run out of his mouth with the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and wound.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 then take your hand and apply all the medication and press down on the eye for half an hour, until you see it numbed and the stinging of the medication is soothed;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 and if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medication, and insert the instrument with all the cotton into the eye socket, until the cotton dries on the eye;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and it will fall off after four days or five.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 And if you need to repeat the medication cautery, then do so, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medication;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it be washed with cold water, and treated with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 This treatment is safer than the incision or the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calament and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them into one pot, and put in ashes, and make them boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 And let the pot be well sealed with strong earth, and within the pot there should be an instrument made like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 And let it be of silver or copper, and one end should protrude into the patient's mouth until the vapors rise to the eye through the nose, until the eye is anesthetized.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 after which it often returns, until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the hot appearance of the abscess, because many things happen there;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 and do not do so when the abscess is cooling down.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 And if this instrument is not present, then take a reed and place inside it the head of an egg, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 because the eggshell does not allow the vapor to irritate the mouth, and this is a good remedy along with the treatment.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 Often there are bones or fish spines lodged in the throat, or something similar;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 so it is necessary that you remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sunlight with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move; ὴ
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 And what does not open to you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 by chance if the harsh thing comes out through vomiting
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of apple, or a lettuce root, or a crust of dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 and attach to the sponge a thread, and then swallow it
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 and when it reaches the place, it will swell up, and then you will pull on the thread 》
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 and if it does not come out through what we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it may enter the throat more easily, and let the head be raised.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 And take care not to touch the epiglottis, so that the whole [throat] does not swell up, and do not push the bone inside.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 And it is better that the patient himself inserts the instrument, so that he may be moved where the thing is difficult.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 if she [the patient] pushes downward, or draws it strongly through all the instrument equally, until it is strong.
de la sansue de la gorge	 of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 Sometimes bloodletting is used, as I said in the division, by means of medication treatment;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 and when this does not help at all, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, after you have pressed the tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see blood, then draw it with a very small hook, or with fine tweezers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if this does not work, then take a reed and put it in the patient's throat, then put hot iron into the tip of the reed, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if the patient is thirsty all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in without choking, and move it about in their hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 And as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of the egg.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 do this many times, because it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are live coals, and let it be covered with a perforated sieve in the middle, and through that hole place the head of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 then cast your fumigation into it, and have the patient put the head of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth so that no smoke comes out, but let it go all the way to the blood;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 And the bleeding will fall now, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 And let the patient be thirsty, and eat salty things and the like, and do not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And then he will need to evacuate it through this process.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 And the shape of the instrument with which one draws blood is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pincers to enter into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 and has the likeness of a hawk's beak, and there is roughness like a file, so that what it takes, it cannot leave.
et vez ci la forme:	 and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	 the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 Very many similarities to an abscess are, according to what is remembered here after from one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 And this happens in two ways, one of which is by its very nature, due to moisture it retains.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second type is according to their location on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 car the boils of the head are different from those of the base, and the boils of the fleshy place are different from those that come on joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 And so are the abscesses that should not be pierced until the boil is mature according to its development;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And so are those that should be pierced when they are ripe, and do not mature according to their development, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 For when boils come near joints, and one lets them until they are suppurated all around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may become corrupted, which is why this causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 Or if the abscess is near the main member, and you delay the piercing until it is mature, it will harm the main member;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 or if it is near the foundation, then pierce it as soon as it is ripe.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 And it is not appropriate to pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for those near the foundation, so that it does not rot inside and become elongated, leading to a fistula. xspace
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 And may not heal within a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 And you must know the hour of the abscess’s perforation that has matured according to its completion, and this is when the pain is calmed, and the separation of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and from the debate and improvement of the abscess’s head, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 And you must make the perforation sit in the most dependent place of the abscess, and where it opens, move.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And let the perforation be long of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in the joints and at the nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no folding.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that bend, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in the fleshy part, it is better that you leave the opening until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 Because if you pierce it before this, the body will be elongated by the poison from it, and it is full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 And perhaps it will harden the lips and make them deeper.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if there is an abscess that has been opened according to the width of the body, according to how much the limb needs it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 And you must introduce into small abscesses, small holes;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 and in large abscesses, large holes, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover the heart and close them off;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 when they have become as thin as cloths, and are dead, then you must do as one does with buboes:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 And if there are such that are split into three corners, and some that you close as the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the groin; ︎
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 and if it has such [dislocations], when making a round cut, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 Those who do not have a head, such as a soft surface abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it completely;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 and if the abscess is large and it has collected a great deal of pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once in that hour, but draw out some of it.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out more again.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 do this many times over several days, until all the pus comes out;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or an old, feeble man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the spirit sometimes jumps with the exit of the pus, which can kill the patient, and you may not notice it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 Avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have perceived your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 And if it is a clean incision, then apply linen bandages or old cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 And if it is a large abscess and there are many holes, then you should insert a bandage into each one so that they touch each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 And if you have cut into the abscess a piece of skin and have pulled it around, then you should fill it with old cotton or shreds of linen without moisture, and bind it until the third day.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs in your work, then bring cold and easy water, and moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 And if the flow of blood persists, administer treatment and care, and use the powders that I have mentioned earlier in this book. If it is wintertime and the place of the abscess is very sensitive, you must apply hot compresses soaked in wine and oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if it is in the summer and the place is fleshy, you must apply cold compresses soaked in water or wine until the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then unbind the abscess and dry it and treat it as needed until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 And this is necessary to know generally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 As I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	 of swellings
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 Or when small abscesses come on the head, and are of the same kind as those that are in clothes, just like the eyes of a sparrow, and there are many similar ones.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 There are some that are fat and such where there is moisture as well as pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 And there are those that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the surgeon does not act contrary to this.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of cutting is such that you should test with all instruments called "spoon", from which the shape comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, then cut through from above the long (bone).
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape away the skin without leaving anything that contains this moisture, for it always returns if something is left behind.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 Then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 If not, in water and salt, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 and those will run like one who has stayed up all night
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know for sure that it does not stay in place at night;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat the wound with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 And if the abscess contains thick pus, cut it according to this method, lengthwise;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 and throw away your fingernails, and scrape it from all sides, and put all your effort into pulling the cloth where it lies; ️
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the cauterization does not work as expected, then do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And do the same for a pustulent abscess, in cutting and cleaning as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And cut on the pustulent and moist abscess, for it is lighter, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if there are some of these abscesses on the head where there is no moisture, such as the abscess that I cut on an old woman's head;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 And I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if one had struck it, it would have caused as much damage as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 In other abscesses that come to a head, be it those that come to the heads of children or to the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made in the lowest possible place, so that the pus may exit.
et les cure si com il covient.	 And treat them as needed.
des scrophules	 of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often these boils occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are many, and intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 And each scrofula is properly inside its rib, like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And there are many similarities between these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and some that are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 In that which you see well-disposed to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and moves from each side and is not harsh on the nerves of the neck or on the artery or on the passage, and is not deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 then you must cut it from above, and peel it from each part, and extend the two lips of the heart, if necessary, as we have said in head abscesses.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 and draw a little at a time, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula be neither too sharp nor cutting, so that the hand does not slip, and do not push too far forward, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not stop bleeding, then put in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that stanch blood, and bandage the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And leave it until the abscess is relieved, and the wound becomes soft, and begins to suppurate.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 And when the blood has been stanched, return to your work until it is completed.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 Then search with your finger if there remain any small scabs, and cut and clean them off.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 And if at the root of the scab there is a great vein, it is not fitting that you cut that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall off by itself, without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 Then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you cut out all the scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 so it is necessary that you attend to cutting the root of it, and draw strongly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 Those scrofula which hold excessiveness, pierce there where it appears dead;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 and pierce it as mentioned before, in descending order, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and when the wound is well cleansed, then bandage it with ointment-soaked meat until it heals.
de squinance	 of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 The ancients spoke and taught about the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is a transcription of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 For those with squinting, it is necessary that the slit of the throat called "epiglottis" be cut.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 and one should not help with this, because all the veins and the throat of the patient are affected in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 When the disease is in the channel of the tonsil, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 It is necessary therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three or four small transverse cuts, between two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the hyoid bone, not in the larynx.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 and those who are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis are those in whom there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And if the master is fearful, then he must stretch the skin of the throat to its full length, then split the heart until it reaches the chin.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the sponge, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 and it is proven by the paralysis of the chin which jumps strongly at the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 And when the time has passed where one fears suffocation, bring together the two lips of the heart wound, and suture it all alone without a needle.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 Albucasis said that this should not be done until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and is unable to breathe.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 Then one cuts the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 and therefore the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease had passed, and it passes in three days or four, and then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, until it was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 I saw that a young woman took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the tendons of the neck;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 and I was called to cure her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 I discovered the wound, and found that blood had issued from it, although she had not cut a vein or artery except in the throat, and the wind was issuing strongly through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and cared for it until she was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 And it happened to the maiden that she was hoarse of voice, and she returned afterwards to her state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	 Of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the color of a coal, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	 and there are two kinds:
naturez, et accidens;	 natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 or the natural kind has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 And the accidental kind is of two kinds, one of which resembles fat and the other kind resembles an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 and there should be fear, and one must not operate with fire on those that are large, but only on the small ones, and test and seek throughout the entire intromission.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 If you find it like this, as if it were fat, and it does not touch any vein, then cut it off, just as one cuts the nose, and draw out all its hair, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And bandage it well immediately, and treat it as needed, until it heals perfectly.
des nous	 de
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 There are many kinds of noses, about which I will tell all their similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 and now it is appropriate for me to describe all the differences that exist between a nose and an ulcer.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say that an ulcer is hot and feverish as long as the inflammation has not passed and the pus has been released.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 Then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 With a nose, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and it begins like a boil, and grows large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 And they are according to two likenesses, either greasy or moist, and many are of color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 It is necessary that when you come to the treatment of us, you first examine and inquire with all the instrument that is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of us is that you take the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the heart, then according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 Then remove the probe, and be careful in this, lest it burst forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 If running moisture has a color, incise it as I have said of other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 And if after the probe moisture comes forth, know that it is greasy, so incise it in a cross shape, and take it with tweezers, and gently scrape each side and guard the skin where it lies so that you draw it out whole with the knot; ething
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 And if you cannot extract it whole, then remove it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 For if anything remains, the pain returns many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if a bit remains and the wound festers, then fill the wound with some corrosive powder, close the wound, place something soothing on it, and continue other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 And if the pain is great, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it as if it were a flesh wound.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 And if the vein is pulsating against you or another, then hurry and fill the place with ground vitriol, and leave it there for two days or three, until the wound festers and the bleeding subsides.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 Then return to the cup what remains of the nut.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 Here are the forms of the interposed instruments, and there are three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	 great, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 and there are three types called "albaret," and one called "breb," and they come in three kinds.
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 and they are similar to the needles with which one sews sacks, and they are made of citron wood or iron or silver, and those that are yellow in color are worth more, and they are proven better for black lead to encircle the scabs of fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	 And there are three types:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Great, medium, and small, according to the size of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The shapes of the hooks are very similar, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 Great, medium, and small.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 And there are hooks that have two curves of three types likewise.
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 And there are hooks that have three curves and are also of three types.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 And there are hooks with two curves and hooks with only one curve, all of which are of three types.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 And all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The heads of these are sharp, and there are some that cut from only one side, which are used for skinning the hands, so as not to cut the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 And from these intrusions are the amputated limbs returned to their places, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	 And there are three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 great, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 And one does not use it anywhere except in meaty places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and elbows, and in similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 And sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to a scoop for stones, according to this shape, with which one stops bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 And it is sometimes placed in the location that heals quickly for veins and arteries, and sometimes they return according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 And they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, must follow this form from this line .b to .g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then scrape away the fat, and fill the wound with meat-based medicine, then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 And if the breast sags downward and is reduced due to its size, as happens with women, then make two incisions on top in two similar cuts.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 so that one is attached to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from this line .b until this line .g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment, until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 And if it is not healed, or the incision is not complete, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with damp cotton in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 And let it remain until it dissolves the rest and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	 of the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 These abscesses that come under the armpits are hard like scrofula with ribs, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those that contain moisture should be incised according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been drained, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and treat with appropriate ointment until healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, then cut it as we have said in the section on scrofula, and if the wound drains pus, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	 From the disruption of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 When the artery is severed and the skin above it is closed, often abscesses occur, and the same happens with a swollen vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 And if one recognizes it thus when it is for the artery, then the abscess is long in depth.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 And when you feel it with your fingers, then you feel the constriction.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 And when it is for the vein, then the wound is red and swollen.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 And it is foolish to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and in the groin and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 Therefore it is necessary to avoid the use of iron, and one who has an abscess on the head must also avoid it, and in one who has a swelling of the artery, make an incision over the skin lengthwise.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 Cut the flesh as before, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 Then push a needle under it and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 Then press the area between the two ties with a probe until the pus comes out, and the abscess should be relieved.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 Then manage the dressing in such a way that it covers well, until the ligatures fall off.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat with ointment as before, until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 And if the abscess is of the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you take hold of as much of the abscess as possible with your hand, then insert the needle under the place that you are holding with your hand, and make it pierce through, and there should be a double thread, so that you pull it out from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with one of the two ends of the thread to the two heads of the needle;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 and if you doubt that the thread may come out too soon, then insert another needle with all of the thread underneath all of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 Then cut the abscess until the pus comes out, then cut the pus from the heart and leave that which is attached.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil over it, then administer treatments of linen bandages and onions until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	 of the nerve abscesses
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 Just as abscesses occur in the artery and vein, abscesses also occur in nerves when they are pierced, or by excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 And this happens most often in the shoulders and feet, and in all places where there are joints. It is a serious abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it is in many forms without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 And when one presses it strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depths of the body, but beneath the heart.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 And moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, nor downward nor upward. And that which is in the joints should not be cut with iron: 》
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 per adventure it would go toward constriction
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 and he who is in the head or in the forehead, makes the skin wrinkle up.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If the abscess is small, hold it with pincers and cut it at its root
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and if it is large, suspend it with the hook, and scrape off the skin, then remove and close the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	 of hanging boils
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 Sometimes it occurs in the stomach and nowhere else, and it is an illness called "fungus" because of its similarity to them, and it has a subtle root and a large head
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 and there are some small ones and very large ones
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 And I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and were always split open, and moisture constantly flowed from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I cut them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces and the other six, and the work in the incision is such that you should consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the artichoke is pale and moist with fine roots.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If you cut it with a broad spatula, and have in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 For when cutting often there is too much bleeding, and if the blood overcomes you, then hurry to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 And if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the iron incision, take a well-made willow branch, and bind it to the affected area as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 And then tighten it, and do not stop tightening the willow branch until it cuts into the affected area, and each time through this process;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 And if the roots are large, there is fear to cut immediately due to the abdomen, but you can cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is of red-brown color and poor sensitivity and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 Car it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the cure of the abscess afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	 when the wound is severe
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 Se the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of wound or slitting of sinus, and it is on the belly and goes to some of the abscesses, as happens in other ulcers, either from blood coursing through veins or arteries as mentioned above, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 and if it is from the ulcer of sinus and from the discharge of boil, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and opens with various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And if it comes from the exit of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when one presses on his two hands so that he vomits, and then it returns, and sometimes it becomes hard, and it increases greatly at the entrance to the bath and through great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor thing, and it drains well when you press it with your hand, but do not constrict it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 and if it is due to blood, then the abscess opens with these signs: it is large and hard, and it is fixed according to its quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to flatulence, then it is easy to touch, and the work is such that you must look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or a vein, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 If it is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 Because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bowel, then you must instruct the patient to raise his leg and lie straight, and then sign around the wound;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 then command him to lie quietly between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked for all the circumference, and draw out half of the abscess above with the entire great hook;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk tightly, and let the knot of the ligature be firm;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 Then work on half of the abscess stretched over the ligament, and press your thumb inside, and seek the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 if you find it caught by the ligament, then free it, and push the intestine back out of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 and if you find the abscess, then take it at the base, and cut off the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 and if the artery or vein is in the way, then go carefully around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads into them, and place the two needles around what you have done in a cross pattern that you make by piercing;
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 then draw the abscess in four places onto the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place until it putrefies, and each bit of dead flesh will fall away by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 Or when you cut it, when it is rotted and corrupted, then treat the wound as needed, and remove the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as needed, and close the wound.
dou chancre	 of the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 We have said in the section on cancers, what they look like and how to treat them with medicines, and how to avoid surgical treatment.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 And we say that cancer begins in the flesh, and great care is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where it can be scraped off, like cancer of the breast, thigh, or similar places, it should all be removed at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 And when he is old and ancient, you must not approach him, for I have never been able to cure any.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 nor has anyone ever cured one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 And when the work is in place and can be removed, as we have said, it is that you must sometimes purge the patient of black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 then make him healthy if he has an obvious fullness, then place the patient in a good spot to do the work.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 then cut away your onions or warts, and the hair from all around, and remove it entirely without leaving anything behind;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 and let the blood flow freely, and press the spot well with your hand or some object, and if the bleeding hinders the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is clotted;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal from one treatment until he is healed.
de ydropisie	 Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron:
si est eclites soulement;	 only it is inflamed;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 and in these two similarities one should not touch with iron:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 that is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for they are deadly things;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy that is called «inflammation» with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as diarrhea and similar things;  />
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease except only dropsy, and he is not too young nor too old, then thus should you work:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 lift the patient straight up in your hands, and have the assistant press the stomach by pushing the water to the lowest part of the bladder, then take the pointed spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 with its point, and nevertheless it should not be so intrusive that when inserted, it can reach the intestines and cannot hurt it;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 then look if the dropsy is accumulated towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 If it is necessary, you must cut three fingers' width above the base of the thumb.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 and if the hydropsy is due to liver disease, let your cut be three fingers' width to the left of the base.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 and if it is due to the spleen, then let it be on the right, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie upon the cut so that the excesses do not flow into that weak place.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push it through, and lift your hand all the way up to the subcutaneous tissue between the skin and the fascia as if you were scraping, to the thickness of a nail or less around.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 then pierce the fascia until the subcutaneous tissue comes into view, which is the place of water, then draw the instrument strongly, and push this instrument with which there is the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and it is of light brass or copper, and has at its lower part a small hole.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 and on one side there are three holes.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 and two on the other side, and one on the other.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision which scribes cut into the quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 at the top is the airhole, so that when the instrument comes to the water, they now rise on the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 empty then the half or third part, because if you empty more than is necessary in that hour, it may happen that the patient dies from the loss of his spirit through the arm, where he falls unconscious, or approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 but in an empty place according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the patient's condition indicates, and their pulse.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 then take out the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the wax that blocks the hole on the syringe, as I have mentioned, so that you pierce in this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 then renew the instrument the next day, if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 do this every day, and be careful not to overdo it so that only a little water remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 And if you are unsure about the patient and leave a lot of water in them, then treat with a hot poultice or sand, and by much sweating or bathing in the sun, and let them drink wine.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 and the treatment with drying medicines should be continued until it is healed, and cauterization on the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the fluid, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	 Of the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small opening, or one that is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 It must be pierced as soon as possible with a very fine needle according to this method:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 then insert a thin reed through the hole, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four. And when he needs to urinate, remove the reed, and let him urinate, and then put it back;
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 and perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes forth does not leave a hole open.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 He whose hole is small will be treated with the pine plug as we have said, and it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 those who do not have the hole in its proper place are harmed, for some are born with the hole at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they raise their penis upwards;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 And cannot heal because the material cannot reach the bone, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 And the manner of the work is that the patient lies on his back, then stretch the head of the rod and the handle equally as the width of a feather quill, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And beware of bleeding that often occurs there; and if it does happen, staunch it with what staunches blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	 of the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 Many times these baths are taken in the rod, and this is an ugly appearance of flesh;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 And there are malignant and benign ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 Si you must take them at one time with skill, then cut and clean all of them, then place upon moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then continue the care with daily application until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the albathe is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, then you must apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 When you have cut it, and if the blister is partly on the vein, with part of it under the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part that is under first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it has healed, then treat the rest.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 For when you treat them together, it is not certain that the head of the vein will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption will occur in the vein and in the joint.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 So it is necessary to cut away all that is black and corrupted, then place upon it a plaster made of honey and flour from the bark of pomegranates and peas, then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 The cautery serves two purposes at once:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 that is to say, for the purging of blood and for the treatment of putrefaction.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 and if the head of the penis is putrefied and drawn back, then you must insert a leaden probe into the urethra, and have the patient urinate through it.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 and when the skin is inflamed at the tip of the penis, which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, due to a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape it with a hairy instrument until the connection is released, and the head of the penis is freed on all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 and if it is difficult to treat this condition, then you must scrape with a spoonful of the tip of the penis and the skin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 Then quickly place between two [supports], and put one fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
de la circoncision	 of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 Circumcision is not a separation of continuity like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 nevertheless when we perform this work by our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest cut for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, because they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 For I have seen many masters and healers performing circumcisions around the foreskin, on the strong parts, and on the entire glans;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 so that the cutter might cause injury because there are two layers, and if one cuts through the top layer, the bottom layer remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 Or there is fever, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleansing which is of the water, the point of the member is not secure.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 and at the cleansing of the nail perhaps the iron escapes, and the work is ruined, and many times it happens that there is no need for cleansing, and I wish it to be so.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 From the amputation done with silk thread I have found the advantage of the experiment, for the silk cuts evenly on top as well as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 For when you press your hand, cut evenly in one stroke.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 but the thread must be well twisted around the leather;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 and the method of the first work is such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you are not doing anything to it but tying the thread around the rod only, and then let it go in all the ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 Then let it stand straight between your hands, and replenish the powers between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 Then place your hand on the staff and blow into its heart, and pull it up until the head of the staff is inside.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 Then clean it well of the gathered filth, then bind the place securely with a double thread, then tie it under the armpit to another bond.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 And hold it with two fingers of the second ligament at the little finger and the index finger, and cut between the two ligaments, then lift the heart quickly and pull the head of the staff.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 Then let the blood flow drop by drop, for this is the cure.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And put powder on it and on the powder a drape stuck with the white of a cooked egg, tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh oil of roses, and leave it until the next day, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 The form of the poultice for this is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 Both ends should be sharp and equal in size.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 The error of the poultice is when the herbs inside are wet from the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 Therefore, you must spread it with your fingernail, so that the place does not form an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 And cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 And if they exceed three days, and that which is below the member is swollen, then leave it until the abscess has subsided, and gently scrape off the scab.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 If you can move the tip as you please, and be careful of the part of the member, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 Then cure the place with sudden powdered wound, as we have said in the treatment of powders, and if the tip goes beyond measure and goes above, it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	 Of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 The retention of urine is due to the formation of stones, or congealed blood, or bone, or dead flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the section on classification.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained due to a stone in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 And let the feet be placed on the back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and let the patient hold his breath as long as he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 And then the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone above, so that the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe," of which here is the form.
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 and let it be of fine silver, lightly hammered, like a bird's feather.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 and let the rod be one and a half palms long, and let it be fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 And the manner of issuing urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie at its end a bag of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 and cut off the excess of the wool and push it up to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and have the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 Then put the syringe lightly on the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then fold the penis over towards the foreskin.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it reaching the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because the duct through which it passes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 Then draw out the thread all the way to the tip of the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out hard and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And repeat with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	 Of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 When scabbing or blood comes into the bladder, or there is rot assembled therein, and you wish to distill waters and medicines, then make for the entire instrument that is called a "clepsydra," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 It is closed, and there are three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 Of one side, and I of the other side, as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 and the leaves chosen so that the medicinal juice is such that it stops the member well without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture, and push when needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 and when you see your medicines fall into the bladder, place the head of the kettle in the moisture, and draw out what is inside.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 thus you will draw the moisture into the kettle, and then push the contents back forcefully.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 so the moisture will enter, and will now come to the bladder, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder:
si est ci:	 Si est ci
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 And it is of silver or steel, and the head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 and beneath in the chest where the ligament rests.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pouch with that moisture over the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 Then insert the nozzle of the enema into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has entered, so that the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it evenly all around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 Then push a strong thread through these holes, then join the circle together like one joins a bucket, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	 of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 We have already said in the division the methods of stones, and the extraction together with medicine;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 And I have said the difference between a stone in the kidneys and all the signs, and in which stone one should work by cutting;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 And in the bladder, and in the penis.
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 And I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like fine water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 and there opens the anus, and the patient grabs his penis, and he ejaculates many times, and then it swells.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 and with each of these jumps the foundation shakes.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 and the healing is light in children until they are four years old, and it is very severe in the elderly, and it is of moderate difficulty for those who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 and the treatment is lighter for those with a large stone than for those with a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, first, we must cleanse the patient with an enema, to expel all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes hinders the search for stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 Then take the patient by the feet and turn them upwards and move downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and jumps out some time.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be under his thighs so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 Then seek and touch within;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 And if it does not fall with the touch of all, then moisten your finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 and push it into its foundation, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then bring it to the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 then press with your finger, and push it out from where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and order him to extend with his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where the cut is made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 Then he applies the spatula pressing, from which comes the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 And he makes an incision between that which is between the thighs and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the vein.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 and let the cut be straight over the stone, and your two fingers be close to the anus, and let the cut across it be so that it is wide on the outside, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 by chance, the pressure from the finger in the anus causes it to jump out without work
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 and know that there are some stones with angles and edges:
si est griés a issir;	 if it is obstructed from coming out
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 and there are others that are below, like a pea, round, whose exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 To those then who have angles and margins, make the cut larger.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 And if it does not jump out, then you must pull with the pincers which are like a file at the top, to pull the stone until it is dislodged.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 Or you put under the instrument subtle curved at the top;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 And if you cannot thus trick it, then widen the pouch where the hole is, and if the flesh tears, then constrict it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 And if there are more than one stone, then first put the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut on top, then draw strongly, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, it must be sawed, and a larger wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 either he dies, or urine flows continuously where the wound cannot heal;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 yet you should strive to extract it, or break it with pincers, until you remove it in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bandage it, and place on top a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 then bandage the patient around his neck, and do not untie the knot until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you untie it, wash the place very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of dyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 And if abscesses or corrosion come to the wound, and a clot of blood in the bladder, which retains the urine so that it passes with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 Stick your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will run to the bladder, and will cause putrefaction.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then raise the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help him in all the ways you know, until he is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind his two thighs together, and apply the medicines to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra, and stuck there, and the urine cannot come out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 then the treatment of what I say is such that you cut it many times, and thus he is freed from cutting through this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 Take iron with a shape like this, and it should be fixed at three corners on one stake:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 then insert the punch lightly into the shaft until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 and turn the punch in your hand gently against the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 then the urine will come out, and press your hand against what remains of the stone inside the shaft.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 Then it is immediately broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 and if you cannot do this because of any obstruction, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the shaft toward the stone between the two ties, then draw it out forcefully, and untie the threads, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; )))
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let the treatment continue until healed.
de la piere des femmes	 of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 It often happens that stones are lodged in women, and if it does occur, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons.
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 And the second reason is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who reveals herself to physicians, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-versed in this hand-based art.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 And the fourth manner is that the stones in women are more deeply embedded than in men, which requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear. And if necessity compels you, then you must find a knowledgeable midwife, but they are rarely found, and if you cannot find one, then seek a subtle chaste physician.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 And it presents a wise midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and commands her to do what you command her concerning the investigation of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 and take great care to see if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 then she must insert her finger into the vagina and search for the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 and if she finds it, she should press it under her finger, and commands that she insert her finger into the vagina of the patient, and seek out and press her left hand strongly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder downward until it reaches the base of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 then cut on the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where it is most prepared, and the patient will feel the bone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 and do not move his finger on top or beneath the bone, and let the cut be small at first;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 then insert the reed into the cut, if you feel the bone, narrow the wound so that the bone may come out more strongly, and know that there are many kinds of bones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 these are: small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you know the signs, you will know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if the blood overcomes you, apply powdered vitriol to the place, and let it sit for an hour until the blood is stanched.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 Then return to your work, until the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I have told you for extracting stones in men to help you in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 And if the blood overcomes you, and it is from the artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the place and bandage with cloths and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not pull it out, lest the patient die by chance;
puis cure la plaie.	 Then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the place healed, return to your work until the stone is passed.
de hernie carnouse	 of flesh hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 "Ramice" means a kind of cloth used to bind wounds. Therefore, an aquous ramice is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white silk under the skin of the kidneys, which contains the egg;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 and it is called "silk," and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that this is another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 And this is the skin of the eye between the white part that we have said.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 and this would not happen if it were not for pus.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 And the cause of this collection is due to weakness in the kidneys, which spreads this substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 And sometimes it comes from striking the eyes, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 or it is a yellowish color, or it is without red, or black, or white like water, and this happens more often;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white part that we have said, then the abscess is thin, the pus long like an egg, and the eye does not open, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if there is moisture in the proper fabric, then the abscess is thin with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if the moisture is between the skin of the coccyx and the white flesh, then one feels it well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test the entire intromission area from which the form comes before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 According to that which follows the instrument, judge what is within it.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 And when we cure it with fire, it is necessary that the patient be bled according to our ability and the fullness of his body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 Then have him lie on his back, on something a little high, and put many blankets under him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs at the base of the coccyx.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 Then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the coccyx along its length until near the anus, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the coccyx down to the white flesh, and delicately scrape according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 Then pierce the sponge full of water through a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put your fingers in, and swell the sponge upward;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 And do not touch the core of the kidneys, but only the sponge;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 Cut all or in pieces evenly the flesh from him subtly, so that if you do not cut well wisely, the water will come back;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 And if the egg jumps forward from your work, return it to its place when you have completed the sponge's task;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then sew together the two leaves of the kidney core with one stitch, then heal it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are bleeding, suspecting the flow of blood;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 Then cut the string with all the suspending parts, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 And if the vessel is divided into two parts together, know that these are two veins;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 Then cut the other part in the same way as you did the first, then wipe away the blood, and place a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And place another piece of cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, and put on the two strings, and put double-layered bandages on top, and bind it all up with all the ligatures according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 Then take two bandages and stuff them with wool according to this pattern, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and one of the strings should go from the anus up to the back, and the other to the scrotum.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 And let the other two heads be on the two ankles, and all the ligaments should be bound together in the elbow loop.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 And sometimes this ligature is treated with a cautery in place of an iron cut. This means you should take a subtle surgical cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and it should be heated as we have said, so that the white part which contains water is uncovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white part at the testicles, and it should be burnt with this hot subtle cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 And cut in all ways that you can, until you burn everything.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 and make sure the fire does not touch the testicle.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 and know that this work is more healing;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 and moving cautions against bleeding, and bandages to prevent the work of incision;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 and if any thing goes contrary, whether it is an abscess or bleeding or anything else, then treat what goes contrary to you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this work because of its horror, then introduce perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain through the signs that we have said that aquous humor is there, then make the patient sit on a high seat; etti.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 then pierce the abscess in the lower part as wide as possible, and place the perforation along the length of the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And let the holes be wide so that all the water flows freely;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 Then place cotton on the spot, bind it, and allow the rest of the water to drain, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 And if the white cloth does not allow water to exit from the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or an instrument for removing water from hydrocephalic patients, as described above.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And widen the wound, and know that the water will return and be collected again after six months or a year, and when it is collected as before, then the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 Know that in cutting this vein there is fear of many complications, which is why I think it is better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 And I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 So I say that many abscesses come to the body, especially to the joints;
et c’est par mout de cas.	 and this is very common.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 This is to say by an excessive acute and sharp humour that spreads to the joints, or from blunt trauma;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 and the colour of the abscess depends on the colour of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 and it experiences no pain, yet the abscess is severe;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 and sometimes the abscess is feared and dreadful, with a reddish colour, and occasionally it comes from a nodule of artery, or from swollen veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 When it is from a nodule of artery, it is known by the hot nature of the abscess when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 And it is not necessary for you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 He who is affected by the swelling of a vein is known by his propensity to express at the touch of fingers, and one can well make an incision on this similarity, and on other scars;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 And it is that you cut the heart of the kidneys, then elevate the egg above, and draw the white thread outward, and deliver the suspending parts from all around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 If the egg is already hardened with these scars born, then it is necessary that you draw out the egg and the cut;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 And if it is on the surface or in that which is within the vessels, then you must deliver all this tendon and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 Et si les racines de la chair sont à l'arrière du lieu, alors il faut que tu coupes toute la chair et extrais le pus, comme nous l'avons dit.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when your work is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then perform other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a bud, with the softening of the cheeks, and if the patient goes away, he becomes very ill.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 And the treatment of this disease is almost as dangerous as the one mentioned before, nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 You must make the patient sit on a raised seat, then wrap the suspenders of the cheeks down to your thighs, with all the vessels that are near the penis, and pull them strongly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 Then cut with a broad, sharp spatula across the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the temples' arteries;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 then he inserts a needle with two threads, and ties it at the first place where the vein has come, and ties it again at the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 then he cuts them in half straight down, according to the length of the body, and draws out the putrid moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 then he treats the wound as with others where one inserts a bone, so that some vessel is filled which nourishes one of the eyes;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 for by this means no harm comes, and if the eye becomes blind in all vessels, then it is necessary to draw out the eyes from all vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 so that the eye does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	 de la rupture du sinus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The events of this hernia occur through the incision that comes in the groin, or the extension on the stomach in the inguinal region, which causes the intestines to descend from that opening into one of the testicles.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 And this opening is in the groin, or the extension of it, and these two types occur for many reasons.
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 from a blow, or a jump, or a sneeze, or lifting a heavy object, and from similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 And the signs when it is an extension of the groin are that it occurs little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 And the abscess is equal to the groin, because the groin presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 And the sign that it is of the section in the sinus is that at first it causes sudden pain, and the abscess has various appearances under the skin nearby, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine and the body outside of the sinus.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 And sometimes the rings go with the intestines, and are retained therein, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 And in these cauterizations with iron, because of fear, one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 And the manner of the work is such that you instruct the patient to pull out the intestines with his hand within the wound, if he can reach.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 then support him on his neck, between your hands, and lift the thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 then press the heart downwards, and cut all the skin of the testicles from top to bottom.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 then push inside the intestines of the belly some hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the feces may exit.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 then remove the fat that is under the skin of the testicles, so that all parts of the hard white fat are exposed.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 then insert your finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white fat under the skin of the egg, and between the second fat layer, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second fat layer.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 And then move to the right hand inside the heart of the kidneys, and extend the white silk up to your left hand, and lift the egg towards the waist with all the silk.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 And instruct the assistant to extend the egg upward, and untie what is tied behind the binding.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 And ask your two assistants if there is any part of the intestine wrapped in hard white silk, and if you find anything, push it down into the stomach.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 Then take a needle with a thread made of ten threads, and push it into the rear part of the silk, which is behind the skin of the kidneys.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 After the waist, then cut the threads that appear from the needles, until there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 Then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie them with a strong cord of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 Then wrap the heads with thread, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that no creature that nurses them can enter inside, lest an abscess form there;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 And put the cord back in place according to the first long cord, and after these two cords leave a piece of the thread that is under the skin of the knees the width of a finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 And then all the rest according to the roundness that the egg bears;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 Then cut in the part that is under the skin of the knees until the blood runs and boils, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 Then introduce wet wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wounds, and there introduce the bandage that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 And sometimes the white flesh is cauterized as we have said, after the incision, out of fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 For this happens often, and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 and if it is slow to fall off, then wash it with hot water, and place (it) on that which we have said, until it falls off;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	 of flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 In this branch, I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cut with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 And the ancients said that it is done as with the string that is with the screw, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting slightly above and below;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 then cut in half, and treat the abscess with that which works, until the vessel falls out;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let the treatment be as we have said, until he is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 Sometimes there is fracturing in joints, as we have said, and the place opens;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 And no one should discharge from the intestines like dogs, and if they do, it is little, and it closes up every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 Yet if it remains too long in this state, the wound or ulcer grows until the intestines discharge.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 And this happens due to the extension of the ulcer that is in the joints, as we have said, for it becomes extended and the place is softened and swollen and open.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 and the patient should lie on their back between your hands, then strike the swollen area with a broad blade according to the size of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 and then extract the pus that is beneath the skin with a hook, then take the cautery iron and place it on the visible part of the wound;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 and press firmly with your hand, then place the cautery iron on the two visible parts of the wound on top of the hook, and burn both places;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 then remove the cautery iron and do not cut the wound or spread any ointment or other substance, as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal rupture;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Then the treatment by treating the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 The incision is tight, and has no appearance in the suture, and the cautery is better in this place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 Many times the skin of the testicles in some men is softened because the glands within are softened, and this is evident to see.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 and it is necessary that when one wants to cure it, the patient lies on his back, and one cuts the softened skin onto the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 then sew together the two lips in one stitch, and if you wish, first sew down the excess skin with three or four strong stitches.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 then cut between the stitches, and treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed, and the threads fall out.
dou chastrement	 Of the castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 Know that castration is considered a disgrace in our law, and therefore I would prefer not to speak of it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 And there are necessary for two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 which is one of them that the physician knows how to answer when asked, and knows the cure;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 and the other is because we often have need of castration of some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and dogs and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 Therefore, I say that castration is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In that which we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and hanging;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 then take them in your hand until they are retracted and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	 Of castration by cutting:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 It is necessary that you dye the beast, and press the skin of the testicles to your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each testicle with one stroke, when you have well scraped them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 and leave any pouch of the scrotum and the fine scrotum that is on the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 and this method of castration is better than that done by attraction, because in the case of attraction, there may remain something from the testicles, which causes the beast to desire lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	 et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 one way is that between the two testicles there appears as if by the design of nature like a woman, where there is hair, and sometimes urine flows from it.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 Et tels estre ne puet avoir en nule manere d’enfanz: quar il ne poet pas faire l’un ne l’autre office de sa nature.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And the cure of a man and a woman is such that you cut all the flesh close together, and treat it as other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 in the second manner, of the men whose urine comes out through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	 of venereal disease
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 A tumor is flesh that has grown on the natural part, until it becomes very ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 It is necessary that you cut away the excess of the tumor with your hand or with scissors, and cut it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do not go too deep, so that blood does not come out, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 And to another wound that forms at the mouth of the uterus, and fills it, and perhaps jumps forth, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If necessary, you must cut it, as we have said regarding the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	 of the dislocated
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 It occurs when the woman's nature is not clear, or the opening is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 and it is caused either by birth, or by accident due to a disease that has come upon her.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 or it is caused by a deep wound, or by a subtle or thick secretion, and it is formed deep within the uterus, or on its sides, or beneath it, wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 and prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps even menstruation.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 And the recognition of this is by the gaze of the wound.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the blindness seems imminent, let it be near your hands or feet.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 If it is subtle in color and is near two pounds, hasten, and do thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 Place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 then weigh out the two pounds firmly until the subtle color is gone, and the swelling has passed.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 Then take wool, and soak it in oil, and place it on the spot, and have the woman lie down every day so that it cannot close.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the syphilis is hard and thick, you must cut it with a scalpel similar to a myrtle leaf blade.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 If the swelling is of flesh and bone, then suspend it with an onion and cut it;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 And have the medicines that staunch blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with plenty of egg.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 then bring a wide lead spoon, so that the wound cannot close
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 and let it be thus for a long time, and bring him a tent of dry linen
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then let him be treated with other treatments until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when a char is born into the womb, it must be covered in this manner, unless it is an encrusted abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For the encrusted abscess that is in the womb, one should not touch or make fire.
des emorroides	 of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which, without a covering, are usually exposed, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become hard.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 and we have already said in the division their appearance, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and the hardened ones, when they are deep in the womb and do not appear to be felt, then treatment by fire is not appropriate.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who are at the mouth of the wound, where one can feel them, are those that can be healed.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold house, then cauterize with tongs, and cut out its roots, then sprinkle on powdered hemostatic medicines such as vinegar, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 Then make him put his feet against the wall for an hour, then put them in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 And if blood continues to flow from there, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and apple tree bark, and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice on her back with it.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it festers, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 If not, then let air out through cupping glasses on the back and breasts without pricking;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 Then take wool, and soak it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and let it out in that place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when the abscess has subsided, then treat the place with onion oil until it is healed.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 And that which is called "albathir" is red, and it resembles the sharp point, so you must cover it as I have said for the telul.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then let the wound heal until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	 of the abscesses of the shin
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many kinds of abscess come to the shin, such as chancre and piercing abscess and herpes and carbuncles and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 Therefore, I must say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes on the back, which is not one of the abscesses that grow big;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 and if you want to know the work of iron, then consider whether the abscess is acute at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether it turns red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 Then do not hasten to pierce, but let the abscess ripen until the pain is relieved;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 And then have the patient sit on the seat, and let there be two small seats where he leans back, and supports his back and gathers his feet together outside the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 And let his thighs be spread wide, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good ligature.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 Then give the patient something to drink towards his right side, and bring the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the wound, from which then comes the shape.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 And it is necessary that when you see the instrument being brought near, that you first insert a reed to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 And if the instrument is too large, it must be covered with cloths to prevent it from hurting.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 And he must put the horn of the instrument on top and dip the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 And when the abscess opens and one makes an opening in the soft part of the hand, it must be covered at the top with spathe milk.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 And when the wound is emptied, then you must put moist linen cloths in rose oil or in dry green oil into the wound.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 And place the edge of the cloth inside the wound at the bottom of the flesh, and place another on top of the flesh and on the joint clean linen moistened in boiled water or mallow.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then the treatment after two days of soaking, as long as it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 and sometimes the scab and the wound are lifted by an enema of water and honey, and then with water and roots of lily and long-stemmed plants that have been cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 then it returns to soaking.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is festering in the marrow, then you must be careful not to burn with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	 of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural process of childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pushing downwards, and desiring to smell the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 then the child hastens to exit by force.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 then know that this birth is according to the natural process, and the exit is under its head, and the afterbirth with it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 And when you see these signs, then it is necessary to gently press on his belly, so that the child comes out quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 for when he descends onto his head, then the placenta comes with him, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses by a good cleaning;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 and those who come otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 For sometimes he comes on his feet, and sometimes he comes out violently through the body or the head, and the hands, or he comes on his belly, or sometimes, and he is turned by chance onto his neck, and in other bad forms;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 it is necessary for the midwife that she be wise and skilled in these things, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the forms in which one must assist her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 Se the child comes out of its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth in pain, and the child's strength is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, where the women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 and let its nature be of oil or fenugreek, which has been cooked, and then pour the bath between her teeth a little spoonful of which the form is here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 and cut the afterbirth, and scrape off at her fingernail until the moisture that is within runs out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman a clyster of fenugreek mustard with sesame oil;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 then have her take and sneeze pepper, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 If one extracts the child now.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 And if both hands come out forcibly, then you must reset them lightly bit by bit;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 and if they cannot go back in, then place the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 then knock the stool over onto the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the toppling.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 and if the hand cannot go back in and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife that was placed here before, and extract the child, and reset it likewise.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the child’s birth on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When the child comes out on its feet, one must push it upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 and then turn it bit by bit until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 Then take a hold of one foot and extend it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 When he can jump to his knees, then instruct him to grasp it, and make it sneeze conditionally;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 if he jumps farther, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 And if he does not jump as we have said, then turn him little by little until he is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 For then it is easily done.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if he does not come farther as we have said, then take mullein of hart's-tongue, and oil of balsam, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 and place this ointment on the woman's genitalia inside and outside, then make her sit in hot water up to the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 And when she is well soaked beneath, give her a potion of myrrh, and place it beneath, and leave it there for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 then have her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child is about to jump out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 of the child's exit on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When the child comes in this manner, then have the midwife place her hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 then have her sit back on her heels, and let her feet hang down, and she should lie on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 and let her bend her hands little by little, and then have her place her hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from beneath, so that she is prepared below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 And if the child does not jump out, take her feet and move them strongly, then move the belly upwards, then push with your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 And give the child little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 and instruct the woman to take hold of herself until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 of the issue of the child which comes from a wide hand hanging
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 It is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 if it cannot be brought back, then lift up the woman and let her walk.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed and spread her legs wide.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 then apply the instrument that I have described.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, then study to bring back the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 and give the child according to its natural form, and make it sneeze, and instruct her to take hold of herself until the child comes out strongly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 of the issue of the child on its neck, and with hands spread out, and face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 It is necessary that the patient keep their hand still, then turn it a little at a time, and move it gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 And when it is healed, put on the natural balm of althea and oil, as we have said, then instruct them to move it a little at a time.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 And when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and tell her to take hold.
et la fai esternuer.	 And make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 De this same manner to all the secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 When it comes out this way with all the snot, cut the mucus with your fingernail until the moisture is emptied.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 And if the child vomits on its face and neck, cut it off from the mouth so that it is not retained, and let the child die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 Then push the child inside, until you have placed it as needed, and instruct the woman to take some time.
adonques si istra legierement.	 Then withdraw lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four at once;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 And this is not an unusual thing, nor does it happen often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 Two are strange things, and do not live, if at all;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 I know these, that they are multiple, and are divided by the umbilical cord that surrounds them, which is tied to the womb;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 And sometimes they come out as naturally as one alone, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 And if they come out violently, then treat it as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, and act quickly and lightly as she knows how.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And make sure to do so in such a way as to promote healing.
de plusors enfans	 of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 Sometimes they are formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, and even more up to fifteen, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measuring of the wise Glorious One, and it is necessary that the midwife knows all this, for perhaps similar things may happen;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 do so accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	 of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When you care for a woman who has had a stillbirth or miscarriage, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 then you must know if the woman is of sound health, and has no complications or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 If necessary, let the woman be placed on her back, and her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 And let the midwife apply the scissors in two parts, so that she is tied to the bed and not moved during the birth of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oil, mixed with a paste of althea and fenugreek and flax seed, then let the midwife anoint her hands with these oils and pastes.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 Then gently insert them into the mother, then seek out the place where she inserted the ointments, and take care to see if the child is prepared to descend onto its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 If the ointments are inserted into his eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the chin or in the armpits or near the ribs, and if the descent is onto the feet, then insert it into the big toe and in the middle of the ribs.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 And it is necessary that he holds the awl in his right hand, and places the handle between his fingers of the left hand, and pushes with all his hand lightly, and drives the awl into one of these places that we have said, until it reaches the empty space;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 And this is the shape of the awl:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 Then drive against the other awl, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 And then they are equally extended by moving from one side to the other, so that it comes out easily, and the awls should be toothed to hold well, as shown in this figure:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 And if a part remains, then anoint the wound with some oil from his fingers, and push it into that part, and pull out the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if any remains behind, then place this ointment in a higher place, and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned due to tightness, then you must wrap it in a cloth until it all comes out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 Then cut in the joint of the foot or with the heel, and thus you must do with the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 And if the child's head is large and it is tight at the outlet, or if there is sharp water collected at the head, then you must put a thorny spatula between your fingers, pierce the head and draw out the water.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 Or take to the instrument that is called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments in the following chapter.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 And do the same if the child has a large head naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 And then draw out the bones with tweezers, and if the head jumps out and is stuck in the forceps, it should be cut open until the moisture that is in the worst part comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as best you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must puncture until the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 And if the child is standing on its feet, then the pulling is gentle, and the placement at the mother's breast is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 And if it is narrow in the belly or in the chest, then you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 And if it punctures the belly or the breast, until the moisture within is corrected.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 And if other members are removed and the head remains, then the healer should insert his hand into the depth of the wound and draw it out to the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 Then he places one or two fingers in and draws it strongly.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 And if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, it is not necessary to work on it, but rather one should apply moist and fatty substances.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And the healer applies poultices, soaking them in softening and moistening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 And if the child is on its side, and you can turn it over, then treat it as we have said for a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if one cannot do it, then draw it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the arrowhead.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 And when you have done this, if it happens that what we have said comes to pass in abscesses like those which come on the thighs;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 and if bleeding occurs, place it in boiling water to stop the flow, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 And I saw a woman whose womb an infant had died in, and then another was conceived above it, and that one also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After a long time, she developed an abscess in the breast, which swelled until it burst, and began to discharge greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I was called to treat it, and thought long about it, but the wound could not heal.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I placed a strong drawing plaster on it, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I was very astonished by this, for there are no bones in the belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 So I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I saw the wound, and drew many bones from it until the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 and the woman lived for a long time thus, and a little pus always came out of the place.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 and I have not written this chapter except because when the master finds something strange, he should know how to provide help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 To return the limb to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 Here follows the form of the press, for which we use the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 and at two turns are two keys of two locks.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 However, the horns should be more subtle in the restrictor, and should be made of boxwood or ebony;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 and the mouth of the wood should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the tree one finger, and in length a palm and a half;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 and between the two locks there should be two supports of this same wood, which are fixed in one and the other, half a palm long or slightly more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 and these two supports are fitted into the mouth of the matrix to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 Another form, more subtle and lighter, should be made from boxwood or ebony, according to the shape of the pincers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 And it should have two heads and two settings, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers in width.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 And when you see the instrument open completely, let the woman sit on the bed with her feet hanging and her legs spread apart, then insert the two settings closely together into the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Then work your hand on the entire instrument in the same way you did with the pincers, according to the quantity by which you see opening the mouth of the vagina, until the patient does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 This instrument is all surpassed, and their likenesses are multiplied.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 And when the mirror has prepared them, so much the more hurried is the work, and higher for men by their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 Do not despise the instrument before you have prepared it, for its necessity is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze by condiment, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 And if she dies from this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 If not, then take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put in it herbs that can open the woman's mouth, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over the fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 Then put a tube or hole from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient, and hold it until the steam enters the mouth.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 Then make them sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 Si la seconde fois hâte-toi.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 And if she remains after this treatment, and is not cured, as we have said. Command the nurse to moisten her left hand in oil of sweet almonds or musk-scented oil of althea, then insert it into the vagina, and seek the second uterus;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 and when she has found it, take hold of it and draw it out little by little straightly, so that the patient does not feel pain at the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, then pull.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 it will come out and dislocate again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And if the mouth of the nose is narrowly constricted, we have said the cure of sneezing, and of fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 and if it does not come out from all that we have said, beware that you do not pull too hard;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the nose, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then give her an enema with four-leaf medicine.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 so she will vomit and expel it, and then fart.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 but nonetheless, when she farts, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 If it is therefore necessary, appropriate fumigations are required for this purpose:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 any of the ancients have proven fumigation with fresh watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for retaining the menses and the afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 And it is like a reed, and one places the subtle end into the body, and the wide ends over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 and let the fumigation be on the charcoal, and continue until it is completely burned out, then repeat with another one.
de percier lou fondement	 To pierce the anus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 Many children are born whose fundament is not yet pierced, but rather closed by a thin membrane:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane with her finger, and do not pierce it with a sharp stick, and take care that she does not touch it with pus; ︎
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then place on it a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then continue the treatment of poultices until he is cured.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 Et si vous avez des doutes qu'il ne guérira pas, alors insérez dans l'ouverture un morceau de plomb, et laissez-le en place pendant moins de jours, et retirez-le lorsque l'enfant veut aller aux toilettes.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 And sometimes this swelling comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	 then it is necessary to cover that sudden (swelling) immediately:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 if it is healed, just as we have said of the linen of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	 of the rectal fistula
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 Fistulas that come from under the anus are knots, and those that come beside the anus outward, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or several; ‌
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 and when that knot is old, it works, and causes more moisture, which is white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 And they are known by this: that it comes out in egestion or ventosity when the patient passes waste, and sometimes one jumps out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 And there are fistulas that go all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 and reach as far as the junction of the thigh, and even to the tip of the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 And thus one knows if a fistula is present at the anus, or not present:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 and it is that you put your index finger into the anus, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 And if there is tortuosity, then insert a fine lead tent or a horse hair into it, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 And if you do not feel it, and neither excrement nor flatulence nor feces come out of the anus, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 know that it does not burst;
si te haste dou curer.	 if you hasten with the cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 And when the fistula reaches the bladder or the passage of urine, then urine leaks out, and it cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tentacle comes to the place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 if there is no twisting and the pain spreads around, it is likely that it will come out immediately, and neither medicine nor a sudden poultice will be of any use;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 And in these Persian fistulas, there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish doctors who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 In those that are not Persian and not very old, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is for the patient to lie on his back between your hands;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 And he raises his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 then put an iron tent, or of lead if there is crookedness, so that you know where the tent comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your index finger there, if you then feel that the tent has pierced;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 and let it be uncovered where you feel between your finger the pus or flesh, then know that it is perforated;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 do not tamper with it if it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 However, one can indeed heal some [cases], but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 and the aid consists in heating the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 And he pours all hot into the fistula, until it reaches near the anus.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 And do this two or three times, until you know that these warty growths are burned, which resemble a bird’s feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 And then treat it with moistened bandages soaked in butter, until those warts come out, and then treat with a salve to prevent inflammation and heal.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If he is thus treated, this is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 If this cannot be cured otherwise;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 and if the abscess enters and does not perforate as far as the bone in the anus, and there is a thick covering of flesh or pus between your finger and the abscess, and you see the fistula at that place where the covering joins.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 si la cautérisation commence dès le début de la fistule,
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 et puis cautérise ensuite,
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 and there will be no trace remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 And if the pus overcomes you and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicinal vinegar.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 il chasse la maladie qui est dedenz, et fait cicatriser le plaie de dehors.
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 et li cauteres de feu fait tant qu’il n’i puet durer ne remedier.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 et sachez que nule autre cose ne poez aider fors le cautere de feu.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Et sachies que li cauteres de feu est plusors foys nesces en ceste maistrie.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 And if the fistula reaches as far as the anus, and is distant from the body, then you should pour oil or wine into the anus, and inquire about this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 If you feel the tent, and there are two fabrics or cloths or tents within it, which is about to tear, then let there be no one inside except for those who are trustworthy and hopeful, by means of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 Or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut to the bottom, or if you can, place tents there and treat as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 And do not go too deep, lest you cut the foundation that holds the bottom, and the evacuation comes out involuntarily;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 Then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 Perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut near the bottom, either by tent or by another suitable instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 Then cleanse the wound with a poultice as best you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the area below the anus:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 this would be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 And sometimes fistulas are like this:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, which is near the edge of the anus on the skin above, then take a pointed tent according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 And you push a twisted thread into it, and push the tent along with all of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 If it is passing through the margin of the anus inside, then draw out the thread from that hole, so that you insert your finger into the anus;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 and pull out the end of the thread, and tie the two ends together, and hold them firmly against each other, and leave it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 And sometimes it restricts, so much so that the son cuts those carts that are between two, and they fall.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 then heal the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 If the fistula does not burst, then make it burst in all ways that you can, unless it is too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it is not necessary to cover the ulcer with a cap so deeply, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 The shape of the spine-like stylus used to make a fistula is very sharp at one end and cutting;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 and on the other side no, so that you do not cut what should not be cut, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	 hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 There are two types of emollients:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 or they are inside the rectum, like resin grains, and there can be small and large ones, and blood always flows from them, and there is one or several of them, and they are outside the rectum and at the opening of the rectum;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 But those which lack moisture have little of it, and sometimes a little yellow water or blood, and they retain the body's color.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 And the treatment for those who have them in the anus is to instruct the patient to sprinkle on himself so that he may go into rooms until the anus releases them, and the threads appear.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 If you hurry, and you grasp it with pincers, or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 And if the tweezers cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them with a cloth or thread, or a piece of camlet.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 And pull them with your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle some hot powders that are suitable for cauterization on top.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 When you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then proceed with other treatments until he is healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 And if the foundation cannot come out, then enema the patient with a biting and harsh enema to clean what is in the foundation, so that it may come out freely.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 When the patient has hemorrhoids and if the threads are protruding from the foundation, then the treatment is light.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 And do this: you take them with your nail or tweezers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until he is healed, and that he fears the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 So it is necessary that you make the suture in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 Grasp the thread twisted, and put it in a needle, then pull the thread on top and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 And strain the thread strongly, then tie a knot in the thread, and pull out the needle, and do thus with all the others, and leave one for running the superfluity of blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 Then put on a bandage soaked in rose oil or wax, and put it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then leave them until they become suppurating, and when they have fallen out, then treat them with salve and other treatments, until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 Of dryness of the intestines in the lower body
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 It often happens that there is dryness of the intestines in the bowels, due to natural constraint, and when the illness is old and medication does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 If it is necessary for you to remove the scab with the tip of a spatula or your nail on top, do not allow it to moisten.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 then heal it until it is dry as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 and if it cannot dry out, then repeat the scraping more strongly than before, so that it heals well and is peeled off.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then heal it until it is healed.
dou fremit	 from shivering
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 Formica is a small appearance of hair under the skin, and it goes very deep into the body;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 and sometimes the cold finds it, and one feels it as if dead with trembling, and it spreads throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the treatment is such that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong quill from an ox, and place that quill on the trembling, so that the circle around the trembling turns purple all around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 Then turn your hand to the whole chain so that you cut all around the freckle, and put it in completely, and eradicate the freckle from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if you see this, do it with a reed of bronze or iron in the same way, and let it be thin below and pointed above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 Do not pierce, but instead hold to the two (sides), and press firmly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you see it, then cauterize the freckle as is described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	 Of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 Sometimes one makes a cluster of silver or gold, or melted iron or brass;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 and sometimes one makes these instruments small or large, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 Therefore, those that are prepared for the care of children who are weak and suffering should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The form of the small or large clyster is thus wide at the top, where the stomach is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 And if there is an obstruction where the intestines are tied, as you see, and the head is pierced within;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 And let there be on one side two holes, and on the other side one hole.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 And let the belly, into which the medicines are placed, be of an animal's bladder or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be one finger's width, then insert into these holes a strong thread, twisted like a cross or around, and gather the belly together as if it were a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 And when the medicine is inside, then bind it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then perform an enema.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg yolk, or a similar substance, then gently insert it.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 Then the minister wrings his hands together until they are completely empty, then he inserts the clyster, and lifts the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, then he holds it as long as he can.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And if he sleeps through the night, then there is even greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you enema him in the disease of diarrhea, and the medicine hastens to exit, then repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 And if the hemorrhoids are in the rectum or abscess, let the clyster be as thin as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which the skin is drawn tight:
des plaies	 of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 We have already said in the section on the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 Or we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines, according to their completeness.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 The things by which wounds are made are by falling of stone, and cutting with sword and knife, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 where they are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with the simple head wounds, because their treatment will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from falling stone or similar things, and the skin is torn open and the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 If there is a little blood from the wound, immediately bandage it from the head itself, and let the bandage be on the opposite side of the injured part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 And let the patient avoid drinking wine and eating heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 And if he does not wish to bandage it, let his food be reduced, and let him not drink wine, nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 And put on the wound, if there are swellings there, only a little cotton soaked in rose oil or in stiptic wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 And if there is no hot swelling, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and not moved by the air, a powder which I will mention in a moment.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the fire has moved it, apply some poultices until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 And if the wound is large like that of a sword or similar, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, then join them by sewing, as I will explain in the case of stomach wounds, using sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it hangs loose, and is only attached by a thread, then cut it off;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, also like beans, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if you find rottenness in the skin, and it reaches to the bone, then cut away all the rot, throw it out, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped with medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it off with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And this is that you put in this powder that seals before the fire has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 And the manner of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	 take incense one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	 dragon's blood two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 quicklime three parts, and powder it finely, and fill the wound, and bind it tightly, until it heals well and adheres to all its flesh.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 And then bind it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 And sometimes one does this with quicklime alone, when one does not have frankincense or dragon's blood, but that the heat has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if the fire has moved the wound, even in summer, one should not put this powder on it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 But apply some cooked ointments or poultices made from barley flour with water and honey, until the wound casts off.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then cure with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, draw it out with fine tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	 of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and one in the head, but if a nerve of the neck or an artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If it is a nerve, there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and not apply anything that might constrict it, for this harms the nerves and causes them to recede.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 but the medicine should be warm, like hot water with sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and wash the cuts in the same way with sweet water, and other small stones according to this manner, and moist compresses.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the wound is large, stitch it and bind with bandages, then let it heal until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 And if the wounds are deep and they have festered and are full of pus, then pierce them in a lower place.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 And if the vein is cut and blood flows out, then expose it, clean it, and cauterize it if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 And if the windpipe or the trachea is cut and the passage is kept open so that food can pass, then stitch the trachea onto the skin of the neck, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then he holds it firmly, and leaves it for some days, then treats it with dried onions until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, seek it out;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 And if there are bone fragments, draw them all out if you can, and those that you cannot extract, leave until the wound heals over and the openings close.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 And if there are bones in the wound, and it has an abscess, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 Of a spear or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 If it is a stab wound or a cut, and the wound is deep, observe if gas comes out of the wound when the patient inhales:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 And if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder in at the first hour, nor bind it for fear that the blood does not flow deeply, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 but apply an attracting ointment, and bandage it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 thus there will not be any spasm, nor evil shaking of the heart, nor fainting.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 and when you see these good signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Heal him then with poultices and other treatments until he is healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 And if she cannot heal, and it works again, know that there is a fistula.
si la cure si com on doit.	 If the treatment is done as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, either worse or on the back, then treat it as for those in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 If it is large, with stitching;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 And if it is small, with powder. And if it is near the bone and has broken into pieces, seek to clean the wound and remove any splinters if they are exposed.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 And if they are not exposed, then let the wound fester, for this will ease the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 The rupture of the belly is great and moderate and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 of the great wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerve of the intestine, because of which the introduction of air;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because it is more difficult to put the intestines back in unless they are replaced hot on hot.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, and they return less easily; and therefore the moderate wound is better, because one returns the intestine to its place more than in other [types of wounds]
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 And know that wounds of the belly are according to IV manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 the II common sewings happen in the sewing of the belly, and the sewing of other wounds of the body and II other special sewings are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 nevertheless they are more specific with the sewing of the belly, and I will speak of each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine has come out, and it is a good thing to return, this is by one of the II manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen by cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 moisten a sponge or a clean cloth in warm water only, or boil in hot water with juniper and clove, and wash the intestines until the swelling is gone;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 and sometimes make this wine restraining, and it is said that only sloe berries are used to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 And when you see the swelling leave, then moisten the intestines in water where mallows and hollyhocks have been boiled, for by this the entrance is made easier.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 And if it cannot enter, then make a small opening in the wound with the instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 and the first cure is said to be that it should be cut, which no one should cut unless there is great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 And this is the instrument to split it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 cut inside on the curve and not outside, and see here the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines leap out, set them back in place according to their natural form in their proper location, if you can, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the stomach, you must make the patient lie on their back and put their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 and if it is in the part below the stomach, put the head and feet higher than the parts below, and likewise if the injury to the stomach is in one of the two parts, set your intention so that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And thus you must manage as I say for both large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 In small wounds, apply what you have prepared, then hold between your hands a gentle minister who can touch the entire wound with his hand and bring the lips together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 And this is the common manner of sutures, and it is that you take one needle or several, according to the width of the wound, then leave two fingers' width from the head of the wound, and there insert a needle with a good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 And pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the needle, which is beneath the skin within, so that you make it pierce from this side, and gather the three heads of the needle together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 Then draw a double thread around the needle on two sides, then gather the two heads of the wound similarly, and leave two fingers' width, and insert another needle there;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 Then take the thread of the needle as you did for the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need the needles for, until all the wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 And let the needles be of medium size, between fine and thick, because fine needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 therefore they must be of medium size;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and widen the wound before sewing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 and then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not wound the patient while sleeping, and put a bandage or cloth over the heads of the needles to keep them still, and leave them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 And this manner of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles are sufficient for it.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 The second suture is common, and it is that you join the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the flesh together with one needle that has a strong middle thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 And when you have pierced these four heads together, then bring the needle back to the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 And put a distance between each suture the thickness of a small finger.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 This suture serves men, and I sutured a wound that a man had in the belly, which was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and two palms of intestines came out, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I returned the intestines to him after they had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound was closed until fifteen days, and I cared for it, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 and did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 and placed on the wound old cotton II times a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 Now I will tell you the II proper ways of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 take the needle, and push it from the outside part to the inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 when it has pierced the skin from right to left, leave the end of the thread where you pushed the needle in, and make it come out on the other side from the inside to the outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 And the method of this stitch is such that you should sew as the furrier does with furs, and leave the end of the thread on one side, and pick it up on the other side, until the entire seam is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 The second method of stitching, which Galen specifically mentions, is done in such a way that some people join the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the thread to the other end, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 Insert a needle into the nearer end of the thread and make it pass through that place only, leaving the two ends of the thread;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 then turn the needle and make it pass from the outer part to the inner one, at the two ends of the thread;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 Then have one and the other pierced from the outer part to the inner, in two other places of the mirror that are on either side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 And this is the manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 Galen said these words, and some testify that one should sew the belly with two needles, each with thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 And one must insert one needle from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 And know that when the perforation is in the middle of the belly, then the stitching is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 And it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the fire has moved it, then put back the entrails, and the skin.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 Then place on the wound a powder of healing herbs, and if the fire has moved it, then apply some ointment that is readily available until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 And stitch up the flesh, and let the skin and membrane be sewn together.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat the wound like the others until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if you do not have medicine, then apply, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 For in many cases you do not need other medicines when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 and if you doubt that the wound may infect the main members, then you must soak a light linen cloth in temperate oil, or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the armpits.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then give him a clyster of boiled wine, and do this also if the putrefaction reaches the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the thinness of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity in nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 And if the entrails come out of the wound, then replace them like the intestines, as long as they are fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 And if the hair is grey or turned black, then you must tie the place that is dark, so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 Then cut that which is between the ligament, and place the two hooks hanging from the part below the wound until it is completely healed to facilitate extraction when the bone falls out, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	 of the wound of the eye
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 When the intestines are cut and the wound is small, then one can restore it in some men, because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, from which excrement and flatulence came out.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 I cared for him as best as I could, and did not stop refining until he was healed, and the wound closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 And when I saw it close, I feared that the patient might have an illness in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 and there was no illness there, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 take broad-headed clamps, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the clamp has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it tightens its mouth upon them;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 and then cut off the head of the clamp, and this stays so that it cannot be loosened, then place another clamp after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely grasped; eben
et cout la plaie.	 And treat the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 Those heads if they get stuck in the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, then one can tie off the intestines with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal, in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 take the head of this intestinal thread that is very thin, and then tie a fine twisted linen thread to the head of this thread, then pass the thread through the needle, and sew the intestines with it, and bring it back in the opposite direction;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 and this manner of suturing is only for when there is hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or cure, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 Of a fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it is healed, is universally called a "fistula", and also when it bursts open again.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 Et fistula est selon la verité, une nodule dure et blanche, où l'on ne ressent pas de douleur, et elle est aussi creuse qu'une plume d'oiseau.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 Et parfois, elle apparaît sous forme de claire-voie, et d'autres fois, elle est épaisse.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 Parfois, elle se présente comme une poche, et d'autres fois, elle est suffisamment remplie.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 Et je vous ai déjà parlé dans le chapitre sur les plaies, qu'une plaie qui ne guérit pas, et où il n'y a pas de chair, n'est ouverte que pour l'une des NEUF raisons:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 C'est-à-dire, à cause de la petitesse du sang ou de la chair.
ou por sa malice;	 Or by its mischief;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 or because there is hard flesh inside it and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 or if there is too much swelling;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 or if the place is rotten and the matter is of bad quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 or if the medicine is not good for healing;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 or because the decay is a kind of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 or because of the property in the region, digestion and healing are slow, and it is naturally swollen.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 or if there are veins or bones involved.
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 And it is necessary for me to make you know the treatment of a fistula made by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 Know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 for there are fistulas that come to the great veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 and if it comes to the property of the main member, and to similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 And all the fistulas that are of this type are of serious illness, and there is nothing except work and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have mentioned, and you are confident of the cure, and you recognize it, then take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, then seek it; xspace
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 And if the fistula is twisted, then seek a subtle tent of wood, for the wood bends easily around the twisting;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot easily seek it with tents, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for moisture courses from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 Then seek it wisely to your ability, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and it is cut deeply, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels at the pressing of your hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the foulness and the corrupt flesh that is inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 And then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep from the right place, you must cut into it deeply, as much as you can, then put moist tents in theriac wine, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then put on bandages made of clean flesh, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut into it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 If a vein or nerve troubles you in the principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, then clean it until all the corruption is removed, then treat with things that promote healing until it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 And if it is not healed and the swelling returns as before, know that you have not reached the source.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 If you expose and clean until you reach the bottom and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 And if it is healed in this way, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 if there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 And if there is a small piece of bone that has decayed and you can extract it with pincers, then do so with an appropriate instrument, and if there are many pieces of bone, then extract all of them, leaving none behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 And if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no mistake or fear, then cut away the flesh and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then apply a putrefying substance to the wound and allow it to decay around the bones, so that the bones may be more easily extracted.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 And if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh bone, then wait for the corruption until all the blackness has been removed, then close the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 And if there is a great deal of corruption, and it reaches up to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 then you must clean and cut away everything down to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 He was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause, so that the matter came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no external cause to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 But the doctors, through their foolishness, operated so much that they opened the abscess, and there flowed a lot of matter from it, and it became a fistula, and there came a lot of holes that all threw out pus and moisture from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 And many doctors tried to cure it for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine present, until I was called upon it, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed through the holes, a great amount.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 And the body of the youth turned red, and it had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 I hastened then, and struck in one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupt and pierced, and the corruption reached inside the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I believed that what appeared to me of the corrupt bone was all the corruption there was, except for what I removed;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, but it could not heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 and then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and believed it, and then removed it, and took care to heal the place;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 But I could not do so much that I cut around a palm's width of the bone, and I pulled out the arrow with all its shaft, then I treated it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 and he was quickly healed and cured, and there was no need to repeat the work except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 Because of the evacuation, he often bled profusely, but he was completely cured, and in place of the bone, a hard flesh grew, which had a good constitution and did not cause any harm or opposition, neither while coming nor going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 take a bandage and tie it around the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to extend it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 and put another bandage of thicker cloth than the first one around the flesh above the bone, and stretch out the end so that you pull the corrupted flesh away from below, and uncover the flesh in the place where you wish to tie, so that the thread does not injure the flesh; )))
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 And place a glowing coal under the bone to better burn the rotten flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And it must be burned until the corruption can be seen and felt, and then it must be burned again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 And if the bone is corrupt, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then peel away all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 Then place a coal underneath, and then burn from one part to the other of the corruption, and let the burning be deep as the length of the corruption, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 And if the corruption is in the joint, then burn the corrupt joint, and burn the bone from the other side where it contains the corruption.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 And if the corruption is between two joints, there is no other remedy than to burn.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 and if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, then that thing is very strong; nevertheless, you must investigate this corruption, how it opens to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but let not the vein or nerve hinder you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 and know that the incisors and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and delicacy, and their size and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 and therefore it is necessary to prepare for each type of work its tool;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 and know that the work will show you the tool that you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If you consider the instrument you need according to what is required.
dou feu	 Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 The head persists either because of internal causes or external ones;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 and when you have treated that corruption with the remedies of medicines, and they do not help, then it is necessary to cover that member up to the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes by death or by the greater evil of the loss of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 and the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, and persists after the blackening, then this corruption of the limb spreads from one member to another, and takes over the entire body; xspace
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 if you hasten to cover it, and if it is due to the bite of some venomous creatures, such as scorpions of the sea and vipers and similar ones, if the corruption is at the head of the arm, then cover it, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 And if it extends to the hand, then cut it at the joint, so that corruption does not spread to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 and if it extends to the arm, then cut it with a knife;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 and if it goes beyond the knife's edge, it is death, and there is no remedy outside of the amount of its power.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 and do the same when corruption comes to the foot.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the next joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 and if it reaches the foot, then cut off the entire foot.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 and if it moves up the leg, then cut at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 and if it comes above the knee, there is no other recourse than to leave the patient to die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 And the way to use the copper or silk member is that you bind it above and below, and have one assistant extend one of the ligatures downwards, and another the other ligature upwards, and you cut away the flesh that is between the two ligatures to a width of one thumb, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 Then take the copper or silk, and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and another infection or abscess will come to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 And if bleeding occurs as you work, then cauterize the area immediately, or apply some powder that constricts;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then return to your task until it is complete, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it heals.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 And I will tell you that it happened to a man in his feet:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 It happened to him that a blackness appeared on him as if it were a burn from fire, and this corrosion first came upon his big toe of the foot, so much so that it spread throughout the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 And when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the foot, and was healthy.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 And after a long time the corrosion returned to his thumb of the hand, and he came to me, and I put repercussive things on him after cleansing his body, but the corrosion could not cease.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 And he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, for I had hope of expelling the material.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 And I also feared that if I cut his hand, he would die, for the man's strength was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 and he became completely hopeless, returned to his land, covered his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And I have only told this account in order that others may do the same if they find it necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy place and stays so long that it causes a large accumulation of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 and then it breaks open and bursts, and the pus jumps out, leaving the place empty, like a vessel.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 and the skin on top is as thin as fine cloth, and it does not extend to the bone or the nerve. Such an illness is called "sinus" and is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 If it is so elongated that it reaches to the bone perfectly, then it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 And the skin is such that you should cut all around this skin, even when it is subtle, just like a piece of cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 and it does not rot due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 And if you think that the skin will rot and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a clyster in this manner:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 check if the breast is large and the pus that comes out of it is foul-smelling, then give a clyster with Egyptian medicine made in this way:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 take equal parts of asphalt, oil, and litharge (lead oxide), and put them to cook in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 And then take of this according to your need, and make it into a mixture with water and honey, and use it as an enema on the chest, and constrict the anus.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 And let the medicine stay in for two hours, then remove it by pressing out.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 Do this many times until the chest is clean, and the pus is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 And sometimes use an enema of ashes water, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them, then strain it, and use it as an enema until you know that the chest is well cleaned.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 And if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ashes water, then use an enema of water and honey in which there is a little powdered lead.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 or you cleanse it with honey and mixed wine, for the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the flesh dry;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 and when you have done this, and are confident that the breast is well cleansed, then cleanse it with that which causes flesh to grow in it, which is to take a definite plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 or you cleanse it with some medicinal herbs and onions, of which I have spoken the properties in the treatment of onions;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 and if the hole in the breast is small and the tube of the enema cannot enter, then widen it a little with an iron, and put inside a tent of Egyptian onion, or Basilicum onion, until it is widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if the wound is too wide, then sew it and leave an opening only where the enema can enter; and if the aperture that the bladder makes is on top, then cut it off or to a lower place than it was.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 For when the bladder is burst, do not allow any flesh to enter;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 And if you cannot cut the bladder as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way that the bladder moves to the lowest place possible; for when the bladder is burst, do not allow any flesh to enter. And if you cannot cut the bladder as you see fit, then arrange it in such a manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 so that the bladder slides gently downwards, and leave nothing of the bladder there;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 And take consolidative medicines to apply to the wound, and extend on a linen cloth that covers all the wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 then press as firmly as possible around the hole in the vein with a larger cloth than the first, then apply soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it on the hole in the wound to lighten the weight, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 and the one that is on the hole in the vein, remove often to remove the weight, and know what comes out of the weight, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or undigestible;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in this manner and you see what nature rises on the hole in the wound, know that the vein has already closed, and health approaches;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 And then unbind it in the morning, or on the third day; and when you unbind the wound, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 And if the breast casts out undigested food after many days, know that the breast does not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poisons pass after a long time, do not despair of health, for healing approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 For there are men in whom the flesh delays to heal in their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 And if the undigested food rises from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach is not healthy.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 And if the stomach delays in healing and is distant, apply drying moist substances with drying power, such as diaphoretic ointment, for it contains a large amount of vitriol, and that is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 Take diaphoretic ointment and make it with rose oil and wash it with equal parts of old wine.
puis le confit et en use;	 Then crush it and apply it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 And if the same substance is more swollen when cooked, and onion is not available, you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey while it is over the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 And then in a cloth bandage, and apply it to the breast, and sometimes administer a long cataplasm of lily roots, which is also like pea flour and celery.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 And make use of simple or compound [remedies].
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 Grind them, and make into a powder, and put on the honey that I have mentioned, and apply it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption has gone deep and affects the bone, or the hard parts, or the tendons.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 Si the treatment of the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 of the abscess of the fingernail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 Paronychia is an abscess that forms under the fingernail or toenail of the hand or foot, or occasionally it can form in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 and when it is neglected, and nothing is done about it, then an abscess like this forms, and it runs and throws pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes it can even reach all the way to the end.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 and the corruption reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the toe is swollen, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 Cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 And if the nail presses into the flesh and begins to prick and wound it, then you must place the reed under the nail that points at the flesh, push it up, cut away that flesh delicately and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the rest of the flesh to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then heal with ointments until he is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and draw strongly, for as long as the corrupted bone remains there, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you see the finger corrupting, cut it off at the first joint as was said before, then heal until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 And if it is pierced and swollen and there is great pain, then you must heal it first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 then cut the fingernail of the patient obliquely from above, and ensure that the cutting does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 and if it happens, place something on it to soothe [the pain].
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 The pain from the shoulder of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The two bones that sometimes grow in the hands of some men are sometimes entirely fleshy, and sometimes there is bone, and occasionally there is a claw, and sometimes they grow at the root of the joint, or the growth is in some people’s fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 He who is born under the knuckle of the finger does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 The cutting of the one who is fleshy is light in such a way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	 if you hold back from cutting [it].
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In one who is born or should at the anus, it is necessary that you cut the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for him, then cure him until he is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 The union that comes to the two together comes by birth, or by union of a wound, or by cauterization with fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 Therefore, you must cut that suture, so that it may heal according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 Then place between two tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, lest they stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 or you can place between two thin sheets of lead until the place is soldered, as needed.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 If suddenly one of his fingers comes with the palm, strike that suture as needed.
des vils	 from worthless
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 Veins are large wounds filled with superfluous melancholic substances that come in many parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 Therefore, you should administer to him some purging of bile, and then heal it with the holy basilicum.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 The treatment with iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 one is that they are cut, and then one draws out the black blood with an iron.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 and the other method is that you lift the wound, and draw it all out with an iron.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 The cut is done in this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 the first rises with very hot vinegar so strongly that the large vein is made fine, then hold the patient's leg from above the thigh down to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision, then raise and pull strongly to draw out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient's strength can bear;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 and then bandage it, and instruct him to eat foods that produce black bile.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 and renew the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full again, and benefit the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The elevation of it is according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 take the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in the bath, and wash the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 and if you do not have a bath, then warm it at the fire, and then cut towards the vein along the thigh to the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 then peel back the skin, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord; xspace
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 Then push the hair under, so that it is raised from the skin, and then attach it lightly with a needle, then cut it in another place above three fingers;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 Then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with a razor, as you have done, and attach it to another needle, as you did before;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 Then cut another shape, or several if you need them, then lift it and cut at the finger of the foot, then draw and lift until the second shape;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 Then draw it from shape to shape until it comes out completely, then cut it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 And if you cannot draw and lift it, then insert a very strong needle with a double thread, and tie and draw it, and push it under the hair, and turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 And be careful that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot draw or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 And when you have drawn it all out, then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And tend to it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 And if the vein is twisted and wrapped together and is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it carefully, but do not cut it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And draw it out as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 The shape of the iron used to cut the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 And it is of thick curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said. And here is its form.
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 This vein is engorged in legs, in hot places where no grass or tree grows, and in land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 and by chance it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes under the skin, just as snakes and worms appear within the body, engorged between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is such that a very great inflammation comes into the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to emerge like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When the shoulder dislocates, you should wrap around it a piece of linen from one and a half to two and a half cubits, and knot it, and let the linen hang on the leg, and every time it comes out due to weakness, wrap it again with the linen and knot.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut near the base until all of it has come out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 because if you cut it, then it enters into the flesh, and brings forth an abscess and pus in that place, and causes a severe illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 for which reason it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing should remain in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 and sometimes this vein when it is treated with five or ten palms in length, and a man came to me whose vein was ten palms long, and when you cut it, then one or two ribs or openings burst forth, and it goes through until the end, so that everything comes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 and let the matter inside be emptied, and apply to the place medicines that prevent pus every day, then treat it as you would with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 And sometimes at this vein there are fewer waters, and especially when it opens in the foot's joint or in the foot, and there comes much water from it, and because of which it becomes rare;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 then heal it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This illness is called in our land "cattle disease," because it often happens to cattle. It is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and goes through the whole body ascending and descending, and one feels it well when moving from member to member, until it tears the skin where it goes, and jumps out;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 And it is infected by the corruption of some humors, like worms and snakes and leeches and roundworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 And one fears its harmfulness, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it enters and destroys the eye.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 And this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When you see it being cured and drawn out, one cannot go too far until it has gone away:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 then you must bind the place above and below with a strong tie very tightly, then cut on top and pull out strongly, and if the pus is deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 And the greatest harm that it does is to blind the eye, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 And if you see it coming toward the head near the eye, tightly bind under it the eyelid, then cut on top and pull out strongly.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 and it is necessary to use the patient for body cleansing with soluble medications for bad humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 from the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This disease is called in our land "vakirir," and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 and I saw this happen as I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I was called to an ill woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 and soon after, I saw it rise like a worm on her shoulder, faster than anything else, as if it were alive silver when it runs from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 the pain left that place and inserted itself in the shoulder, and then a little later it ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm;  ?> li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 Then she told me that she was always turning around the body, as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 Je me demande beaucoup comment elle change ainsi d'un membre à l'autre, car je n'avais jamais vu cette maladie se manifester de cette façon auparavant.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 However, I had seen many who well had wanted to move pain from one place to another, but I did not see it as I saw in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and open veins, and therefore appeared this forced windiness.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 And they did not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and filled veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then strike quickly above and below, and then cut until that forced windiness comes out of its place;
et cauterize le leu;	 And cauterize the place;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those that expel flatulence, such as foul-smelling pills, and mugwort pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	 Et si tu ne vois pas de flèches
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 Les flèches sont variées, selon leurs apparences et selon les endroits du corps où elles atterrissent.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The differences in their kind is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and hooked, and welded.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 and of those which have two prongs, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are parts;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 and if it falls into any member, it falls in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 or in a principal member, such as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 When it falls then in any place of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you afterward appear to you.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many ways;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 And the signs of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the sutures that are above the brain, are: scotoma, drowsiness, faintness, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm, confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 And perhaps it is without force of the nostrils or the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 and perhaps he loses his speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 and from the wound comes white moisture resembling pus, and it leaps out like flesh broth.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And if these signs appear to you, then take care of the cure, and draw out the arrow if it is there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and it feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 And perhaps the arrow moves as if it were pus, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 Know then without doubt that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 And the sign of the arrowhead that never comes out without foam or bubbles from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 And if the arrow falls into the cover of the foot, it is near the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 and it causes great pain and suffering.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And it moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps something undigested comes out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 And if the arrow falls into the belly, and some feces come out through the rectum, then there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine leaps out and flows away, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulders and arms and spine of the back and chest and hips and legs, and similar members, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 It happened to a man, an arrow fell into the arm in the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I extracted it and drew it out from another side beneath the fat of the ear, and he was healed without injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And he drew an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye beneath the skin, and the arrow was bent, and he could only reach its tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, with all the iron very light without ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 The game was completed, and no bad incident happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 And he drew an arrow from his throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic in nature:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I shaved my beard, and acted subtly until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 And I drew an arrow from a man into whose belly it had fallen, and thought that he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change at all.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I cut into the arrow, extracted it with force, and he had no bad incident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 And then I saw a man onto whom an arrow fell on his back, and the wound was closed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And the arrow remained within him, and did not change its natural disposition in any way, nor was it disturbed in any of its natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And he saw another man, into whose face an arrow fell and the wound closed up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 and he remained thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	 and many other similar ones.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And one threw an arrow at a man of the king's nobles, which had fallen into his nose, and was leaning slightly to the right side; abei
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 and the arrow was completely lodged.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I was called to treat it after it had fallen for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 Si je trouve la plaie très étroite.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 I touched it all over with a subtle probe, and felt nothing;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 And he felt a stabbing pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was the tip of an arrow, I applied a poultice that is attractive and digestive on the spot, so that the place would not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 And I saw the place where the arrow had entered.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 I applied the poultice for several days, and the wound healed again, and the patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose;
et il le me dist.	 And he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open, and then I probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow which had turned in place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 Then I inserted into the opening of the wound using that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared clearly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 And it exceeded the limit by three months, and then the wound healed so much that when I put the pincers in, I could not pull out [the arrowhead] from either side.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 Then I did not stop trying and contriving various instruments until I got it with well-made pincers, as will be described at the end of this chapter, so that I pulled it out and the wound healed.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And physicians judge that the nasal septum cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 Or I have told you the nature of extracting certain arrows, so that you may apply your care to what I do not say, for the book cannot comprehend everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 but the wise master comprehends very little and only what is present and failing; he finds nine works and nine instruments in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 I say that arrows should not be removed from the members into which they are inserted except in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 or through the place where they entered, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 and that which should come out from where it entered is an arrow entering fleshy places, and sometimes now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 And if it does not jump now, let it remain until the flesh is rotten around, and the exit be cleared.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 And similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it remain thus for several days, and move it each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And then it will jump out, and if it does not, pierce all around with the finest needle until the place is enlarged, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 And if the arrow is stuck in the skull bone and goes into one of the cavities of the brain, and some of the things I have mentioned happen to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 Do not draw it out, but let it remain until it is equal after some days, for if the arrow reaches the sinus, it means death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is not fixed firmly only in the bone, and does not reach up to the surface, and the patient remains for some days without any bad incident, then use the tool of pulling.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 And if it is very firmly lodged and cannot come out by force, then apply tourniquets around it, as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the place until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 And if the arrowhead has returned to its place in the body and cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the entire area.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 and if you feel it, then draw it out with some suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, and there are no bones, nerves or veins, then widen it until the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 and draw out the arrowhead if you can, and if there are barbs on the arrowhead that hold it in place, then cut away the flesh from two sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrowhead until you can draw it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And handle it carefully so that you do not break the arrow, which would wound more severely.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 And if you cannot do it all at once, leave it until the place around is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easy.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 And if the flow of blood seems contrary to you, then proceed as we have said in the chapter on treatment;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 And beware of cutting the nerve or vein, and devise a way how you may draw out the arrow safely, whether early or late, strongly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And put the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest help there can be; and if you cannot do this, then place him according to the signs that show you how.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 An arrow that comes from another place, or where it protrudes something from it, or the skin is swollen there so that one sees or feels it clearly: 
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 Cut it off, so that the pincers can take hold of it, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	 If it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 And if she cannot come out, leave her there and then begin the extraction again until she comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 And if part of the arrow is still in there, push it all the way to the shaft.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 And if the shaft has broken off, and you see that a push will be necessary, then use an instrument with a notch, so that the arrowhead fits into the notch of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And then push hard, and if the arrow is splintered, push in an instrument with a pointed end to ease extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrow is poisoned, you must cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 And if an arrow falls into the belly or the stomach or the bladder or the side, and it is close to the surface, and you can reach it with a knife, then cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 And take care not to cut the vein or the nerve, and then extract it, and then close the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And treat until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 The shape of the pincers used to remove arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 And there are many kinds of them:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the arrowhead tip is like the feather of a bird, to pierce the point of the arrow, as shown here in this shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 The shape of the pincers for pushing and extracting is as follows.
des voinnes dou cors communes	 common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 There are XXXI wounds from which one can heal, of which there are sixteen in the head, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 Two hollows located after the ears, called the "two herbaceous".
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 And the two arteries which are in the two temples of the head.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 And two veins that are in the two eyelids, which are called "aspirers".
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 And the vein that is on the forehead.
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 And the vein that is at the tip of the nose.
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 And the two windpipes which are in the neck.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 And the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augerich".
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 And two veins which are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 The veins which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 One is the cephalic, and it is from the left side, and the common people call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 And the remedy is called "fennel," and it is composed of celery and basil, and the common people call it "vein of the heart.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 And the basil is in the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly," and it is on the fascia, and it is that one by which one heals, which clearly appears on the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 And the savatelle is the vein between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 And in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 one is below the crook of the left wrist, and the second sophone is at the ankle of the right side.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 And the vein which is called "nesse," that is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And in the other leg there are three veins beneath these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 The opening of the veins which are after the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 And the quality of the opening is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 Then the patient should squeeze his neck with one hand, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two hanging places from the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 Cut them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, press firmly;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 Then take the lancet, and push it under the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along with the entire vein, and cut both the skin and the vein well into two parts, and make the blood come out as much as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then hold it tight and bind it until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 And I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for chronic migraine, and inflammation, and chronic glaucoma, and for acute tears of the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 And the quality of the bleeding is as I have said:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 And it is that the patient should hold his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 And feel your thumb under your toe, then signify so.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 then lift the curved needle above the vein at your toe's tip, and insert the lancet below, and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you have done with two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 then unbind the patient, and place your toe on the vein for an hour, then put cotton over it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 and then bandage it firmly, and leave it until it heals.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 and we have already spoken about their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 The bleeding from the vein of the forehead is as valuable as the bleeding from the cephalic for ancient facial diseases, and for migraines, and for redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 And the quality is such that the patient stretches his neck by twisting it until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 then take the instrument called "fosseur", of which here is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 And place the tip on the vein, and strike with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you wish.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 then release the patient's neck and bind the vein until it is healed and sometimes work with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 However, it should not be that the flame is too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 and heal obliquely, for the bone is close by, and perhaps breaks the flame when it is delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The bleeding of the two veins that are in the two temples helps with the eyes, and with alopecia, and with redness, and with the little vein in the eye, and with diseases of the face.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 And the quality of their bleeding is such that the patient should tighten his neck by twisting some rope, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Then let it bleed, and the bleeding should be from a hole, a little long rather than wide, because there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 And if the flame is delicate, perhaps it will break.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 Then make the blood flow as much as you need, and then tie it with a cotton cloth, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The bleeding of the nose vein is good for fever, and for madness, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that occurs in the face, and especially when it is chronic.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 And the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient strains his neck, then presses his nose against your left hand, and takes the fine long flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 And do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your needs, then bind it for one night, because it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 And this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 The bleeding of the two jugulars helps with the narrowing of the vein, and with the beginning of leprosy, and with many illnesses, and with pustules, and with ulcers, and with shingles.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should stretch his neck under one and the other, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 And let the master be standing over the patient's head, and the patient sit on a stool. Then open the vein along its length widely, then draw blood gently or as much as is needed;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 Then do the same on the other vein, then untie the bandage, and stretch all the veins moderately so that the patient does not choke.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 And leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 of liver bleeding
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 The bleeding from the wounds of the lips above thus helps to heal in the mouth, and causes decay of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and of the nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 And the quality of bloodletting is to make the patient sit in front of you and stretch his neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is in the right lip and the other in the left, and they are recognized by being black, and because around them there are small black veins.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 So cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them or are in doubt, then cut the thicker one from each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 Of the wound beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic (vein), and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for the diseases of the eye, and for the diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 And the quality of the sick person is such that he lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he raises his tongue, and looks down on each side a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 Heal one and the other, and do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The veins of the knife with which one commonly heals are healed in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 either by piercing with all the flame of a large mirror or an olive-shaped subtle knife, and it is called "anaesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 The form of the burning ember is very famous, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 And it is necessary to open the swollen veins that are full of thick and visible blood, which contain large and turbid blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And this is the form of the olive oil flame
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 And it is more finely pointed, and is for healing fine veins, where there is fine citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps against diseases under the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 And it is necessary for the physician to draw wisely, and to guard against the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 And if he cuts the artery, and blood comes out, then he must cauterize it, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And the flame should not be pricking, but cutting like a lancet.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 And if the basilica does not open clearly, then you must constrict it and seek another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 Or where you wish to take some blood from him, or you heal in his place the vein within the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	 it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 and clamp with the flame cautery, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 And if you wish to know the place of the vein, then first you must stretch the arm so that you touch the place until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 then mark the place with a cross, and then tie the arm, and clamp the vein with the flame cautery.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 and beware not to strike an artery when you see the place swelling, for it is from the artery:
eschui la donques.	 avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 And if you see it spurt out like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 hurry then, and place your finger firmly, then remove your finger if it is stained with blood, for this often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 if the arm moves, let it be, and do not move it yourself, the patient.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and act cautiously, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 And if the blood is not stained, and it flows away from you, and the doctor is not present, cut the artery if it is open, for the head of the vein will retract.
et estainche li sans.	 and staunch the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And take a piece of fig bark, and split it, and take one half and bind it firmly until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 if the blood is staunched, that is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 If not, then treat it with powders that stop bleeding;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And the treatment is not suitable in many conditions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The bleeding from the middle of the vein is such that it draws blood from above and below, because it is composed of the basilic vein and the cephalic vein, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 and it is necessary for the bleeder to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if he goes too deep, and finds the nerve, and it swells, and the healing is not suitable, and perhaps it cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 And this nerve often opens up, and if it does not open in some men due to its subtlety, then you must cauterize it with the instrument called "anesil";
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 And let the nerve slip away as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 The vein of the cephalic also helps, as it draws blood from the head, and it helps with the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 and it is necessary to cut deep into the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because that is the safest of all the veins, because there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 Nevertheless, one should seek the lightest place, and do not worry if one misses the first time, and start again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 and perhaps the spot swells for some men when one misses the first time, but it does not matter.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of the bleeding depends on your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that bloodletting is practiced only to maintain health and to avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 And let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are in the hand:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 that is to say, cephalic, fast, and basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 The bloodletting that is used for illnesses has no fixed hour, but rather whenever needed during the day or night, at all hours and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 And it is not appropriate to bleed children until fourteen years of age, nor women who are pregnant beyond the fourth month up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 Nor should the old who have passed sixty years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 And when someone wants to heal, in whatever manner it may be, he must cleanse the intestines with a light enema if he has retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines the harmful superfluities into the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 nor does he heal who is too full of food, or drunk, while still inebriated, or who are dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 and if one attempts to heal after colic, vomiting, diarrhea, multiple miscarriages in women, labor, vigil, fasting, or anything that entirely diminishes the strength of a person by a weapon or disease.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 then refine the humors if the blood is thick with foods and drinks and medicines if you have the means.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 then enter into the bath, if nothing prevents you, to make the blood thin, and heal from the wound of the foot around the third part, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 and guard yourself that day against work, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 and be happy and joyful, and let the bandages be higher than those of one being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then draw the ligature moderately tight, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 and then rub the area with the hands, so that the veins swell and are felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 then moisten the bandages with a little old oil, then place his left hand’s finger on that vein beneath the area where he wishes to heal, so that the vein does not flee and evade at the time of healing.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 Car there are veins that bleed like strings for the bowyer, and there are some filled with windiness, so that when one applies fire, it draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is in such a state.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 And if he opens the vein, the wound is too tight, therefore it is necessary that the bowyer be knowledgeable in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 And if the vein opens on the first attempt, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 If not, then he should try again a little lower or higher in haste, unless the place is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 And if the place is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him wait for one day or two, and do not tie the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 by chance such abscesses may occur
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 do not enter a bath, then resume the bleeding if it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 and if the orifice is small, or the blood flows subtly, and you doubt that not as much blood will come out as you wish, then thrust into this same orifice all the flame straightaway;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 and perform it a little hastily, before the place swells;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 If you see the place swollen, do not begin the bleeding again, and put a little bit of oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil is better than oil;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 And thus administer the juice of oil into each wound that you open the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 And this same act as a poultice and boil of them, when one places it on the wound.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If it refines the blood and separates when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, especially when it is not opened strongly except for that time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and place on the wound a sponge moistened in water and in salt a little hot, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 And you must do this after the discharge of blood from the vein, and if there remains on the wound after some days any blackness or greenness, it will not harm him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if you see, put on some substance of aloe or myrrh mixed in calamint juice, mustard, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 And often there is an abscess and appearance at the base of the skull:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 put your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft to the touch of the hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 Therefore do not put on it any substance of what we have said, for perhaps it is bursting from the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 but make a dry poultice to harden the spot, then heal it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 And draw out some of the blood according to its quantity and power, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 For if the blood is black, let it issue until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 And if you see it swollen, let it be until it is drained;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 And he who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, should have a larger wound made, and the flame should be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed often and frequently, and he should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than the long or wide incisions for bleeding.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 And to him whose body lacks strength for bloodletting, it is necessary to give moistened bread in apple juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 If he is heated, draw blood three times or four, and if he has a cold constitution, let him chew bread soaked in syrup of muscadine, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if he faints from blood loss, after losing much blood, it is necessary that he drink broth made of meat, and a subtle, fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the section on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 And if he wants to drain his arm and bleed another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great blood loss, that he bleed little by little, according to the amount of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 And if he wants to drain his arm after the first blood letting and he has a strong body, then let him bleed seven hours after the first blood letting, or in the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 And whoever wishes to heal from another place, must be healed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 For there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 then one must draw out a large quantity of it, and widen the opening until it reaches as far as possible.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 after you have observed all the conditions of bloodletting, and place your hand over his pulse when he is bleeding, so that death does not occur in place of healing, and this often happens when the bleeder is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 And it is not necessary when you see to dislocate the arm and cause blood to flow a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press very hard;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 or if it is crooked, let him extend the arm quickly, for this would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 but leave it until it heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 or you press at the tip with the flame until the frozen blood that has gathered in the wound flows out, and place on it a little cloth soaked in water and press lightly on top.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 Et s'il est enfle, laissez-le et ne le serrez pas, jusqu'à ce que l'inflammation soit calmée.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then heal it in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The vein in the arm is healed in the place of the head's vein because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 And the manner of healing is such that the patient plunges his hand into hot water until the flesh is red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 then it should be moderately bound so that the wound appears well, then let it heal now across, not wide or long; xspace
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 And let the opening be wide, and let it be cauterized close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 And if it is in summer, do not put the hand in hot water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the cautery of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are neither artery nor nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 The cautery of the little vein of the right hand is effective against all liver diseases, and this is how it is done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 Hold the hand firmly and put it in hot water until the vein swells up, if one can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 And if the wound is at an angle, and you cut it completely through, then it does not matter.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 And do not go too deep, for the nerves are all bare of flesh beneath, and then place the hand in hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile and seil por souder hastanment, and ensi fai de chescun rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 The wound on his left hand is equivalent to the illness of leprosy, and it does all the same as I have told you concerning the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The wound on the shin is equivalent to all the diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of flowers, and diseases of the kidneys, and of the thighs and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 And the quality of his wound is such that the patient should place his foot in hot water, and rub on the wound until it bursts, and bind it above the ankle.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 And the wound is at the ankle, and there are many veins that run upward from the foot;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 Cut it then in the widest vein, or at the ankle, whatever is best.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath, and make the incision across like in cupping;
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 and let the flame be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 And if the pus cannot come out, put the foot back in water, and allow the wound to drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 And if the incision fails the first time, then start again a little higher on the second attempt, for the place is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 nor should you doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the saphena of the other foot likewise.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 The place of the sciatic wound is on the ankle bone, and its healing is worth against hip pain, when it is for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 And the characteristic of its incision is that the patient enters the bath, and draws over the ankle four fingers in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 and if it opens, then incise it in all the ways that you can, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And it is better for you to cut it off, because the place is open, and it is very painful in many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 And if you cannot find it, then cut off some of the flesh that is open on the back of the foot, towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 And make the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and bind it;
ele est maintenant sanee.	 She is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 of bleeding cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 Cupping glasses are made of horn, or bronze, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 And cupping is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 Either by drawing blood or without drawing blood.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 And this cupping which is done without drawing blood is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 Or she is all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 and venesection which is done by cutting and extracting blood is done in fourteen places of the body, one of which is completely on top of the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	 and the other is in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 and two others in both sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 and the cupping glass under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 and the cupping glasses on both shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 and the cupping glasses on the buttocks;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 and the cupping glasses in both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 and the cupping glasses on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 and the cupping glasses on both ankles; xspace
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 and the venesection does not draw blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken anyone at all, as is done with bloodletting from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And it is not necessary that she be purged, by any fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 And if because of illnesses it is necessary to bleed or by custom, then we administer (it) each hour at the beginning of the month, in the middle and in every time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and on the neck, and darkness to the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And there are some who dream of blood and wounds and death and such things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we instruct them to venesect after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 The sinus of the nose also helps against the coldness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary for this to be after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 and this ventilation is in place of the sinus of the head, and it is not necessary for those who are of cold temperament to use it, or who have catarrh, because it does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 And therefore it is not necessary for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 And those who bleed often from it become foolish, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower because of the fear of folly.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 The ventilation in the neck is in place of the sinus of the head and basilica, and therefore it is useful for the constriction of the bladder, and for the rupture of the urinary canal of the scrotum, and for stone, and for retention;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 And there you should put a little, for if it holds too firmly, it causes obstruction of the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 The ventosations at the two ribs of the neck are good for headaches, and migraines, and strangulation, and toothache, and it is in the place of the basilica's venesection.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 And you should instruct the bloodletter to press his hand well, so that he does not cut the artery and cause an uncontrollable flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 The ventosations under the chin are good for mouth diseases, and for rotting of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 And it is in the place of the venesection of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 The ventosations of the shoulders are good for illnesses caused by heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 The punctures of the ribs are worth as much as three veins of the arm, because they draw blood from those large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 and instruct the physician not to strike too deeply into the flesh, because the place is bare of meat, and beneath are nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 The cupping glass that is on the buttocks is worth against hemorrhoids of the anus, and against diseases below, and it must be large, and made of bronze, so that it can draw well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 and perhaps, if it were delicate, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	 and it makes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 The cupping glasses on the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the entire body, and are worth against old pains of the kidneys, and of the spleen, and of the bladder, and remove flows.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 And they are in the place of two spleens and two ankles, however they weaken the body after long use, and bring paralysis in many ways.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 The manner of placing the cupping glass is to first place it empty, and suck quickly, and put it on hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 then burn, and put on the cupping glasses again, and take care according to the condition of the body, for there are some who have dark flesh and clear pores;
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a deep cut.
et suce legierement.	 And suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 The first time to clear the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 and when we want to draw the blood little by little, we need only one strike.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if we want a lot of blood, then we must do it often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 and if the blood is thick, strike deeply, and the end result should be that the heart is pierced suddenly, and those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, must anoint the places of the cups with opening and dissolving oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 If it is inflamed, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if it is swollen, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 And if the superfluidities are thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the one being healed has tender flesh and large pores, oil must not be applied there, but it should be washed afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or mallow water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar water.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 And the one with much moisture should be treated with ease, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 And those who have large superfluous fluids should drink old wine, or the water of swine, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 and it is not appropriate to use a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that one wash, both before and after being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 And watch out if the patient is choleric, and if his blood is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 then he should take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in vinegar, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 and minced partridges, and roasted meat, and moist dishes.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 And the one who has a cold temperament should take syrup of honey, and wine that is moderately fragrant, between old and new, and minced peas, and minced partridges and small birds and thrushes;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 and on the day he bleeds himself, he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 and it is necessary to give some men sometimes a tricacle or musk before bleeding, or after, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And let the blood be drained, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 The cupping glasses that are placed without puncturing are those placed on the liver, and the bladder, and gout, and on the belly and the breast and the kidneys and the hip, for these members do not allow puncturing, and one does this only to attract blood from one member to another, as we do on the breasts when the nipples bleed;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 To remove the thickness that is in the member, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and the breast to reduce the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 And removes the pain when there is a swelling or stone, and by its attractive power perhaps removes the swelling, or moves the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 And so it does when placed on the liver and bladder when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only that.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in pleurisy, and in such a manner that one fills the cupping glass only with hot water or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 The form of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and on the side around the middle there should be a small hole, like for inserting a needle, and it should be made of bronze, softened beforehand so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 And let there be in the middle a rod of cross sectional area made of brass or iron, to place a compress there, and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who use them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 And one should thus place this cupping glass on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 grasp the compress of wax or linen, and place it inside the cupping glass across the rod that is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass that it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 and then place it on the member, and your two fingers should be on the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wishes, the steam escapes, and remove the cupping glass.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And use linen as before, and often repeat it if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 In the cupping glass which is used for pleurisy, there is no rod or hole, and it is only prepared when full of water, and it is placed on the member alone;
et c’est li forme:	 and this is its shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 Leaches are only prepared when they are to be placed in members where a cupping glass cannot be used because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 And in fleshless places, such as fingers or noses, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 And the quality of using them is that when you find leeches that are in clean fresh water without any stench, take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 And he puts them in a vessel of fresh water, until they become accustomed to it, and have nothing in their bellies.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 And then let them be bled by venesection and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and apply leeches.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 And when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where a cupping glass can be applied, he should apply one, for this is very effective afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 If not, then raise the place with a poultice of barley and then with water, very well, and then bandage it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 And if the place bleeds too much after the removal of the leeches, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and apply it until the bleeding stops.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 And if the blood is increased, then apply ground vitriol or gallnuts and similar things until it is dried out.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 Or take half of the peeled beans and place them on the spot, leaving them until they dry out in place, this will stop the bleeding now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 And if you need more, then take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 And if the leeches do not want to attach, then rub the spot with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the blood comes out, and then place them on, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will attach.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And when you see that they are falling off, then sprinkle on a little powder of ground aloe and gum, or ashes, and they will fall off now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 It is necessary therefore that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of the words and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or splintering occurs in someone, then you must hasten to heal the patient from one side and the other, if anything hinders you completely, such as physical weakness, or childhood, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 Or if the time is not very hot, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 And avoid cold food, that is to say cold soups, and bird meat and rabbit, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty foods, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess or swelling in the limb.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 If the patient returns to his previous diet.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that promote thickening, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, heads (of animals), feet, calf's foot, eggs, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 For with such nourishment the bones heal more quickly and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 And know that broken bones of the old and decayed cannot be well taken or healed according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor can those which are too tender, such as the bones of young children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 but do not worry, reset on top of the broken bone with strong clamps that hold and join the member together, until it is reinforced as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 and do not completely hinder its work, and for this reason it must be fed with coarse foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses en maintes manieres.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 Because the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 Because there is a fracture that goes to the bone marrow, and another in slicing, as when cutting a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 And there is a fracture with wound, and a fracture which is just a small crack all around.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 And each kind should have its own device and proper tool for the restoration, according to what comes to mind in its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 and it is known that the break of the bone occurs because the place is twisted, and it swells well on the outside, and resounds when pressed with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 And when there is no fracture or breakage, and the patient does not feel great pain.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 But he may well have a dislocation, or a split, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 If you must not move it by hand, but apply the following medications, and then delicately secure it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And know that the breaks that go in the direction of length, and the two parts are separated, it is necessary to now set them equally, before an abscess forms there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 And if an abscess forms there, then leave it alone for some days, until the abscess is reduced.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 Then align it equally with a screw that you can easily and wisely place, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of those where there are splinters.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 Then he holds it, as will be explained later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 And if there are broken pieces in the bone, extend it with two parts, if it is hand or foot, or hold it with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset all the additions in their places as much as you can, and be careful not to cause the patient injury or pain with your work.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 And feel it well with your hand if you think it is not well enough: ‌
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 Si tu alignez bien la dresche, et ne la serrez pas trop fort, ni ne pressez pas comme font ceux qui causent par leur travail un abcès chaud et une contraction du membre, comme nous l'avons observé de nombreuses fois.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 Et lorsque le membre est prêt, instruis bien le patient de ne pas le bouger, ni en éveil, ni en sommeil, ni en tournant ou d'une autre manière.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 Et veille à ce que le membre soit si solidement fixé qu'il ne ressente aucune douleur.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 Car lorsqu'il ressent de la douleur, ce n'est pas suffisant, et il faut le placer dans une position où il ne ressent aucune douleur.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 And take care that it is set straight, so that deformity does not occur when it is reset.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 And the quality of the broken member is as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 For there are small members, such as arms and fingers and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 so it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 And those that are large, such as hips and legs: ️
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 So it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the entire large member and holds it evenly on all sides, so that there is no gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 Then place light wadding around it, three or four turns according to the member, and tighten your hand a little all over the bandage, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break is moved away from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy place, then take the other ligament, and turn it back again on the broken place;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first turn above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 then put between the ligaments linen swabs or cloths, until it is all even, then bind everything above with the bandage, and then place your splints well on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 And if there is swelling or abscess, put on something that eases the abscess and removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 then brace above your shoulders, and let them be half the width of a large cane, made wisely, or from wood used to make clefts, or from palm leaves, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 but it is necessary that the brace placed above the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 and let it also be as long as needed for the member, whether small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 then brace above the braces as you did at first, then bind on top with a bandage, as in the first ligature over the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 tighter is underneath, gradually less so.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 and it is necessary that the bandages be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 because if the threads are thick, as I have seen the work of fools who make their laces from twisted flax cords, and this is a great mistake, for the lace cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have between each star less than two fingers' width.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 And if the patient is wounded by the tips of the stars after being drawn into healthy places, put underneath them wool or cloth scraps so that he does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment next.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 And know that it is not appropriate to draw out all the stars from broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 Because when the limb is large, it should not be put in stars larger than five or seven days, or more according to your security of the resulting abscess;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 and see here the manner of old plasters for the restoration of breaks, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 and it is that you take flour that stays on the mill walls, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this preparation, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring breaks in many ways, especially for women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold. ︎
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 Another method of plaster for mending fractures, dislocations, and twists.
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 Take aloe, ladanum, elecampane, asafoetida, gum arabic, and musk, in the amount of ten.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 Myrrh and aloes, in the amount of five.
alechil VIIII З.;	 Garlic, seven.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 Grind them into powder, and mix with egg white.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 If the man's temperament is hot, then use this plaster, for it has a good composition and quickly mends broken bones, and is valuable to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another method of plaster for twists:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 Take musk and marshmallow, in the amount of ten.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 Mirror and aloe, nine parts each.
acaice VI З.;	 Acaice, six parts;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Bolic Armenian, ten parts; and grind well, and mix with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another method for emplaster on dislocated joints and displaced bones, and soothes the resulting pain, and heals bone fractures and breaks:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Take new wool, and moisten it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This emplaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and properly removes pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 Another method of emplaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Take dried fig leaves and wild pansy leaves, and grind them together, and make an emplaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of emplaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to soften the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take root of mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, chickpea flour, one part each.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 And grind them together, and make an infusion with wine, and if the limb is hot, make the infusion with moist coriander water or plain water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of plaster that is stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take roots of mallow, and seeds of flax, borage, melilot, and woodruff, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 And grind them together, and make an infusion with salt water or fresh water or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 Ypocras says in his book that one should not place anything on a broken member to restore strength except for a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 And it seems that Galen says one should place on a broken member, to restore it, dry things that are slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and frankincense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Another plaster for injury and pain: 																														
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Take mallow and clipped men's hair, or bird feathers, and marshmallow, and salt equally, and crush them, and make a poultice and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 Then, after that, loosen the poultice a bit, and check if the patient feels any pain, or if the bone has moved from its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 If not, then do not remove it for several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 And if pain comes to the area, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry and remove it, and take away the poultice now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 And take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift up the area, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 Then let the member rest for an hour, then place on a dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind onto a knot, until you are certain of a hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 and the inflammation of the member will rest, and the pain will be removed. Then begin again with a subtle binding, and a little poultice, and do not tighten it as much as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and make it subtle until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, I have removed it all, and you need a plaster and a bandage, then start it again, as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 And if nothing happens to the member as we have said, do not unbind it until after three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the fracture sets, and the connection of the flesh approaches.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 Then you constrain it more than before, and you increase its flesh, as I have said earlier.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 And if you see the place becoming drier than necessary, know that nutrition cannot come there;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 Therefore, apply warm water dressing every time you dislocate it, which should be done every three days, and release the bandage a little;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 By this work, then, nutrition comes to the limb, and quickly heals like what foolish doctors do, who return the twisted limb.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 This is bad, and it is a fearful work, and I see no other remedy than to leave it alone and to set it right.
des diverses manieres de brisure	 In various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 There are many types of breaks, and diverse shapes, and the causes are different;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 for it has breaks that are made by the strike of a sword, and the neck removes all the bone up to the marrow which is below the bone, as an axe or stick does;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 and therefore this manner of break is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 where the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this manner of break is called "absolue";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 and the wound from these two breaks is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 And if there is an embedded strike, or a split from the blow of a stone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 And if there is a breaking wound, which reaches up to the skin beneath the bone or on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 And there is a wound that is confined within the bone as fine as a hair, and the fracture is small, therefore this break is called "capillary". 》
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 and there is the wound that is made either by striking with a stone or by falling or something similar, which causes a fragment of bone to enter inside, and the place is swollen as blacksmiths do when they strike on cauldrons; 》
si entre li piere dedens.	 If between the stones inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 And this happens more to those who have moist bones in the head, as in a child's head;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 and it happens with all these types of breaks where small fragments are separated like stars;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 And we recognize all kinds of fractures by their retraction on them, and the examination with tensors, and by the corrupt flesh that is upon it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 The similarity to hair is known because when the bone is exposed and rubbed with it, the black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 In the treatment of fractures, pay attention to the patient's accidents, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, distension, pallor, fever, and eyes coming out strong and red, and other similar things in many dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 And if you do not see a frightening accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 And when the wounded person comes first to you, and this is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 And if this is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh beneath the bone is not corrupted and the complications that we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the bone break reaches to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the split part like this:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as gently as you can, and if blood runs when uncovering the bone or an abscess like this, help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with cloths moistened in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 And make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be assured of the stoppage of blood;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 Then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two types of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 one manner is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and it is called the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 And then he puts another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 And the second manner is that you have many different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 and work lightly, so as not to harm the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 And if the bone is tough and hard, you must bore around it before you administer incisions with drills, not so deep that they do not pierce through the bone of the skull, and there should be a margin or circle above the point to prevent it from piercing through the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 And it is necessary for you to have several, so that each comes into its place in the width of the bone, so that you have pincers for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 and this is the shape of the III types of pincers
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one pincer on the bone, and turn with your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 then place the pincer elsewhere a little after, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone to your hand, or by some of the instruments that you have such as tongs, pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 And take care that you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 And when you have pierced the bone and drawn it out, you must remove the splinter that remains of the bone with all similar instruments, resembling an awl, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other awl.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 And if any small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with an instrument.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 Then treat the wound with linens and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 And the other way of working is that which Galen says is safer;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 And he praises it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 It is first necessary that you uncover part of the bone where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incision.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 And do not cut from one side only, for the parts are sharp on both sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; xspace Et quant tu avras bien leu ce chapistre, et entendu les choses dessus diz, si te covient conoistre que li cervel porroit estre si perciet par II manieres.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 Then strike with a small mallet from above, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 If it is adherent to the bone, lightly scrape it off, for one can remove it well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the skin, and the bone is only cut slightly from above, and there are small pieces, then you must sharpen that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you should have various quantities, in order to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 If you first use large scrapers, and then more subtle ones afterwards, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 In each of the other subtle cuts or breaks, you must bring in a reason according to its nature;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 and this is something that cannot be answered by someone who has studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 And if the wound is exposed, then you must take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 Then take another double-layered cloth, either two or three times, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the patient, then administer another ligature on top, and do not tighten it too strongly, only enough to touch the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 and leave it thus for a day or two, until the abscess has subsided, then remove the ligature, and administer medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, incense powder, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 and make a paste of these things, and place it on the wound, and continually administer moistening medicines without irritation.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 and ensure that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the cloth of the head, it will spread and fester, causing great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 because when one applies a sharp object to the wound, it clots over.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 Take heed therefore, if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, then doubt is certain.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 And if blackness occurs other than from the medicine that has been applied, and it has such power, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them together to make a poultice;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then proceed with the treatment as required until it heals.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 Know that sometimes both parts of the nose are broken, or only one alone, because these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 And below it is cartilage, and does not break; it does not cause any force to bow or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger or pierce through the nose, and place the breakage inside your index finger, and with your thumb outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach it, then you must place a small amount of fat evenly at the end of a reed.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 And if the break is in two parts, then do likewise, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when this swelling has subsided, then insert at the end of the nose some linen cloths, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 When you push one bone against another, if there is a break
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 and the ligaments are so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some say that one should soak the bandages in butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 It does not seem good to me, but they must be moistened in the preparation of an ointment made from egg and powdered myrobalan.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 then let the ligament alone until the bone is firm and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And sometimes one puts goose feathers in the nose instead of ligaments, and then there is a soft cloth around it, and the fracture holds, and the patient breathes through it.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 or do whatever you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 And if abscesses come to the nose while you are working there, put a poultice of oil rose or cotton soaked in aquilon on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 And if there are no abscesses there, then put a poultice on the outside, made from sesame flour and frankincense powder, mixed with egg ointment, then put light wadding on top, and do not bandage the nose.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into many pieces, then apply suitable instruments to it, then sew up the split, and treat it with things that draw flesh, and bind it, such as suitable plasters and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and place lead pins in it until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	 From the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the jaw is dislocated beneath, and there is no wound outside of it, and the fracture is only outside, and it is not broken in two, then you recognize it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 It is necessary that if the fracture is on the right side, you place your index finger in the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then place your index finger of the right hand, and push the fracture gently inside, and adjust it with the other hand from without, and make it equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 And if the jaw fracture is in two pieces, it is necessary that you apply traction of two parts until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 And if there is movement or loosening of the teeth, hold them in place with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then apply wax on the broken jaw, and put on a double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And put on the cloth a well-made large bandage, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it at the top as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 And if you see that the appearance changes, then untie it on the third day, and then reset to the place where it has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 And apply a plaster made of flour from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame paste, after you have removed the wax.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 And put on a light wool bandage, and if the bandage tightens, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it heals.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 Many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 Et si apostemes se presentent, faictes ce que nous avons dit maintes fois.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 And if there is a fracture and wound together, check to see if any piece of bone has been removed.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 If it has been removed, use suitable instruments for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your needs.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then close the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable dressings to promote healing until it heals.
de la forcele	 of the splint
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The collarbone has broken several times before, near the shoulder, and the break is according to three types.
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 Or it may be broken and separated into two pieces, with parts remaining, and this is the easiest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 Or there may be a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 And the work is so when the fracture is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken strength.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 and the other extends the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 then place the fracture evenly between your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor protrusion.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 And if you need to extend more, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 and extend and lift the limb, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you place the fracture evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out of the wound because it is deeply embedded, then it is necessary that the patient lie on their back, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and let the assistant push the shoulder down until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 And then bring the fracture to your fingers, and if you find it splintered, then it is necessary that you split open.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 And draw out the bones lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut it with one of the chisels that you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 but place under the trestle this instrument, to hold the bone in place:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 and resembles a spoon, and is not pointed, and should be as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 And it should have two heads, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound that you made when you drew out the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And when you are sure that the abscess is hot, then stitch up the wound, and if the opening is small or you doubt that the abscess is hot, then fill the wound with cloths and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 And if there are abscesses here, then moisten the cloth with rose oil and asafoetida and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 The squeezing of the bone, when it is without wounds and without a fracture, is that you place on the bone the poultice made from powdered millstone and egg white, and put light packing on top, and place a sphere under the seat if you need it.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 then take a very wide bandage of one palm in width, then place two layers of cloth over the packing and the poultice.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 then take a subtle strap three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 and place the strap on the break, and turn the bandage up over the shoulder, and under the healthy seat, and under the unhealthy seat.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 And there you reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the broken bone, then you should check it every day, and when the ligament slackens, then you bind it again.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 And make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise it up.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 This will lighten the fracture of the collarbone by straightening the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad incident occurs, for up to twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 Then begin the plaster again, if you see that it is necessary, and bind it and leave it so until he is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 And she is restored within twenty-eight days, and within fewer for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	 Of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 It often happens that the shoulder breaks or tears in a large place and not in the middle, and it should be touched only by hand.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 if you prepare it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 then put on the place powder of millet with plenty of egg, and light stuffing, and put on a double cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 then put on a wide and fine bandage, somewhat wider than the shoulder, and if there are gaps under the bandage in any place of the shoulder, fill those gaps with linen stuffing so that the bandage sits evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 And then secure it firmly with a large bandage, so that the bone does not move from its place, and examine the knot each day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 And every time it loosens, secure it again and align the bone if it has shifted from its place, and have the patient lie on his side;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 And the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 And when this number is completed, release it, and be assured, for the bone does not easily dislocate again.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and touches under the heart, it breaks through, and removes it, and does what we have said in the breaking of the fortress to appease the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	 of the break of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 But it often breaks at the tip.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken in the middle, it shifts downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of breath, and fainting, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the passage in the broken bone, and this can be felt well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back, and place one cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and bring the ribs of the two ribs towards each other with your hands, and use all means you can to align the bone as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 then place over it plasters and wool on a thin salt sheet, or other light wood, and wrap it in one cloth, and bind it to the broken bone, so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 and tie the bandage tightly around the back, and bind it properly, and check every hour to see if it is loosening, and if it does, then bind it again.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 and if it is necessary to untie him, due to inflammation or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and untie him, and remove the plaster, and apply a treatment suitable for the condition.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then replace the plaster and bind it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	 Of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 Know that the breaking of ribs occurs only in large places after the back, and inside the head, and they break only because they are slippery;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 and one feels it well at the inquiry by two (methods).
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the treatment is that you set the fracture equal, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 And then apply a plaster, and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 And if the breaking of the ribs is directed inward, then the patient feels very great pain and pricking, as in pleurisy, because the bone pierces the flesh.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 and breathes with difficulty, and soon vomits great plenty of blood, and this is of grave illness, and the ancients have placed great skill in it (i.e., treating it).
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And there are those who say that it should be administered food that swells the belly to expel the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 We do not do this, lest hot abscesses come, if they have not already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 And if they have come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 And some say that one should apply cupping glasses to the place, in order to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable. 》
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 Toute voie, doubt has that the cupping glass may attract the superfluous fluids to the place due to the weakness of the dislocation.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 And some say that the site should be covered with wool soaked in hot oil, and tents are placed between the ribs to make the bandage even all around, then it should be treated according to the treatment of pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that punctures the flesh, and there is doubt on the part of the patient, it is necessary to incise upon the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under an instrument to protect the liver.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then one should saw the bone, and pull gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with poultices until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 And if such abscesses come, place dampened cloths in rose oil on them, and put on the place.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat the place as one would an abscess, and let it lie quietly on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	 of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and often it bends;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 and similarly to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then observe whether you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that he is mortally wounded in many parts, and if he moves them and feels well when they are strained and pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured, provided that one applies treatment there.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 And if something similar happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, take note whether the feet are numb, and if there are accidents in the hands, and on the back a swelling and involuntary urination;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 and when it is laid on its belly, there is involuntary urination.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is turned onto its back and wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 Know that it is fatal;
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 If he does not work diligently in his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 And if this accident does not happen to him, then the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And the treatment is such that you should apply a hot poultice if there is heat in the abscess, and place on top of it rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is appeased.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 Then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 And if any bone breaks, it should be covered with wax.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And remove the bone, then join together the two lips of the wound with a stitch if it is large, and treat it with a flesh-forming ointment until he is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the shoulder head", place your thumb of your left hand into it, and make it equal to the other hand by your power, then put the plaster and bandage on top, if you need it;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 then hold it steady, and if there are any bone splinters, they should be removed, and heal the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 of the breaking of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 It happens sometimes that the hip bone may be broken, and if it is, there will only be a little weakening at the top.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 and it breaks longwise, and declines to one side, and the patient feels pain in that place, and bruising, and swells as if broken. ➤
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 And the treatment is such that you extend your hand over it, until you are above the break.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 and know what the fracture and its appearance are;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 and if the fracture is only in the head, then set this fracture so that it is of natural appearance.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 And if the break is lengthwise, or slants towards the inside, then make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you may prepare to restore that break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 And when you have set it equal, then apply the plaster, then place a splint of wood or horn over it, and bind the fracture so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 and support the place under the ribs, until the limb is level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 And if any abscesses appear there, do not touch them until the abscesses are healed, and then apply what we have said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 And then return to the restoration, and hold it as needed, if there is no bad outcome.
et c’est li maniere.	 And this is the way (to do it).
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 The shoulder is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways.
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 The first way is that you take a stick full of medium thickness, according to this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 And tie at the two ends two strings, and pull them up, and make the patient sit on a seat.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 Then you throw the broken arm over the stick, until it reaches the armpit, and in the middle there is a curve of the stick, then pull up some heavy thing that the attendant extends downward.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 Then the doctor should place the splint evenly against his hands together, so that the splint returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 And another way is that one makes the patient lie on his back, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two attendants, one to hold what is above the break in his hands, and the other to hold below all the cord, and each extends at its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the limbs to its side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 And if the splint is near the shoulder's head, it is necessary that you place one string under the armpit, and another towards the side, under the splint.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 and thus if the splint is towards the side, it is necessary to place a string lightly, without difficulty, so that the splint is even on the place and on the side.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 Then make the splint even as it should be, and bandage it, if any abscesses come there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 And if such abscesses come there, do not bandage it until the seventh day, and place a wet cloth on vinegar and rose oil, until those abscesses are calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 Then he holds it, and the manner of holding is that you place the bandage on the fracture, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 And place the cloth and hold onto the shoulder and the arm, so that the arm is in the proper position, unless something prevents it or the bone is not set.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 And if you doubt that the bone is not set, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than others, and there should be between each splint two fingers' width, and each splint should be so large that it passes beyond the fracture by three fingers' width on either side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 Then hold it up to the stars, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, stronger and less slanted.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if you see the base of the bones and the holding as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 then check the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur in the area, and that the nursing cannot reach the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If you accept it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 And if no such incident occurs, do not unbind it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 and place under the shoulder a pillow filled with wool equally, and check each hour of the day or night that the position of the broken limb does not move, nor is the ligament softened;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 if he receives it by the power of medicine, and give him the food that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is first finely prepared;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 and when he begins to recover, let it be thicker.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be taken for forty days in total;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 and then one must unbind and administer baths and ointments to heal the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the constriction is ugly and clogged, it takes one day or two months to unclog.
de la brisure du bras	 of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "dui foscile", one of which is small and follows the elbow;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 And the other is large, and this one is below, towards the little finger.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 By chance, only the large tendon breaks, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 When the small tendon is broken, the restoration is easy, and so is the healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 And when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more serious than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is only the small fuscille that is broken, one should extend it lightly and make it equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 And if it is the large tendon, it must be stretched more tightly;  /> Et se c'est li petis, il n'i covient pas tant grant force;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 And extend it on the pillow, and raise the heel of the hand higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the pillow in front of him higher, so that the patient does not endure any effort.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 Then extend one of your arms to the lower part under his hand or at the wrist, and another minister above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 Et puis, remets-le en place le chirurgien, selon la meilleure forme possible.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 Et si, dans une fracture où il y a des fragments, alors remets chaque fragment à sa place; et s'il y en a un qui dépasse et touche le cœur, et que tu ne peux pas le ramener à sa place, fends-le et retire-le, comme nous l'avons dit précédemment.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And if there is a fracture with a wound, I have spoken about it in a specific chapter;
si pren la cure.	 then take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 And if in the beginning of the treatment such abscesses appear, then apply a cloth of plaster made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 and delicately place the cloth on top until those abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 And then remove the plaster and apply the poultice of milled powder with plenty of egg, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage on the fracture be always stronger, and a little wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 And know that it must have six stars or ribs on the arm in various positions.
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 whether the break is in one of the bones, or in two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 and press more on the break than elsewhere, and always less while pulling, as I said at the beginning of the chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 and let the rags that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 and let the thread, with which it is tied, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And wrap the limb and the tendon after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 And if any bad thing happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must rinse the limb with hot water until that itching is calmed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And let the member not rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then begin the splinting again, and if the tendon is weakened and the bone dislocated, or similar things, treat it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 And if you take precaution that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it in a pot, and leave it thus for some days until the nourishment can pass through, and then splint it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things happens to the patient, do not release him until 20 days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 or in which case, he should place his hands around his neck, and let his neck be equal on both sides, and guard against movement and shifting, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 and know that this fracture is healed in thirty or thirty-five days, and perhaps even twenty, according to the composition and complexion of the body's humors.
de la brisure de la main	 Of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 Know that in the back of the hand and at the fingers there are few breaks, and it only happens that there is often a sprain.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 And when a plant [i.e., bone] of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit straight in front of himself equally;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 then place his hand on the stretched table, and let the minister straighten the broken bones, and let the doctor set them evenly until they are well joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 And put the poultice and bandages on it, if there are no abscesses, then apply a compress according to the size of the wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 And if the break is around the waist near the lower belly, make a sphere of cloths and instruct the patient to tie it to his broken part.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 And then bind it with a long cloth, and let the compress be made of soft kersey as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 And if the break is in the hand, you must place a bandage on top and another below the hand so that the fingers are open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and make the knot between the two fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 And if the break occurs in one of the fingers, whether it is sprained or dislocated, set it straight as needed.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 And hold it with the sole of the foot, and if you see this, place a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 And if the break is in another toe, such as in the big toe or one of the others, place it evenly, and bind it with the sound toe that follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 Or tie them all together in a single bandage, whatever works, or place a splint on top, as with the foot.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And take care in the restoration and positioning of a hot abscess, and secure it with what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	 Of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 The thigh bone is often broken, and this is evident when the leg turns in front or behind;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 And its restoration is such that one ligament is tied above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 And let the patient lie on his back, then each assistant should extend their ligament to its equal part;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then let one ligament be towards the knee, and the other ligament below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 And also if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be by the knee, and let the extension be downwards.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 Then let the surgeon align the bone with his two hands so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bind it, if pus does not come out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 And if there is hot pus, let it quiet down first before returning to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 The ligature is made in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture I bandage thick and double in II or III, and remove any excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the base of the big toe, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg, near the knee below, and let the ends of the thread come out above;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 then turn the bandage around the leg and the thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and place a splint on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make the splint equal in size, then begin to tie firmly III or IV turns on the fracture;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 And as one goes higher towards the fracture, it strains less;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 Then thread two knots in the thread that you have passed between the thigh and the leg, and tie three knots that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 And it strains so that it does not move from its place; then leave it thus, for if there comes no abscess or swelling or other similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 And if it happens, then unbind it, and address what comes as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 And if there are bone fragments that protrude, they must be removed, if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 And if it cannot be done, then the site must be split and pulled strongly.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 And sometimes the thighbone is broken like a splinter, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 nevertheless, in such restoration, the patient does not become lame.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 And know that the thigh is restored in five days, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	 from the cavity of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Saiches que en la ruelle du genouil advient peu de fracture, mais elle ploie souvent.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 Et s’elle brise, si n’est que d’une fente, ou une perte, et il advient à toute plaie, et sans plaie, et cela se sent bien.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 And the restoration is like placing equal that which is round to its two sides, so that it can be joined together.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 then apply the plaster, and put a round splint in it if needed, and secure it as required, then follow all the arrangements that we have said for other fractures, such as abscess and others.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 treat each injury with what is needed until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	 Of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 Know that in the leg there are two bones. One is called by its right name "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 And there is the same break as in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as for the arm, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 And if the small bone is broken, it will turn to the front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible;
et torne desoz.	 and it turns downwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 Then apply traction, and make it even, and bind the splints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 however, if the break is ugly and there are several fragments, then traction should be lesser and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 And align according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood shavings that wrap around the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee downwards.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 Then wrap the two of them with one bandage on top and another below, and tie it in the middle as well. And at this point the leg will not be able to decline to the right or to the left, and thus it is well.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 And some apply splints along the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and one puts the leg in it to prevent movement. Properly done, this is for a fracture where there is a wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 And move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other incident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the cure is such that it may heal.
de la brisure des os dou piet	 Of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 At the ankle there is no breaking, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and the two heels, and in this case it is only splintering in several directions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones rising above one another, then put the patient's foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and then place your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 Then place the dressing and wool on top, and under the sole of the foot put a small board with two full nails, then fasten it securely to the foot, after which you wrap bandages around, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 And when three days or four have passed, then unbind the ligament, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 And if there are any broken fingers, restore them, just as we have said for the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 Then place a splint on the broken finger according to its length, and let it be a little wider, then place beneath the foot the table that I have mentioned, and bind firmly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 and if there are two or three, or more, broken fingers, then place a splint on each finger according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the table beneath the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 and let it stand on top of the table, beyond the foot's belly, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 And assist each incident as needed.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 of the fracture of the bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 When the woman's natural bones are broken, have her sit upright, then lean her towards the back, and let her be held from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 Then fill the woman's natural cavity with cotton, and put in as much as needed.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 Then have the woman stand up and lift her back little by little, and then the cotton will jump out until it reaches the entrance of the vagina, and the bone will return with the cotton.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or more.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 Thus the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and attach a cord to its opening, and insert all of it into the vagina.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 Then blow into the cannula strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 the nature will return to the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 And when the bone of a man's or woman's fist is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 and these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who put their effort and skill into it, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 For the fracture indicates in several situations the correct path to restoration:
enten le donques.	 understand it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 Then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days wrapped thus, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	 of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 It is necessary for someone who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh bone or shoulder bone or similar, to be bled now, just like the bleedings we have mentioned testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the wound is healthy, then seal it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or that day, unless an abscess forms there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 And if an abscess forms there, then wait until the ninth day to resume treatment, until the abscess subsides, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 And if the broken bone is protruding through the skin, it is necessary that you gently grasp it with your hands and apply slight traction.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 And if the extensions are not prepared to be equal to your hands, then reset it with this iron instrument which has seven or eight teeth, and its width is according to the size of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 And for this reason it is necessary for the physician to have three or four [of these instruments], according to what he needs in each wound treatment.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 And let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend at the pressure on the member during your work, and let it be pointed in front, and thick from the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 And it is called "palainche," which is why the curved head must be placed on top of the visible bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 and it should be struck once, so that it returns, and is equal one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well take the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the head of the bone, so that the instrument has control over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then strike it with a suitable instrument for this purpose, either a scalpel or scissors, according to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 then remove the bone fragments and small splinters that remain in the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 Do this until it is in its place, then moisten the bandage in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is summer.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 and do not put any ointment or other greasy substance on the wound, as it will cause rotting and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 Then administer stitches when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound open, and cut the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and be sure that the wound is not constricted with the fracture;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And many times have foolish physicians done this, causing the patient to either die or be crippled.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 And let the constriction be softer and gentler than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that evil occurrences may happen as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to apply stitches there.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 But instead of stitches, bind hard cloths around it and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one day or two that the wound is swelling, remove everything you have put on it at once, and apply a healing ointment to the wound, such as tetrapharmacon or similar ointments.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 And you must unbind the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 And it is necessary that the limb be arranged in such a way that the swelling runs downwards lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 And if many days pass and it cannot heal but rather swells again, know that there are small bone fragments causing the wound to swell and bringing this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula forms at the site, or another type of corruption occurs, you must treat it according to what is said in the previous chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 And when the bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the thigh or shoulder bones, and other similar large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times this causes death, but leave it until it rots.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 Perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 and if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 Of the bruises that come upon the suture
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 We often see good health after the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the limb's condition;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 Take care, therefore, if the bone is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 If you administer to him medicines that are styptic, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolle, and similar others, in the manner that you take some of these things, or all together, and boil them with styptic wine, or with an abundance of egg, or with oil;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 And place them on the wound in cloths, and bind it well, and do not unbind it for many days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 And then unbind it, and begin again another, until the knotting is removed;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 Or you bind onto a well-made plate of lead.
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 For the property of lead is such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 And if the knotting has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then scrape off its surface, and make the superfluous part evident.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 You shall have it rasped by some rasp until it is removed, and the wound cared for until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 of the limb that is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 When the bone fracture is repaired, but afterwards the limb remains weak and delicate, it happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 one of which is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishment could not reach the limb.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 or because of excessive bleeding;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 or because of too great movements, not at the right time.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 or because he has little blood in his body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 And the care is such that you make the patient eat and soften the body until the blood is increased in him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 And give the patient a bath, and bring him joy and happiness;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch draws out much pus, and wash it often with cold water, until the pus flows from the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 of the twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 When the limb is twisted after being set, and the broken bone is visible, and the shape of the limb is unsightly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 do not believe those fools who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 and these actions are blamed, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps death.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 Nevertheless, if the swelling and inflammation are recent, it is necessary that they be bathed in hot water, or herbs with a softening effect should be boiled, such as mallow leaves, roots, and melilot, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 And he makes a softening poultice, such as well-made diquilon, and you take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and apply the poultice on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 Or you take fatty figs, and grind them with bran of flax, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes the dislocation is removed by continually and for a long time rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And let there be gentle movement to the limb each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 And if the swelling is old and hardened, like stone, and needs to be removed with an iron instrument, then it must be shaved down to the bone with a fine, sharp knife.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And put prudence and diligence in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 When dislocation happens to someone, it must immediately be reset without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 For if one delays, the place swells, and perhaps it is only with great difficulty that it can be reset to its place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 because it is not fitting that one moves it at the hour when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 many times it brings on cramp and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 nevertheless, when this happens, have the patient bleed, then leave them until the inflammation has subsided;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 then foment the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as it returns to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	 of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 Rarely do both jaws become dislocated at the same time, and the dislocation of both is according to two methods:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 And they are slightly removed from their places, and softened a little.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 and they are completely dislocated, hanging down towards the chest, and saliva runs from his mouth so that he cannot hold it back or close his mouth, and his tongue is tangled with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through many positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 And if it [the dislocation] is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it immediately, without delaying at all;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 and in such a way that the attendant holds the patient's head, and the practitioner places his little finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 and the other two fingers are placed evenly.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 And instruct the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 And the physician should set it right, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 And if the relocation is difficult, especially if it involves both jaws together, soak them in hot water and oil until they can be easily reset.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 Do not hesitate to reset them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 And when they are reset equally and the patient's mouth closes well without swelling, place moistened cloths in a plaster made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bands.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 And let the patient sleep on their back with their head between two pillows so that they do not move to the right or left, nor should they try to speak, but rather eat light food until the pain has passed and the jaws have healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And then he chews what he wants lightly, and does not exert himself to open his mouth for eating or drinking, as long as the jaw is well tied and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 And if the two mandibles cannot be set right within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and sudden illness may follow, and perhaps intestinal discharge, and possibly pure bile will be vomited.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 And when you see this, then know that it is a loss;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 and many times he dies who experiences this, within nine days.
de la forcelle	 of the jawbone
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 The jawbone cannot dislocate from the inside or from the foot, and sometimes it dislocates downward, which is easily felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on his back and stretches out his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tightly.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 and the joint that is towards the knife cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 if not, and if it dislocates any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then put on the plaster and bandage it, and bind it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And thus the same thing happens with the dislocated shoulder when it is removed from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 Know that the shoulder can be dislocated in only three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 one of which is when it dislocates toward the lower part of the armpit;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 and the second is toward the side of the chest;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 and perhaps it dislocates toward the upper part, which happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 and it does not dislocate backward behind the shoulder, nor inward toward the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 and often it dislocates downward toward the armpit, especially for those who have little flesh, because then it moves quickly. xspace
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 to those who have enough flesh, barely, and it enters barely.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 And sometimes it happens to some men that they experience bruising or fracturing, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated for this reason.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 Therefore, you must examine it until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	 And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 The dislocation is known when it falls towards the shoulder blade, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the scapula at the armpit the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 And the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you can clearly see it in the armpit.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 et cette manière de dislocation n'est pas facile à remettre en place lorsqu'elle est nouvelle, ou si l'enfant est malade.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 And the manner is that the servant takes the patient's hand up high, then places his fingers underneath the axilla, and lifts the joint with force up to its place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 And the servant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then places it below.
si venra hastanment.	 Then it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 And if it does not come as we have said in the hand within several days afterward, then the patient must be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 And let the servant make a softening and soothing mixture, such as a decoction of hollyhock, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and apply it.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 then the patient should be placed on his back, and under the armpit a pad of wool should be put, not too soft nor too hard, then the physician should place his heel on the pad, and lift the shoulder head skillfully, and pull the patient's hand;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it does not move downward;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 then the shoulder returns immediately, and if you see this, you should reset it in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 and it is necessary that a man be present who is larger than the patient;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 and he should stand straight towards the patient's side, and place his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And another minister draws the patient's hand down towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too light, then have him hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 And it is reset in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 and it is done by driving a long stick into the ground, so that the head is as round as a fist, neither too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 then it should be placed under the patient, but let there be soft cloths on top, and the patient should stand along the length of the stick; xspace
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 then his hand should be stretched down on the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 And if it does not want to return through all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 Take a stick of two arms' length and four finger-breadths wide, which has a round head to enter deeply under the shoulder blade, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 then place the pole on top of the patient's head, under a drape, so that the pole does not hurt the patient, then put it underneath the patient's backside;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 and extend the other arm along the length of the pole, and place the shoulder on the pole, and the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm on the rung of a wide ladder, and let the hands hang down, and let the body hang freely from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 now the joint returns to its place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 And when it is inside, in whatever manner it may be, you must place under the seat an equal sphere of wool, then apply the prepared plaster of powdered millstone, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it, then tie it securely under the seat, and wrap the bandage over the plaster, and hold the hand to its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 And it is necessary that he rests a little, until the member is comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 and then rests more afterwards for five or seven days, and moves it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 And if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply three cauteries, as it is explained in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot raise its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the hips, or the back, is done by pushing, and stretching of hands, and another remedy is applied there;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and it is treated until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 And if after healing there is stiffness in the limb and slowness of movement, then the patient should take a bath many times until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	 of the dislocation of the rib
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 Know that the dislocation of the elbow is dislocated by points, and returns by points;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 And if it has dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, the dislocation is not repaired, because one can see and feel it well.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 And dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 Et when you join the sick coute with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is cut, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 And you must reset it before any abscess forms there, for if an abscess forms, it would be difficult to set back.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 And perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is at the rear;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 It is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and death may occur.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 And the restoration is such that when it can be set back, you should extend its hand with both your hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 and his arms should be spread, and the hands of the surgeon according to the bone around, above and below, and press the joint together with his thumbs or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 Et si the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and strikes with the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 And if it does not wish to return to its place, administer a strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 and let two assistants extend the arm, and hold it still with two assistants, so that it does not move during the extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 then turn the arm in all directions, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 and when the surgeon has brought the joint together with his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint strongly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 and when it is in place, put on a dry bandage with some egg, and hold it firmly, and tie the arm to the patient's neck, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 And if you see that the joint does not hold well, then begin again with the bandage and the band, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	 Then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 And if the patient feels stiffness after the joint has been set and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is eased.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 or you place on the joint a greasy piece of sheep's wool, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make it enter the bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do this two or three times, until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 and if you see, then put on moistened cow dung heated with butter, and bandage it up;
si revenra a sa disposition.	 it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	 The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The joints of the hand are dislocated, and their relocation is light, more than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 However, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the place does not swell, or a hot abscess develops. 》
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 And the restoration is that you place the afflicted hand on a table, and the minister extends his hand, and the physician places it equally, so that he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 However, you must check if it is properly in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 Then the patient should place the back of his hand on a table for extension and restoration.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and the physician should place his hand on that part of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If not, then apply soothing plasters for such abscesses, and leave it thus without repeating the process.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains dislocated; ️
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 And do not cause any harm to the patient further than the hand is wet, and cannot grasp anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 then know that the nerve has been cut or the artery.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 if there is no other means than to grasp by cautery near the wound, and perhaps it serves no other purpose.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 And when the hand is in place, apply the poultice we mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then unbind and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he cannot move it well and there is stiffness, then moisten it with hot water and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the wrist.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 then extend the fingers and push the dislocation back towards you until it returns, then support the head of the finger and turn it towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 and leave it for two days, and then set it straight on the third day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 And of night the ligament, as we have said, and unbinds by day, and makes it move, and binds it again at night;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and act as you have done before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 And do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 Of the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are several dislocations, there is no treatment, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 And the sign is that the excretion jumps out without willpower, and one cannot hold it in, and often some member becomes soft, whether the two thighs or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 And often the spine moves in four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 that which moves at the back is called "scoliosis":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 The remedy is such that you treat if the curvature has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 there is no cure or healing for the whole of it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 And those that come from falling or striking or similar things, the ancients speak of cures in great words where there is not always great benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that in the curvature that comes in the chest, there is no skill or healthiness;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 and also that which comes straight into two ribs, and one cannot cure except for the one that comes directly to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 and is such that the patient should be stretched out on his back in one equal place, and have support under him, so that he does not injure himself.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 then drive a stake firmly into the ground at the head, and another at the feet, and tie one rope under the patient's ankles, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 and two assistants should hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 and ensure that the stakes are securely in place, as we have said, and let the physician place his palms firmly on the spine until it returns [to its original position].
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 And if it does not return to its original position with this treatment, then take a board three arms long, and place it under the patient's back, and let the patient be on their side, and push the end of the board under the back, then put the middle of the board on the spine; pgfqpoint
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 And let the physician place his feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if you see it happen, do the same at the shoulder that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 And it is that you place two faggots at the head of the patient, one on each side of the body, and between each faggot, above and below, there should be a hand's breadth of space.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 And let there be in each faggot a hole, where the shoulder fits, and let the faggots be firmly in the ground, so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 And between each of the two faggots, there should be a rotating faggot, on which the rope turns, and for the two turnings, there should be two small faggots the length of a hand, to turn the shoulder.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And then have the patient lie down with a ligature between their legs at the tourniquet towards the head, and the other ligature towards the feet at the other tourniquet, and each of the assistants turn their tourniquet for the entire ligature, and the master should place the spindle evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when it is even, place a desiccating poultice with plenty of egg, and then the bandages, and then a strip from a board three fingers long, which should cover the area of the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a ligature, as we have said, and let the patient use delicate nursing until they are healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 And if something happens at the end of the treatment, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, along with the poultice that we have mentioned before;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 And sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes it appears at the back of the spine, and one thinks that this is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 and it is the bone that has broken through, which is why one should not have any presumption about it:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 by chance it could bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	 of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 Know that at the hips and shoulders, only dislocation occurs, not like in other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 Inside and outside, front and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 And more inside than elsewhere, hardly dislocates in front or behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the sign of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer and more open is the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double his knee to the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the place that is nearby is swollen with abscess is hot, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 And the sign of that which comes to pass, so it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And the sign of the one in front is that he stretches his leg according to its length;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 yet he does not double his knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot go forward, and holds his urine, and the ankle swells, and when walking, he walks on his heels.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 And the sign of that which comes to pass behind, so it is that they cannot spread their knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the hip bone is in the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 The remedies for this type of dislocation are such that you should consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, then there is no treatment.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 And it is not necessary for him to have any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 And in that where the dislocation is fresh, and this occurs in four ways of dislocation, then you must hurry to return the joint, and push it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 Perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is necessary.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and strongly support the leg with two hands, or with one hand that is tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 And another assistant extends his hand over it in such a manner that he places his hands under the cushions, then binds with a soft bandage on the thigh;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 and another holds the end of the bandage.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And they pull upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 This method of extension is common in four ways; if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If not, then it is necessary to take care of its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 When the dislocation is at the shoulder, it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the place that is under the armpit, then pull the bandage up towards the armpit, and towards the chest;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 Then let another assistant take his arms, and embrace the thick part of the sick thigh, and stretch it firmly.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 now it will return to its place;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 And if you cannot secure it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, soft band around both ankles and both knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers' width more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 then let it be hung over the top of a beam, and let it be two arms' length above the ground;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 then instruct one assistant to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who should embrace the thigh firmly, because the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides,
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 Et li maistres le retaigne par dessus sus le col, et en ceste maniere deveint li malaides sanz aucune dolor.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 Et quant il est a point, si le ramoine en ceste maniere: il tient l’olle par dessus, et les cuixes entre ses bras, si les distent tant qu’il voit que li malaides ad son membre tout reteigne; puis le fait asseoir sus sa lite, et lui met II coussins sous la teste, et II autres sur la jambe, puis un autel sous les piez, et l’olle et les cuixes il li enlace, et ainsi le tient une heure ou II au plus.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place him on the table and press it as we have said in the case of dislocation, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 And when the dislocation is forward, then it is necessary to extend the injured leg quickly, as I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And let the doctor apply his strength to be on the injured shoulder, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 And if the dislocation is backward, then it is not necessary to extend the injured one downwards or lift it off the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said about lying on two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 And let him be on his back, and the strap extended as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 And it will be perfect when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 then draw together the thighs, and apply a poultice, and hold it in place with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 and let him rest for three or four days, then unbind him, and apply another poultice on top;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 and if you see that they are equal, then bind as before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 then unbind him, and let him walk gently, until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	 of the knee dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 that is to say, inward and outward, and backward. ‌
et ne desalue point devant.	 And do not dislocate beforehand.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not adhere to his thigh, know that he is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on top of your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then strongly bend the two sides of the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 and another assistant extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he adheres his leg to his thigh lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 And put the poultice on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three days or four, then unbind.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And let the patient not exert himself in walking, until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not at all, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	 of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 The ankles are sometimes swollen and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 And the sign is that the ankle is swollen and protrudes forward towards the dislocated part:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 The resetting should be gentle, and it should be gently extended at its hands when only slightly moved.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 And when it is fully dislocated, you should make the patient sit up straight and have one assistant hold the leg by the foot, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 Then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, then with the left two times, then extend it upwards and nicely push the foot up;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 And do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 If it returns, that is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 if not, then begin the work again, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and drive one strong stake firmly into the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around [it], so that it does not hurt the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 then let one servant take hold of the thigh, and another servant extend the foot to his hands or with one band, which he ties above the ankle;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 then let each servant pull equally, and let the stake be always between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when [he] is stretched.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 Then let the physician set the dislocation evenly with his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when it is perfectly set, apply the bandage and padding on top, bind it very tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and protect the nerves that are above the ankle in the back, so that the binding is not too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage softens, bind it again.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 Then unbind on the third or fourth day, and advise the patient not to walk for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if abscesses come here, you must soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	 of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 When the fingers are dislocated, they must be stretched nicely without effort, and this is an easy thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 And if the dislocation is in any node of the back or foot, you must make the patient sit on a plain place or on a table completely straight, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot strongly until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 And when it is level and nothing opens, place under the foot a board with two legs, then press strongly, and leave it for three days, then release.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 When a wound comes with the dislocation and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 If you are not learned in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, do not be bold. xspace
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 And use at first things that calm a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And when you see hope, reset the limb to its place immediately before the hot abscess grows there;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 And when the limb is in place, administer things that calm hot abscesses and treat the wound as needed with dried onions.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 And if there is also a fracture with the dislocation and small bones are shattered, remove them and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 And guard yourself from entering into fear, as I have said, for this will move you according to your Creator and for the safety of your weapon and body.
