O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the end of the knowledge of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 And it has come to me in a vision that I complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hand, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 And because the work of the hand is neglected in our region and is entirely foreign, thus the knowledge has perished and been destroyed, and nothing remains of it except for the small descriptions in books of the ancients which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 And from this have come errors and vain things, and intentions are closed off and knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 Or it seems to me that I wish to vitalize the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will also bring together the forms of the iron tools for cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has declined.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 And he who undertakes it must excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so that he knows the judgment of members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of veins, and their movement and rest, and the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	 And because of this, Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things, let him beware lest he fall into error and harm people; as I have seen many times those who engage in this science and then abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 For I saw a foolish physician who cut into an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the artery of the neck; so much blood came out that the woman fell dead at his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 And I saw another physician who removed a stone from a man with water, and the stone was large; so he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 And I had already been called to extract it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if one cut it out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 And I saw another physician who took care of the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the physician, full of ignorance, tightened the break over the wound to the splints with great strength, and left no ointment at all on the wound, and left it so for one term; and he commanded that it should not be loosened; and he remained so that the leg was completely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come and unbind the leg; and when I had unbound it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 But nevertheless the corruption was already established in the limb, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 And a certain other physician drained an abscess which became infected, and then inflamed by the malice of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 For a cancer, when it is purged of melancholic humor, one must not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place where all that is corrupt can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: that is to say, the work where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 For which reason it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you. Therefore, take your weapons in prudence, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the terrible diseases for severe sicknesses; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on the care of serious illnesses, lest you be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 The first chapter is about fire cautery and about hot irons, and the chapter is arranged from the head down to the feet; and about the shapes of instruments, and the materials for cautery, and about everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 The second chapter is also about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is arranged about the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and the chapter is arranged from the head down to the feet, and about the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 Just as we remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of help and harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 Je dis que les qualités de l'aide et du nuisement sont le sujet le plus long et la science la plus subtile et les secrets les mieux répondu ; et à ce propos parlèrent les plus sages, et ils s'accordèrent à cela ; et peu me suffit leurs paroles, car je redoute la longueur.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 Je dis que le cautère est universellement utile pour toutes les complexions qui contiennent de la matière, à l'exception de deux complexions : celles-ci sont une complexion chaude sans matière et une complexion sèche sans matière.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 En complexion chaude et sèche avec matière, certains ont discuté et dit que le cautère est très utile ; les autres ont dit le contraire : que le cautère ne sert à rien pour la maladie qui vient de la chaleur et de la sécheresse.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 Because the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be used for treating hot diseases with heat or dryness; and he who says otherwise claims that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that come into men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 For when you compare the man's body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 For I have found it to be true by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 And yet, one should not attempt this except for those who have proven it and who know by long experience the chapter on cautery, and the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the outcomes and duration of time; we do not fear other constitutions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 And all the doctors gathered and agreed on cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 And know, son, that cautery with fire is among the secrets of healing, and of greater virtue than burning medical ointment.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 For fire is simple, and does not affect anything but the member that is cauterized, unless it can be named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Burning medicines spread from one member to another, causing serious disease in the affected limb; and perhaps killing the patient. Fire, due to its intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	 And this I have found through experiment and the long service and study that I have put into the art, based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself for the length of my speech, because it pleases me not to take away from you the secret which is answered in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstration. Receive it now into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauterizations should be done, and chose patients.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 And I say that cautery is suitable in all seasons, because the harm that occurs is put below by the help of cautery; and also if the cautery is necessary for pain that cannot wait for the time when greater evil comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 And do not think so, dear son, as the foolish doctors do; for the disease that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because a cautery is nothing but a medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors which cause pain, and works faster than any other medicine due to its effectiveness and power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	 And it happens that the illness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its power; and the superfluities are gathered in him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless there are cauteries administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as dental cauteries for pain, and similar things; and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cautery is worthwhile after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of healing in some illnesses and they are not effective, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 Then it is clear that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 The ancients said that cauterization with gold instruments is more dangerous than with iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; but they were not telling the truth, for I have tested it and found that it is true in some men; and cautery with gold is indeed more dangerous than with iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 Nevertheless, when you heat a gold instrument, you cannot know when it is hot enough by the color of the gold, and if it cools too quickly; if it is heated too much, it melts in the fire; thus there are many obstacles to this.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 And therefore we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet, so that it may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	 of olive oil
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 This cautery is useful against moisture and cold on the head, and there are two reasons for it: due to an illness called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and the ears, and due to excessive dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also all illnesses that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged with a laxative medicine, cleansing the head three or four times, according to what the patient's strength and constitution can bear; then make the patient's head bald.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on your thighs; after that, put the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his two eyes; where your middle fingers meet, there will be a bleeding; afterwards, heat the cautery called "olivare" for this purpose.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place it on the marked area, and in descending and holding your hand tight, turn it little by little; then lift your hand suddenly, and check the spot if you see a small bone; and if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards, take a piece of silk, and put in some soft cotton inside, and place on the spot, and let it stay for three days; after that, put on a damp cloth with butter; and leave it on until the burn is gone; then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	 And the ancients said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges itself; and therefore it helps to move (the limb).
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 And some of them said that one should let the cautery burn for so long that part of the bone is burnt, and then scrape off what has been burnt from the bone, and it should be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 And others say that one should let the cautery burn so long and push it so hard that a piece of bone comes off as wide as an arrowhead, which women use in their spindles, so that the humors are moved out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after that, one must cure and suture it. 》
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 And these two ways of doing cautery do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a cause for fear; and I think that I must leave it; because the head (of the limb) is weakened by continuous natural discharges, as we testify in other members; and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more healing and beneficial to me, I use this method of working together for salvation. 》
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 When pain in the head becomes chronic and lasts long, then the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, and oils and poultices; and if one performs the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Take care if the head of the patient is of a strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize under that cautery a little bit which we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 Afterwards, make a cautery on each horn of the head until the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place which is called "vasselz"; and it is the place where one puts cupping glasses; and lift your hand so that you do not see until the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and the cauteries of the horns must be thinner than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form.
dou cautere dou chief	 Of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the eye is purged by purgative medicines, and other cures have been performed as I mentioned in the division of diseases, and none of this helps: then make cauteries according to two methods, that is to say, with sharp medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 The cautery with sharp medicine is done by taking a clove of garlic and removing the skin, then placing it under both eyes, and then making an incision on the temple where the pain is in such a way that you can place the clove of garlic under the skin; and when it is placed, tie and bind it well and leave it thus for XII hours; and then untie it and draw out the clove of garlic, and let the wound remain thus II days or III; then apply a plaster soaked in butter until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 After the cure of inflammation until it is healed; and if you wish to do so, use some of the combustible medicines that I have written about in the doctrines of combustible medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery like this which is its form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 And it is called "clos" because its head is shaped like a bell or has a hollow in which there is a little opening in the middle; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand steady while you turn it slightly until half the thickness of the iron is burned; and lift your hand so that the iron does not burn you, which is outside, and abundant blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 After, put cotton in vinegar water and place it on the spot for three days; then put moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare," do so entirely at the tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not very old.
de emigraine	 of a migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 When you treat a migraine as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the previously mentioned cautery of medicine and iron is of no use to it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery that is called "cultellare" until it is white; and so press it on the painful spot for half a line in length, and remove your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cut the artery and that you do not reach the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and let the nerve have no regard except that it may move and that spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, for cutting has great fear and also for him who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how one stops blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it is necessary.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is tolerant, cauterize him in the head as we have said, and care for the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction, along with a cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better and more helpful than that one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When there is pain in the ear from cold, and one has worked with dissolving medicines and other cures that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery which is called "point", of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After puncturing all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move it a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place for piercing; let there be ten punctures around each ear; then heal the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	 of the mouth's torment
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 Torment that must be cured by cautery is only that which arises from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make cautery for similar conditions that come from dryness and nerve spasm.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 When you treat this type of torment that comes from phlegm, idres, and purging of the head and gargling, and it does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little outside the temple, and the third between the two lips; and place the cautery in the healthy part, and make a cautery on the top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery until half the head is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And it is similar to the cupping we have mentioned earlier, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the knife be a little larger; after the treatment of the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and there is no improvement and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, one in the place called «vasselz» as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and it should be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	 Of lead poisoning
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 At this illness, you must give the patient large pears and pills that cleanse the brain; afterwards, rinse the patient's head thoroughly, and place on their occiput a plaster of mustard as written in the treatise on plasters; and this is how to cauterize: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 If he is thus cured, it is good; and if not, perform three cauteries in the middle of the head descending to the neck, with two fingerbreadths between each cautery; and treat him as the others, and if you see fit, and the patient can endure it, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two temples, and treat until he is cured; and let the cautery be called "olivare," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	 of coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and from what we have said before; after rising the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is tolerant, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the largest part of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; then cure it until it is healed, and let the cautery that is called «olivare» that we have said before be.
de l’epilempsie	 of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 The epileptic should not use fire cautery except for the phlegmatic, and first must be moderated the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and able to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, give him gargle and chew to moderate the brain often with good foods; afterwards rinse his head in the middle, and make a cautery there as we have said before, and a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and able, make cauteries as I have said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-sized as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If the patient is a child, perform a subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 When because of melancholy there are superfluous humors or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then perform the cautery with these cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And if because of melancholy the superfluity tends towards black bile, and the patient's body is moist, then give him to drink something that will cleanse his brain, as described earlier in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After shaving the patient's head, make a tourniquet of well-made linen, like a circle, and place it on his head; and let the patient sit cross-legged and be held firmly from all sides; then present the ointment, which is mixed with old sheep butter; and heat the bandage gently in the fire, so that the two (bandages) can be inserted; then empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this for each patient once a week with other good treatment, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 If you see that you are cauterizing the wound by making several punctures throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cautery moistens the brain equally; and then place a piece of cotton soaked in butter and goose fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	 from the edge of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 When the edge first comes to the eyes by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to purify the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 After that, command him to shave his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the edge is on both eyes together, or one if the descent is on one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against an excessive flow of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then staunch it with as much power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des artères et à l’incision la caution, comment tu l’étancheras; et parfois on fait un cautère ou une hâte sous les deux os derrière.
dou cors des larmes	 du corps des larmes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 Lorsque les larmes des yeux sont anciennes et habituelles et sont sur les veines, ou près des artères qui apparaissent sur le front; et on voit que c'est une superfluité froide flegmatique, alors il fait le cautère que j'ai mentionné au début de l’œuvre descendante dans les yeux : un cautère au milieu du front, deux cautères sur les deux tempes, et deux cautères sous les deux os; et s'il y a plus besoin, alors on le cautérise sagement sur la racine des cheveux avec de petits cautères.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 from the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 When you medicate it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three nights of cooked food to drink; afterwards, anoint the head and make a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped scar; and make two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two temples, one slightly below the eyebrows; and be careful not to cut the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 And this is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery that is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 For this reason, here is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if you see thus do two cauterizations on the two sources as long as the roots are; and do not leave your hand until one-third of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	 from the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are turned towards the inner corner and prick the eye, and then one does cauterization in two ways: namely with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 When they are born and equal, then place the patient in your care; afterwards, draw on the skin of the eyes a figure that resembles the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then place moistened cotton with egg white and powdered perilla on the eye, then heat the cautery as described here.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterwards, cauterize on the figure that you have drawn bit by bit many times, until the skin is burned in that spot; and the sign of the healthiness of the work is that you see the skin retracted, and the hairs lifted to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for III days, then place moistened cotton with butter until the scab is removed; after that, treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And if after that the hairs come back, and the flesh is softened, then recommence the cautery on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the flesh is raised to its natural place, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 The cautery of burning medication is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even. Then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live alum, each one .З., and grind them together well. And do it hastily, so that it does not cool; then spread on the form that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put on the flesh of the eyes; and if the disease is in only one eye, one should work in one, and if in both, likewise; and put wet cotton under the eye with egg white. And let the patient's head be in your healthy place and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press a little and the egg white all the times that the patient feels the burning of the medicine, for he feels the burning as if by fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the bite has passed, lift up the skin, and look to see if the papillae have been raised in the same way as they would be by the constriction of fire or by an incision; and if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If not, then apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has not worked until your work is equal and your eyes are focused; then put on a piece of cotton soaked in butter until the burnt skin falls off, afterwards treat the place with an ointment called "dyafenis" and other things until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 Et si c'est nécessaire pour toi de faire très attention à ton travail afin que la médecine ne tombe pas dans les yeux.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then start the medicine again on that place which is made soft by the paper properly, as you did before; cure it until it heals; and this is the shape of the myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this let be your constraints; and do not be answered the right way for him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 Of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When you cure fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 Instruct the patient to place his head in your hand; and have the assistant place his head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor remove his head; then place wet cotton on top of egg yolk or juice of pepper on the eye; after heating the cautery which is thus: and it should be shaped like the feather of a vulture at the top where the cautery is; if you wish, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, let it be like a tent; but nevertheless, this one that is shaped is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 After pressing the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then open it, and draw forth the head; afterwards place a very hot cautery on top, and hold your hand at the cautery to the part of the neck above the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If not, then recommence the cautery again one or more times as needed, and leave it for three days; afterwards place a cotton swab moistened in butter, and use the cure of the desiccating ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply corrosive medicine so that the bone may be exposed; and do this according to what comes in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Here is how to treat a fistula: first open the area; then place in the opening a thin camahan, whose shape is described below:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 and make it the size of a .З. of lead; and hold the camahan firmly in your hand, and let the patient not move at all, until the melted lead flows to his eye; and one should place on the patient's eye cotton moistened with egg white or vinegar: the lead thus cleanses the area of the fistula, and heals the healthy by marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have spoken of, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then it is necessary to administer an opening at the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	 fissures in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 Very often, fissures occur on the lips that are called "hairs," and also on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 When you treat these fissures as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat a small blade-like cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place it quickly in those fissures until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, treat the area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 When an abscess occurs in the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes putrefaction and a hole forms, and it becomes swollen and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not help: then it is necessary that you have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards open or pierce the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron reaches the bottom of it, and in the rear place; and do this once or twice, after the treatment as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	 of tooth movement
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but to no avail, then place the head of the patient in your lap; afterwards heat the cautery as described later in such a way that you put a reed on the tooth; and put inside the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and start the cautery again according to your will; afterwards let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water, and let him keep it for an hour and spit out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 And in this way the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the softened gum is restricted, and the moisture that caused decay is dried.
de la dolor des dens	 Of tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 When tooth pain comes from cold, either from cold or air, and medicinal treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use two types of cautery: cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 Cautery with butter is done by taking cow’s butter and placing it on the tip of an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a probe, dipping it in boiled butter, and place it quickly on the aching tooth until it cools down. Do this frequently until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see that you have moistened wool and cotton in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth, and then apply hot iron until the fire reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The cautery with fire is such that you take a hollow iron or bronze tube, and it should be large enough that the smoke does not reach the patient's mouth; afterwards, heat the cautery, from which the form will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter when applying this cautery, and then rinse well; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	 And make a cautery on whatever part you wish, according to what you are able; and this is the form of the tube:
des scrophules	 of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When scrofula are from cold phlegm and moisture, and do not respond to digestion with medicines, then heat the cautery head as described below, and let it have two openings for the smoke to escape; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it there for three days; then place a cloth moistened with butter over it until the burn is gone; afterwards, treat the area with onions and lint until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the dog:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When moisture overcomes the passages of the nostrils, especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be first voided by soluble medicines; after which you make a cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come as far as the throat, but only a little from the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavicle" as we have the form before; and treat the place as we said before until it is healed.
de la toust	 by coughing
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 When all and the illness of the nostrils are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is chronic, then make two cauteries on the breast in close places; and another cautery between the two breasts; and let the cautery be called "clavicle" according to the form that was said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see, make a cautery by pricking the entire cautery that is called "point" for which the form is thus in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or around them.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After treating the place according to what was said before, and let the cautery be at three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 And because the cauteries are lighter, therefore you make them in three doses.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 Afterwards, have the patient lie on his back and on his side; afterwards, lift the heart which is inside the tickling towards the two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat up the cautery which has two nerves where it is located.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 And cauterize the heart until it perforates to the side, and there will come the figure of the cautery along with four other cauteries; and because of this, the cautery is made with the three-nerve cautery, which makes the figures of cauterization six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and that is the form of the three-nerve cautery:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 And sometimes it is applied on this one nerve, which makes eight cauteries in total.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 After applying the cautery, bruise it with salt; then make the patient rest, and let the limb remain immobile for a long time until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it becomes dislocated again, which happens little, then make a cautery on the thick part of the dislocation, or many times in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When cold and much moisture come to the stomach so that it strains its complexion, and catarrh multiplies for him, and in the accustomed manner of treatment he does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and extend his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 From then on, he makes three cauteries. One under the scapula of the foot for the quantity of a finger, throughout the entire cautery, and two cauteries on the two sides so that the shape of the cauteries is in three corners, and there is such space between them that they are not joined together when they emit pus; and let the cauteries be so deep that they reach both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this figure without alteration.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you want to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this figure, and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you wish; then cauterize throughout the cautery which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the previous treatment, as long as it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When pain in the liver comes from cold and moisture and large flatulence, so that it is greatly removed from its natural complexion by superfluities; and if the patient is treated for what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him at all, then the patient must be placed on his back; and make three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, beyond the hypochondria, where the rib of a man comes; and let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger; and let the cauteries be long along the body, and do not press your hand too much at all the cautery; and let only half the hair be burned, and let the patient be upright on his feet; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, and stretch out his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if your will is to cauterize these cauteries with a knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, take care not to burn the entire heart, for you would dry out the whole body; and do not let it go as far as boiling, for the heart is very delicate in that place, and know this for certain.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, the patient feels intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And then when this cure should be performed by the physicians, it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back; and then designate the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a grape, here is its form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And let him be cauterized with the cautery until the heart is burned, and it reaches up to the spleen, so that all the veins are completely emptied; after the cure according to the cure of the eyes until he is healthy; and it is not necessary for this cautery to be used by anyone other than one who has studied long in the art of medicine, and through whom fewer of these diseases have corrupted many times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Therefore he can boldly work, yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	 of the pleurisy cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 The ancients said that one should make pleurisy cauteries with the root of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, as large as you can find, dry, and as thick and long as your fingers; moisten it in oil, take it to the fire, and cauterize I cautery between the ribs and the neck, and II small cauteries a little below in the part that is under the beard; and II cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, sloping back a little; and I cautery in the middle of the chest, and I another on the stomach, and I between the two shoulders, and II on the sides of the chest opposite the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make openly as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And some ancient ones say that a man uses a fire cautery similar to a razor, and heats it and places it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and thus it is for pain, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula may form which cannot be healed.
de la mice	 of the pus
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 When you treat the disease of the pus, as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three kinds of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 One of the ways is that you make three or four cauteries, lining according to the length of the pus, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient lie on his back; and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the skin that is around the pus, where the ribs of the patient come towards the left, and the lifting should be according to the size of the head, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 Après i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part,
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 Après le cure, quant il a geté purriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut miex que li autre des cures devant dites.
de ydropisie	 de ydropisie
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 This means that cautery is not suitable for those with dropsy, except in the manner called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When you treat according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the bladder, two behind the back on the spine, and one at the breast; and let the cautery be close to the edge of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 Afterwards, leave the cautery open to discharge pus for a long time, and do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like a nail as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is placed here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	 Of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen for someone who is hydrocephalic and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply, so that you can draw out the yellow bile, and let the cautery be of this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the little toe; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries uncovered for a long time without curing, so that the bile can come out; afterwards, cure it as we have said for the other cures.
de la menoison	 of the arm
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment; and you see the patient well tolerating and of strong virtue, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before in the chapter on stomach cautery; and four subtle cauteries around the navel, each one with a small nail, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient tolerating it well, then make a cautery on the elbow, and one cautery on each hip, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	 About the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said by division, but it does not help, then make cauteries: III on the spine of the back, those which are all outside under the navel, a little at a time in triangulating, and I cautery below the buttocks II; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then give him I large cautery on the stomach as was said before, and I other on the liver, and I other on the bladder with all the cautery covered; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After caring for the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 of the condition known as "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 When you treat althelul, heat the cautery that looks like a razor, and then place it completely ablaze on the treated althelul; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein where the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of althelul, then cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	 of a poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 When the patient cannot tolerate cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, then such a disease occurs that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When someone has a fistula and it is swollen and gives off putrid and corrupt moisture, you should probe it with a very fine needle, and make sure you know the depth of the needle throughout its entire length.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 Then heat the cautery that looks like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the depth at which the needle has entered, and repeat the cauterization until the putrid and corrupt flesh is burned, once or twice or three times, as needed; and beware of burning the nerves that are in it, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and intestines, beware of these places, and do not perform this procedure except in a fleshy place, and consider that it is not persistent; afterwards, treat the place until it is healed, and if the place is healed and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; but if the matter is not removed, know that the place is pierced, and the bone is corrupted at its root; and so as one of those which we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	 Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and of great flatulence, and does not act like that of a woman, then it is necessary for you to make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and on the other with a clavicle cautery as we have said before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and they will bring greater help.
de la vessie	 of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a cautery on the lower part of the abdomen above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right side and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as your thumb; and you may also make a cautery on the back if needed; and let the cauteries be flat according to the shape mentioned before.
de la marris	 For the piles (hemorrhoids)
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 When the hemorrhoids are cold and moist, preventing conception, and the menstrual flow is corrupted and delayed in its course; and when it does come, there is great pain: then one should make three cauteries around the anus, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder, and two on the back; and let the cauteries be flat, as we have said.
de la hainche	 of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the place of separation is found to be visible, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a circular cautery, and mark before the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle; and let the cautery be such that it was used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if this cautery is not available to you, then make three large olive-sized cauteries, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the joints; and treat it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	 Of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 When pain comes in the joint of the hip, and it is from cold or moisture, and the patient is cured with what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After that, perform cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is such that you cauterize on the joint of the hip three triangular cauteries in this form, and make each of them deep and large, and there should be between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if you see, then cauterize it with the circular cautery that we have previously mentioned for the dislocation of the hip; but do so in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burnt.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the manner in which one proceeds with sciatica, when the pain is confined to the hip and does not extend down to the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if it extends to the thigh and leg, then make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery four fingers above the ankle, slightly towards the left; and let the cautery be cutaneous, and let the thickness of the heart be burnt; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the two toes or close thereto, then cauterize where he feels the pain three or four times with the cautery which is called "point".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if necessary, do more; and if he knows that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with a lancet or circular cautery, and be sure in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg became completely swollen, as well as the foot, and all the foot was eaten away and rotted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a bellyache from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the wise say in the cautery of the hip, for which there is this manner: make such an iron tool and let it be at the tip as thick as a nail of a digit, or a little less, and let it have prongs and let the prongs be from one to the other of space the quantity of a nut of a pouch; and let the prongs be covered on two parts, and let them also be like needles, and there should be a well-made iron handle; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it be heated until it is all red and casts sparks, and then place it on the boil of the sick hip, and turn it on the healthy side; and cauterize once with a cautery again, and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the care of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its gaze, and if we see few who use it; however, this is one of the good cauteries, which can be endured, and there where it is needed.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The cautery of burning medicine is such that you make an instrument with interwoven strands where the margin of the door descends. It should be made of brass or iron, with one long side and two holes on top, each the size of a finger's width. They should be open at both ends and join together in this manner:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 Afterwards, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and then place your hand very high up on the box of the hip; afterwards, throw between the two circles of the awl a little hot coal that has been heated in the fire, and leave it there for an hour. Let the patient endure the heat and the burn of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Because it experiences burning as if by fire; and when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip with gentle heat, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the scalding is removed; and leave it for three more days so that the putrefaction can be drawn out; and this would be the last aid after the treatment of onions until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, then make an instrument that holds heat according to what you have done for the hip in the same way; and this is the manner of hot heat, and I have written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take quicklime and slaked lime, equal amounts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 where there is a small hole outside so that the point of a razor can enter; and put on top of this pot another well-sealed pot, and place quicklime and lime powder on top until there are two fingers’ width above the powders before you have it well sealed with your hand; and leave it like this until the water descends and collects in the bottom pot, then take all that water and throw it back onto the quicklime and lime powder as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And then it will be very acidic and is used in many works of medicine and for other cauteries on members because it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hip well, such as terebinth, anacardium honey, and lime mixed with soap.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 Et (And)
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says in this manner that you should take fresh and dry litharge, grind it very finely with a little fat, and apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and let it sit; and leave it for three hours, by which time the patient should no longer feel the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then have him enter the bath so that his body is slightly warmed, and put him to bed, and all the pain will go away and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use such a cautery with these medications unless it is after the evacuation of pus.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with wool of sheep, it helps very much; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow that is between the big toe of the foot and the one called phalanx.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 Then take dry goat dung and press it into coal until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the wool, and let it remain until it is stained; and do this again, and do not stop doing so until you sense by touch that it reaches the hip, and the pain ceases; and this type of cautery is called "goat cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	 Of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 When pain comes to the back, from falling or striking or from excessive evacuation, or from similar cold spread material, none of these resemble cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 Il is necessary after the patient has been voided of pungent pills or other similar substances that one make on his back, where the pain is located, three lines marked with ink, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the strength and amount that the patient can tolerate; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see fit, make III cauteries or IV at the middle of the cautery clavile according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 Often this disease comes to small children, and the sign of its beginning is that they have narrow veins when they rise, and fear; and you find in the lower spine of the back and with us the appearance which comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see this and wish to cure it, then cauterize it with the cautery of that according to this manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 So that the cautery penetrates each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a penetrating cautery two or three lines deep, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, and beware that you do not administer a cautery in the region of the spine of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	 of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 When the pain of the joints comes from moisture that is spread to each member of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which doctors call "podagra" properly, and when it is due to a cold cause and drugs cannot cure it, then it should be cured by cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary that you prick on the sole of the foot, make a cautery over all the area called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pains reach up to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make cauteries on each knee III or IV from each side, all olive cauteries; and if you need more, do more, but keep your hand no longer than it takes for the cautery tip to be burnt.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are in the hands, make a hole around the wrist II lines; and if there is any pain in the two (fingers), then make holes on each joint and on the palm of the hand; and if the pains reach up to the ribs or up to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and give him medicine. ię And if there are pains in the feet, make a hole around the ankle II lines; and if there is any pain in the toes, then make holes on each joint and on the sole of the foot; and if the pains reach up to the knees or higher, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and give him medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you give him good care and purge phlegm, he will be cured with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	 of the dislocation of the hip
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 When dislocation occurs in the hip and the buttocks descend to the thighs, which is new, you should ensure that when you have it treated, he does not move that day; and let him use things that open the belly so that the feces leave his belly; then make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his leg until the buttocks are restored, and bring them back to your hands, and place a sign under the dislocation on the bone of the elbow, and let it be like half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 As long as he is white and casts shadows.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Until they return to their place; and the assistant holds his hand so that they do not return backwards; and work well the thighs on the patient, and put under him one pillow and one sergeant on the thighs, and another on the foot which holds the hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it right and straight until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again until you reach the bone; and subtly watch that the testicles do not protrude when you make the cautery; so that you do not burn them; and so that the patient does not die or other evils.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that the cautery for children be fine according to their size, and also large for adults according to their size; after three days, cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is gone; then cure with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that his nourishment be prolonged, so that the boils do not come out when he tries to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him have a well-made belt and wear it for another forty days; and let him rest well, not exerting himself too much, and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and of laughing too hard; and when he follows this advice, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	 of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When ruptures occur in other bellies and are noticeable, and you see that they no longer grow, perform the cautery of cautery again according to its size, and burn one-third of the heart; then treat it as we have said; and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery like this:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first sign the place where it begins and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and then hold your hand in the middle of the whole cautery firmly.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cautery is lighter and softer.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 Of old pain in some limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in some limb, whether from falling or striking, and this pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment is not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cautery should be made according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of the twisting and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If it is healed from the first cautery, that is good; if not, perform another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it should move to the nearest limb, which is why you must perform the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	 of healing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The illnesses are helped sometimes by cautery with great benefit, and especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 When you see it being cauterized, take care if the illness is at its beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and neither subsides nor lingers, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head at the nape, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on the two temples, and one behind on the occipital bone; and let your hand be such that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scales come out so that the vapors of the gross humors may escape; and cauterize on the bladder as before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 And if the contamination is spread everywhere; and it is clearly lost, then you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned earlier, and one cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and another nearby, and two on each shoulder; and two on each rib, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the knee, lest you burn them; and sometimes a man makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more I do of cautery, the more aid I give him, and it benefits him; and know that the patient does not feel pain from cautery as the healthy person feels it, because his body is already completely corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And the cauteries must be large and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the manner of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing, apply a mixture of crushed chickpeas with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When inflammation occurs in any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then I make cauteries on the member according to its size; and let the cautery be a little deep into the thickness of the skin; then cure it with onions until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And sometimes one cauterizes at the hand and at the foot and at the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb; and thus the swelling is removed; nevertheless, no one should interfere with it unless he is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves.
de albaras	 of apples
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize it with a cautery, not too deeply, according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes; then treat it with a mixture of chickpea flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the colon and almond tree, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and let it air in that place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 The treatment of cancer by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When cancer first appears and you see it stop, then cauterize around the entire circumference of the cancer with a cautery that looks like a circle.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 Nevertheless, the wise say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the cancer; but this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen sometimes; and a more reasonable thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circular," as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 of the swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it is slow to heal, either because of the patient's superfluity or due to old age when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and have little blood, or because of time; and you see that it is hastening to heal: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 Because she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you see her through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery with what is in this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it on the surface in such a way that the course of the corruption is relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the cure, so that he may be perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	 The cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another manner of disease there is which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a gnawing away at the members, for it gnaws at the members just as fire does dry logs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease in a place that can bear fire together with the iron, then heat the cauterizing irons very small and large according to what is needed for the place where the disease is; afterwards cauterize it from all sides until you remove all the corruption and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted may be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days, and place on the cauterized places a plaster with oil until the burns of the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment of flesh-producing wounds.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if after three days you see that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if not, then begin the cautery again on what remains of the corrupt place.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 And this mistake has sometimes been cured with cold medicine instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure with cold medicine in the previous section: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 of leeks that grow at the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 It often happens that on the soles of the feet a disease grows which is called "clots" in our opinion, and it is a large wart-like thing that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cautery for this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Fire cautery is that you heat a cautery like a goose quill, and it should be made of good iron so that it can penetrate the clot on all sides, and there should be subtle edges; after that, place it very hot onto the clot, and turn your hand completely around the clot until it reaches the base of the clot; and leave it this way for three days until it begins to produce pus; then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the clot will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the area of the burn with aloe vera until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if they are turned outward toward the body, and this happens often in hands and feet, then you should bring hot water cautery to it; and it is done in this manner: take a rod of brass or iron, or a goose quill, and place it on the wart and the altar (i.e., the wart), that is to say, the common wart; and place the rod so that it covers all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the wart, and let the hot water find its way deep down to the root; and allow the patient to endure the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave him thus, and it will be completely uprooted from all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Then do one after another, until you have extracted all that are in the body, then treat the wounds that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	 The treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever, or other causes, it is necessary that you make four cauteries, or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; then the trembling will stop, and the health will hasten from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	 Of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes there appear on the surface of the body baths or stinking pustules that come from large corrupt substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 If it is necessary at first when the boils appear, then make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, whose tip should be seized in the fire, or a long root of aristolochia, or a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further, but the superfluidities from which they come are broken, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	 when the vein is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 Many times there is a great outpouring of blood from the vein that is cut at the wound that appears in front, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a very serious matter to faint.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 And nevertheless when this happens to someone, hasten to place your finger on the vein wound, and hold it very firmly until the blood is quiet under your finger, and no drop comes out; then put in the fire several small and large olive cauters until they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and the place where the vein is open, and place the cauter on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauter there until the blood is coagulated.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 And if it spurts out when you remove your finger from the vein and the cauter is extinguished, then quickly take another one from the cauters that are on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stopped, especially when the artery is large, except by one of the four methods we have mentioned: by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and held appropriately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 Whoever administers the stopping by tightly binding with cloth or placing burning things on it, or other similar things, if it does not help, then it is of no use.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a doctor or present medicine, then he should place his finger directly on the vein wound as we have said, and press it firmly until it is constricted over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the finger, but apply cold water often, so that it is very cold, until the blood is frozen and swollen and constricted; and make arrangements in advance for those things he will need for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 Here begins the second book of the treatment of hernias
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cautery or burning medicine, and the preparations and causes and tools and types of cauterization; and I placed that chapter from the head down to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that what one seeks may be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 Et avant que je commence ceci, il est nécessaire, cher fils, que vous sachiez qu'il y a plus de danger et de peur dans ce chapitre que dans le premier des cautères, et pour cette raison, il faut prendre plus de précautions.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 Car dans le travail de ce chapitre, il arrive souvent une évacuation de sang lors de l'ouverture d'une veine, et lors de l'incision sur un abcès, et dans les soins des plaies, et dans l'extraction des flèches, et dans la coupe de la pierre, ainsi que des choses semblables; où il y a du doute et de la peur, et beaucoup en meurent.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 Et je vous avertis de ne pas entreprendre de folie.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For very many types of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 if they come of such who are so afflicted with their illness that they die easily from the madness caused by their illness and the severity of their condition; and of these one should be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And there are some who give you their wits and say: "wait, I am healed"; and the illness is insolent.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more consideration in your honor than in your greed, and do not open your doors foolishly but wisely to those whom you are certain of, and from whom you can take credit and praise; and use prognosis and diagnosis in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, glory, and a lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 Very dear son, Our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 Now I have arranged this chapter for you by discussing in chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cautery, which I have discussed from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 full of water from the head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the delivery is too tight around the child's head; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 And I have never seen this illness except in children, and all those that I saw were approaching death; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work of such cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day so much that it could not support it; and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is gathered under the bone on the forehead, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should cut into the head a wide slit; and it should be as long as II of us, so that the moisture runs out; and see here the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, as shown in this figure:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the cracks of the head open on each side, and the water jumps strongly when you press it with your hand inside, and this is not answered: then you must split the head into three splits in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, extract all the moisture outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After closing the splits with bandages and powders, put wine and oil on them, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then release it, and heal the wound by degrees and dressings, and let the head be held evenly, and give the patient dry food with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	 And another way of incision is that you look at where the greatness of the abscess opens, and the gathering of water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 Cut there where the abscess opens, and the gathering of water, and make an opening according to your ability; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and let blood flow out, so that the patient may die from bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	 of pus
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 When it happens to someone that they have a disease called 'catarrh' in the eyes or in the bladder, and the disease is chronic, and medical treatment does not help, then the final cure is fire cautery with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 It is therefore necessary that when you see them swell up, the patient should bend his neck back; then rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient stretch his neck with all his might; then observe where the vein beats, and the places of one and the other are behind the ears, and they are few in number; then mark the places from below, then cut each with a sharp spatula of two parts, as deep as the incision reaches the bone, and this should be done across the width of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 And if you see it, push the spatula under the artery and cut above, slicing as you would two dices across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 And when the vein is cut, the blood jumps up continuously outward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And if the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the length of three fingers, and sign the spot with ink and cut down to the bone; and as for how much blood should come out, it is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can bear and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains a point of pus on the bone, then cut it away so that such pustules do not form, then press the wound and bind it, and continue the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	 of a migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and ancient foolishness and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medication and none of it helps him at all, we will extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 And the manner of extracting them is such that the patient shaves the hair from his temples and feels for the artery that appears in the temple, because it appears well through its pulsation, and there are few people who do not have it; and if it is not found, then let the patient tighten his neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a rough cloth, and moisten the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which here is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then skin the hide lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up to the pincers, and separate it well from the cloths that are beneath each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it with the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 Because if it is not cut, the blood will not flow at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 And draw out the blood from the VI part until the III part; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you bind it in two places with a strong double silk thread to prevent infection before the wound is closed, and the bleeding should come gradually; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures at that very moment, and then, if you wish, cauterize with a hot iron until the bone, so that the fingers are completely cut off; this is a bad outcome if the patient has a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 For the cautery is used to finish moisture; therefore, it is of greater help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 And for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with old cotton and apply well-made compresses; and when you unbind them, cure with dry medicines that produce flesh, and with compresses, until he is healed; and if the blood flows from the artery as long as you work there, hasten with the copper cautery, or fill the place with vitriol and press it with your hand so that the blood may be stopped; and if you do not have this present, put your finger on the place until the blood is congealed, and sprinkle the place with cold water until the blood ceases, and hold it as it should be held; and what is easier and lighter in the extraction of arteries than that you cauterize the vein of this cutting cautery on both sides, but let the cuts be well spaced to retain their heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 When the instrument is too dull, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And there should be one finger width between the two knives, and then when you have joined the two places, place the burning iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let the two ends be far apart because this is not a complete burn from beginning to end; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	 tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 When tears descend from the veins on top of the head, and medical treatment does not help, and you see the patient's face turn red, and they feel a pulsation in their forehead like shivering; and their eyes are dull and moist so that the eyelashes have fallen out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And the ancients called it "cure for contusion," and what you must do for the patient who has this illness is to let the hairs on his forehead grow long; then make three incisions in his forehead, equal in length according to the size of the forehead; and one of these incisions should be as if two fingers wide, going down the middle of the forehead until the nose, and the other two on each side above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting the arteries that are on each side above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and let each wound be three fingers wide across; and prepare a piece of sponge and many cloths to wipe away the blood, then apply the sharp spatula in two parts as follows:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 From the incision that is towards the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the heart that is between the two cuts on all the tissue that is above the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second, and then strongly extract this instrument.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 insert into the first cut the instrument called "cultellary," which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other; this is its shape.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And place the cutting side towards the soft flesh of the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it opens the heart; and then make another cut in the middle cut to the other outside; and then draw out the blood equally, and press the place for the taken blood; then put in each cut a tent of old cotton, and put on wet cloths in wine and oil and honey, and be careful that any abscesses come there; and on the third day remove the bandage, and apply a large plantain poultice with cold water, then treat it with an ointment made from basil and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	 About the head of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 When someone has an acute cataract, you see the eyes watery and small, and it weakens the sight, and the eyelids burn; and the hair falls out, and there is a headache, and the patient sneezes; then know by these signs that those substances and that cataract come from many veins, and the remedy for it is as follows.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And what you must do is instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one on the temple.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 And begin the incision from the left temple to the right, and let the cut go down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then scrape between the two lips of the cut and put old cotton and linen bandages in it; then bind over it wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when they are removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow on it, then cure with drying agents that promote the growth of flesh.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 En such a manner: take two parts of flour from wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it in these wounds to heal flesh completely.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 of the stopping of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 All that falls into the ear is one of four things: grain, animal, stone from a mine or similar thing like iron; or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; or flowing substance, such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When something falls into the ear that does not belong there, such as a stone or any other thing that is not suitable for the ear and cannot grow in the ear, put the ear in sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see the stone, drop some drops of violet oil or sesame oil, then perform extraction; and make him sneeze by condiments, and stop his nostrils when he sneezes, and wrap pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and stretch the ear upward.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Much of the time this cure causes a fever; and if it does not cause a fever, let him be treated with subtle lancets, the form of which is here described.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 If it does not cause fever with lancets, it is good; if not, then apply an extraction with a fine needle of small thickness; and if it does not cause fever this way, make a tube of bronze and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal strongly, and stop up that which is around the tube with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the tube; then draw out strongly, for much of the time it causes fever as we have said; and if it does not cause fever in this manner, take glue of the sort from which birds make their nests, and put some into a suitable instrument, and place a little cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and draw out strongly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it does not jump out of all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear before an abscess and spasm come there; and the manner of the cutting is such that you first make the patient drink cephalic wine, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat or dependent place; and let the cut be like a moon until you reach the stone, then remove it as best you can, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 And if there is a grain inside and it swells, administer an extract; and if it cannot come out, then administer a subtle and thin ointment according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and administer an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear; rather, make many pieces of it; then draw it out with subtle tweezers and a syringe, as we have said, so that the extraction may be easy.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Therefore, in water that falls into the ear, the patient should first use sneezing-inducing condiments and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let it lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 S’ele saute fors per ceus, ceo est boin.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 And if not, then take many small stones according to the length of your thumb, light and thin, and warm them slightly in the fire. The patient should put one into the opening of his ear, and jump on his feet from the other side, and strike with another stone onto the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this with stone after stone until all the water comes out, and thus it will come out completely. And if you wish, take a reed, put one end into the ear, and hold the other end in the fire until the thickest part of the reed is burned; then repeat this with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 In the extraction of an insect, if it is small, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, use extraction by tweezers; and this is the lightest thing to remove that may be in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in dealing with distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight; if any worms appear, then extract them with fine tweezers, and if none appear, then take a reed of which there is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And inject the most subtle part into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then draw out all the wax; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not come out, then plug the ear with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out strongly as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven for killing worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations; and thus distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And let it be of silver or copper with a small hole at the bottom and a lid on top for distilling; and to press the distillation inside, use a well-made copper tool for this purpose, and if you wish, take a scraper and wrap cotton around the point; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you want into the ear, and let the ear be in the ear; then insert the scraper with all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled into the hollow of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillation be a little heated over the fire before it is distilled into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 of ear blockage
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 No child is born without any hole in the ears; and this same thing happens to adults by blockage of a wound, or bone born inside the ear, and this blockage sometimes goes deep into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there is only lack of the hole, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 That which comes deep and cannot be seen is of serious concern in many cases, and in that which can be seen, it is necessary to place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the hair apparent, then work all this spatula of which here is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 And let it be sharp and cutting edge both in front and behind all plainly, so that it does not wound the ear; if the lancing is of flesh or body of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers, and cut lightly, until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the lancing goes deep into the ear, then take a fine, light rasor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it in the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the lancing which the patient feels pain at hearing, pierce lightly, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a tampon according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Do this every day until the wound is healed, where you take a linen cloth and soak it in rose water, and sprinkle on powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear swell, then you must remove the cloth and use another cloth soaked in ointment made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are described in the section on distillations.
de la char des papieres	 of paper's flesh
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 This inflammation that comes in the eyes when they are wet and then dry, you should dilate them with tweezers and pincers, and scrape out the matter with a spatula made from its roots; then place powdered vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 Et si sans en decort, then you cauterize it with the subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is worthwhile; and often they regrow, when some part remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	 of gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Many times in the eye there are things that seem like gravel in their shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called «hail», and it is a large collection of moisture in the upper and lower eyelid; the work is thus: take care if the hail moves from one side to another, and this is easy to know; then make an incision widely, then peel each part lightly, then take with tweezers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot cover it without puncturing the skin slightly, then it does no harm to the patient; and if the tear is large, then stitch it with a single suture, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, then do not use force, for the ointment restores it quickly and regenerates flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And if the boil descends into the ear towards the upper part, then puncture the skin, and extend the boil with pincers, and cover and press it from both sides; and if the skin is separated by the incision, it does no harm; and when the boil is covered, lift the skin with salt water, and treat the place with that which regenerates flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	 of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Exinach is a fat that is produced in the tissue of the eyelids, and this occurs more often in children than in adults, and it greatly irritates their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they always lie on their backs, and sleep face up, and their eyelids below their eyebrows are moist with exinach that opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the place between your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And the manner of working is that the patient places his head in your hand; and then take a cloth of linen, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, then place it on him; and press between your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinach is gathered into the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit as wide as the incision for a vein; and cut the skin to the depth until you reach the exinach; and in many cases the exinach comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 Pull it out then all at once with a piece of cloth between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread; and be careful not to enter into the cleft, that you do not come all the way to the eye, that you do not injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 And if the wound does not open at the beginning of the cleft, then widen the cleft slightly until it opens; then pull it out as we have said, then moisten clean cloths in vinegar and water, and place on the spot, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And there are such men who break reeds and put them on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Puis le cure, so long as he is cured.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if a hot abscess forms at the place, treat it with soothing poultices until he is cured.
des poilz des papieres	 of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 When hairs grow on the eyelids that are different from natural ones and they become inflamed, they harm the eyes and bring on various diseases such as tears, swelling of the eyelids and styes, which can lead to blindness; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by medicinal ointment as described in the previous chapter on cautery, or by incision and suturing, or by caustics, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid of the eye towards your left hand; if it is turned, that is good; if not, then insert a needle with all its thread above; and let this be near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are born near these hairs, and pull the thread over the entire eyelid, and turn it to the razor; then cut in the part below the eyelid, below the close hairs, covering all the way from the large tear duct to the small one; then remove the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the eyelid, then make on the eyelid a figure of incense, as the myrtle leaf, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount you wish to raise the eyelid which has been said.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And for those who need it, cut a large quantity of the paper according to how soft the paper is; then make all the spatula above the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large lacrimal up to the small one; and let one of the cracks be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then apply the ointment into one of the two angles of the heart, then peel it all off; then join the two lips with a stitch of a needle all along I thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make the superfluous threads above the two eyebrows adhere to any gluey things, if you want to do this; and if not, then don’t worry about it, but leave the stitch and the threads for III days or IV; then treat the wound without a stitch with dry and constricting things, because the paper revives at the joining of the wound and its healing, but the stitch is harmful (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear; and there is another way: which is that you seal the paper with a shape that is like the leaves of myrtle, as we have explained, with III ointments uncovered according to the form that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 Then cut those who surmount the small forces equally according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread next to the large tear, and the second thread next to the small one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin you have cut, as we have said, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with wax and similar ointments that alleviate pain; and sometimes it happens that the hair on the skin turns: then you should use what we have said about the incision; but stitching in one way or another is more skillful.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 The cure of the hairs is thus: you must turn the skin and the hole inside as I have said, then make two hairs by art, and two subtle ligaments as long as the skin and wide as the spatula; and cut the two ends of the two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one with the other subtly on what stands out from the eyelid skin, and strongly tighten the two hairs of the two parts; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is tightened will die and darken and rot, until it falls by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it delays, then cut it with forceps, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the skin is lifted, the hairs will no longer prick; and this is the form of the two hairs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity in length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 The work is such that you take a subtle needle and put in it a soft and subtle silk thread. Then assemble the heads [of the needles] and tie each of them subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then arrange in the handle another brief and subtle silk thread, and tie the ends of the thread together; then let the patient place his head on your healthy side. And let it be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is a subtle and small work; then push the needle all along the handle into the root of the hair next to it, and make it pierce the skin hastily until you pull it out above the natural hair; then pull the hair up to above the handle, and put in the handle that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out all along the handle with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the hair is removed and does not grow back with it, you will draw out the hair beneath all the way along the length of thread that you have placed there, until the hair comes out from above and you can see it with your eye; then you will remove the hair and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh heals; and if the hair is small, accompany it with a long natural hair from the eyelashes, and let them grow together until they are long enough, then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	 of the pustule of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease called "aleacrati" or pustule comes to the eye, there are two kinds: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or from cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And the manner of the work in it is that you split open this scar, and separate its edges, and place inside tents of linen, and bind it until it is healed; and it is not necessary that you use in its treatment things that dry out and constrain.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 For if you do this, then the disease returns worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and wash it with water or althea and linseed that are cooked, and ointments of diaquilon melted in some of the oils, and wrap it in a bandage, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 And the treasure of your care is such that you must ensure it does not heal according to the form it was before; and these works that we have said are not outside but in accordance with this illness, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This illness, which is truly called "axacrati", is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident comes from a wound and a split and a burn and similar things; and the way of the work in it is such that you take a needle with two threads on it, and pierce the flesh from the left tear duct to the right, so that the thread passes through two layers of the flesh; then press the flesh down over all the needle, and cut off one broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, then take a razor and place it in the slit, and turn the paper, and make two slits on each side inside the paper; and let the ends of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and let one angle be made such that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter called "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are sharp below, from what follows the paper, then join the two severed parts, and sew them with a linen thread; then follow the cure as we have said for softening medicines and bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 And if the disease comes from a split or stitch or cautery, then you must make a clean split under the hairs of the papers; and according to what is said above; then drain between the two livers of a tent, as I have said; and one should perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an engine of all his power how he may bring back the figure to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs for work and instruments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	 of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When this union happens to many people in such a way that the paper above is glued with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural works, then it is necessary that you push the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and hold it with tweezers, until you cut what is hard to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer that the too sharp spatula hurt the eye; and let your incision, from which you scrape that union, be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural shape; and all that union is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is salt water, and raise with fresh water, and with honey; then put between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye wool moistened with plenty of egg; and after three days use honey and things that are gluing until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	 of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 You should know that the nail is according to two kinds: one is nervous and similar to a hard syphacus, and another which is not nervous but is similar to frozen white moisture; if one touches it with iron and tries to pinch it with pincers, no one can do so. And both resemble each other at the beginning of the great eyelid, and grows little by little until it covers all the sight, and all the light, and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 And the manner of the incision is such that the patient places his head in your hand, then opens the eyes; and removes the paper from your hand, then rolls the nail with small pincers, and raises it up; then take a needle, and put one horsehair, or cow's hair, or ox hair into it, and one strong thread; and fold the point of the needle a little and insert it into the middle of the nail, and pierce all the way with the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and raise it up, and scrape off all the skin that follows the root and the silk to the hair until the head, then cut off the remainder in the root of the eyelid with all the subtle spatula and small forces, and leave the natural flesh in the eyelid, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears habitually; and sometimes they tie the nails only at the onyx, and to the thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft spatula from which this is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And take care that the mucus does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the prunelle is not pierced; and after the incision, throw into the eye a little bit of crushed salt, and made from litharge, and leave it until the next day; then treat it with what is needed so that it may heal.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the hook cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail is treated with medicine; and it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, work on the eye of the patient, and take a small amount of mucus according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 Et gently scrape the nail from above, and if you see that it is not thinning and the root approaches, then drip into the eye a collyrium made of lead and red and burnt lead powder, and plug the eye until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If anything in the eye is opposed to this, such as an abscess, then let it be, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 And if the appearance of flesh from the tear duct enters the eye to great harm, then suspend it at the corner, and cut off a part but not all, so that the body of tears does not come there; then drip into the eye red collyrium which is made from lead.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 of the flesh that grows upon the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 of some men's eyes there grows sometimes red flesh, which covers the pupil and extends onto the eyelids and turns them outwards, and it appears like a rose on a column; and the procedure is such that the patient places his head in your lap, then you operate on the eyes, and remove all that flesh into suitable vessels for this purpose, and support with forceps; then cut the first flesh, and continue cutting to the razor's edge until the end, and be careful not to damage the eye during the operation; and let the incision of the spatula be as we said in the incision of the nail and small forces by which one removes the pustule, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, fill the eye with boiled linen thread on which you have dripped red vinegar or similar corrosive medicines, and place over the eye a thick cotton pad with egg white so that it is secure from hot abscess; and if anything remains and the pus surmounts the wound, and you doubt hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the hot abscess with soothing remedies; then return to your operation until it is healed, and thus do whenever flesh grows in the eye by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 And yet it is necessary that you choose the treatment for each weak eye according to nature's way; and for accidental ways, by ironwork; and do not place your hand in any of these works until you see that this member can bear the work.
des voines des eulz	 of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 If the veins of the eyes are red and cover the eye, they hinder sight and weaken the eye daily.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Therefore, first look to see if the eye in which there is redness is sound, and there is no other disease besides the redness; then treat the eye in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then raise those veins with a very fine double needle according to your skill.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 Et soient two ointments by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 Then anoint subtly those subtle veins with those forces, and wipe away the blood hour by hour until you see those strong veins withdraw from the eye; and take care not to wound the eye with the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very eager in your work so that you only strike those veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye green and red choler to corrupt what remains of the black.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	 And if you do not have the power to heal all of them in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye from things that ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and the abscess is hot, then begin again according to this manner which is before until they are healed; and these are the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	 Of the fistula of the anus
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 Physicians call this type of fistula «arissati»: when you treat it with cautery and burning medication as I have previously described, and it does not heal, there is an abscess within it that you should open above the abscess where it should burst open, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and blackness, use all the tools whose shapes are described here; it is called «sharp head», and it should be made of iron or steel, and it should be pointed like a file as shown in the following illustration:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 And place it on the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly until you know that the corruption has been removed; do this several times, then restore the area with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the wound is healed and flesh grows back, and the body of the bow remains healed, and it stays this way for forty days without reopening or becoming infected, and no bad incident occurs, then know that it is cured; if not, there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the nose according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is discovered, then take a reed according to this form, and let the head be of iron with three angles, and let the shaft be tapered to the tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it on the bone near the eyelid, and remove your hand from the eye by a thumb's width, then turn the entire reed until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the wind comes out if he holds his hand to his nose; and then restore the place with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and the wound hardens, the matter goes to the nose; this is a lighter procedure for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	 of the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the eye is entirely open and there is no disturbance or narrowing of the pupil, you must bandage the patient; then heal it, then apply cupping glasses without pricking to draw out, then place on the eye a plaster made of acacia, aloe, frankincense, and myrrh, then bandage the eye, and cover with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is such that you take cloths soft enough, and fold each one four times, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eye needs; then bind tightly with a hard bandage, and reapply the cupping glasses to draw out without pricking; then remove the cups and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the bandage softens, you must bind it very tightly; then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye begin to heal, that is good; if not, then repeat the plaster and the cloths and the bandage and the cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 Of the breaking of a woolen garment
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 When disruption occurs in the woolen garment, it opens up and there comes out pieces of paper like a grain of resin, which is frightening to see; then if you see it closed, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below until it reaches above, then insert another needle where there is double thread from the armhole; and pierce it through, leaving the first needle according to its arrangement; then cut around the place of the double thread and tie a piece of the woolen garment around it, and secure it well, then draw out the needle and put on an ointment of moistened linen with plenty of egg; and leave it until the threads blend with the woolen garment, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restricted by the woolen garment all around in a circle until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the eye gives a great appearance, prick it with a subtle spatula that goes deep into the eye, and drain the whitish moisture from the eye, and put in immediately; then withdraw it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	 of the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease which is called «alcunnati» is nothing but the socket of the eye which resembles descending water, and it is not water; and the manner of appearing in work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the socket appear above your eyes; then it should be inserted, and not descend, and the light should be darkened, and let the patient see things as he used to; and if it does not go down, know that it is water, and if the descent of the socket is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If the patient is seated between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make an incision on the horny tissue at the corner of the eyelid by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horny tissue and the cornea, until the pus comes out; and when it has come out, instill in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey, then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	 of the eye's water
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have seen similar waters in the division, and those that need to be pierced; act accordingly to the health of the situation.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, out of direct sunlight; and bind the healthy eye very tightly; then place the eyelid in your left hand if the eye is the left one, or in your right hand if the eye is the right one; then take in your right hand, if the eye is the left one, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eye is the right one; then place the tip of the instrument next to the cornea at the thickness of a ray in that white part of the eye towards the minor lacrimal duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and turn your hand until it pierces the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty place; and it is necessary that the measure of the almagda hole be at the depth of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black part; and this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see the bone in that eyelid because of the clarity of the horny tissue, and afterwards place the instrument where the water is, then press it under a way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If the water descends now, let the patient see it before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting it a little, and if the water rises again the second time, place the fire with the instrument, and when it is in and does not rise, gently draw Almagda by turning your hand little by little; and then put in a bit of soft gemstone, and remove his eye from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then place on the outside of the eye a wad or piece of wool soaked in rose oil and plenty of egg, and bind with healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those of our time, put it on with a poultice made from plenty of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if Almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "Alberit," which looks like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And so puncture the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle; then put in almagda, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a suitable bed, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be free from all movements, and let him take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or to the left, and let him be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you do this beforehand, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 If abscesses come, uncover the eye before the seventh day, and apply a remedy that soothes the abscess; and when it is calmed, uncover the sight and put on its face an orilliet to cover for some days, and always keep it in a dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And then leave the house little by little, and behave according to the patient's condition; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And one came to us who was from the Irach, who told us that in their country they did something called almagda, through which one draws water, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	 And these are the likenesses of the forms of Almagda, because those who do not recognize them may see them; and they should be properly of iron.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 And their heads should have the same subtlety, and their ends in three sharp points.
de la char sor le neis	 on flesh over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Sometimes hairs appear on the nose in various forms, some of which resemble many-legged scorpions; and there are those that have flesh with a reddish hue, and others with fair skin tone.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In this case, then, for the hairs that are fair and not reddish, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and throw the oil on those hairs, and pull them out; then cut what you can with a sharp, subtle scalpel, until you know that all the flesh is removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 And if there remains any part that cannot be cut, open it with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if there is swelling or an abscess, then provide relief as needed; and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize until the blood is dried up and all the matter is removed, then cast in the nose easily and vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If the nose bleeds and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not come out as needed, know that there is matter born in the bone above, which prevents the instruments from cutting: then you must insert a thread of linen about a thumb’s width thick, and let it be knotted by hand, and have between each knot a distance of a finger or less; and let the patient place the end of the thread into his nostril as much as he can, and pull through the nose until it comes out through the mouth into the throat; and many times children do this in schools, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to do it; then hold with one hand the end that comes out of the nose, and with the other hand the end that comes out of the mouth, and know each after the other by following the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then draw out the thread, wipe off the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian unguent, and put it back in the nose as before; do this for III days or more, until the unguent has dissolved all that remains of the flesh; and then put a lead plug in the nose for some days until it heals, and if dry medicines are needed, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to clean out the head, into which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 And let it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a plug, and the conduit likewise; and if you wish, make it a closed plug, and let the instrument be full to clean out the head; and have one handle at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	 of the skin on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 often appears on the tip of the nose a disease called "telul", and grows and becomes very large, to the point that it is a visible thing to look at; and therefore you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all its force, then apply the cautery or burning medicine on the spot; and if you delay cutting until it is large, beware if it is hard, of a purple color, of poor condition: do not touch it with iron because it is an incarnate abscess, for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of purple color, and you see that it can be completely cut, let the patient empty themselves and cut without fear, and treat the place with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 When the nose is cut and pierced
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when a solution for continuing work comes into one of these cartilages, it benefits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is therefore necessary that when this happens to someone, one should see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together in a seam, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated from one side or the other, then you must cauterize all the parts of their heart until they heal, then join the two lips together in a seam, and bandage them, and sprinkle on powder of dragon's blood and ground incense; and put on the powders a piece of strong emplaster or another adhesive emplaster, and let it remain until it falls off by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 The manner of sewing is such that you join the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the sewing of the abdomen; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	 of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many people get hard abscesses within the lips, resembling grains of peas, smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips, and cut into each knot, and take it with tweezers and chop it in each part; then fill the place after cutting with vitriol powder until the wound is stained; and then the juice of asperum, and treat the place with dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	 of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 Often appears on the gums a fleshy growth called «albulus» by the ancients; then you must hold it with tongs, and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow; then apply on the place vitriol powder, or other powders that restrain and dry out; and if this flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it a second time, and cauterize: it does not return after the cautery; these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	 of scurvy
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 Some are assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; sometimes the teeth become black and yellow and rotten, until the decay reaches the gum, making the teeth stink; then you must make the patient sit in your lap, with his head resting on your chest, and scrape off the teeth or the scabs until nothing remains; do the same with the blackness and greenness, and with the yellowness and other spots, until they are completely removed; if one removes at the first attempt that which is there, it is good; but if not, then continue to scrape again on the second day and third, until you have removed everything; know that teeth require various forms of instruments for scraping, according to what the work shows, because the scrapers used for scraping outside the teeth have different forms than those used for scraping between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain you delay drawing it as long as you can, for this should not be done; for it is a very high substance until such time that there is no excuse for extracting it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is forced to have it drawn, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth that aches.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Often the pain deceives the patient and thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and has a good tooth drawn; and still the pain does not depart because of this, until the bad one is extracted, for we have already seen this happen to these lords; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you cauterize all around the tooth with very strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or with fine forceps bit by bit, until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp the forceps, and let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and gently push it into each side, and remove it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is perforated and rotten, then you must fill it with cloths where the holes are; and gently clamp it with tongs so that it does not break when clamping; and one must work very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And take good care that you do not break it, leaving a part behind, and the patient will suffer greater pain from the root than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And beware not to act like the ignorant doctors, who in their haste and boldness sometimes break the jaw, and do not bring what we have mentioned; but they often cause great illness due to the roots that remain, or because of the broken jaw, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is removed, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows there, which often happens, then fill the place with ground vitriol; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	 The forms of the instruments, with which one first removes the teeth, should be long and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 They should be made of strong material so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made of good iron, and they should have teeth to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	 from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains after pulling, you must put cotton moistened in butter on the spot for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 until the spot is softened, then put in the pincers called "algefri", with which the tooth seems like a bird's beak; and they should be made inside like a file, and that is the form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots do not come out with all these tweezers, then it is necessary that you uncover all the flesh around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", that is to say pincers, in this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 And let it be outside and large so that it does not break. And if the root jumps out this way, it is good. If not, then help yourself with all the instruments, whose shapes are shown here below:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 And one helps oneself with this instrument that has two branches, as is shown in this form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 And other irons which are found at the base of the teeth, and this instrument which resembles large tweezers, as is shown in this form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that many instruments for teeth are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise master subtil finds his instrument by himself according to what his works and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancient ones did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of all things. And if one does not break the cartilage or other bones, where it can be done, then he looks for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and he helps with gestures, here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And let them be large and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can hold and remove it; and then restore with medicines suitable for this, and if there is rot in the bone and it is small, this instrument can extract it all.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 Quant les dents apparaissent pas selon la nature du corps, et leur forme est laid, et surtout chez les jeunes femmes, il faut savoir si la dent est née après la dent, et n'est pas à sa place correcte, et on ne peut ni la broyer ni la limer : alors, l'arracher ; et s’il y a de l'air avec la dent, alors prend cet instrument dont voici la forme, et il ressemble à un petit bec, et soit en fer indien aigu en sommet.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And the pliers take little by little in your hands day by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it seems that it can be filed down, then file it with such a file as is shown here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 And it is like the file on which one makes needles; and with a file, day by day lightly in hand, so that it does not move until it falls out; then the plain at the end with any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then you must file the roughness until it is even, so that it no longer hurts the tongue or corrupts speech.
quant li dent lochent	 When the tooth falls out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the front teeth fall out, either from a blow or from falling, and the patient cannot bite into what he eats without them falling out, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, but that does not work; then they must be restrained by a golden thread, for a silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the width of the space between the teeth; and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the ends between the loose teeth, as many as there are, until you reach wisely to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the wrapping again up to the place where you started, and gently and wisely tighten your hand so that it does not move; and let your knot be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then cut the heads of the wire with a pair of pliers, and join them together, and place them between the healthy teeth, and put it in such a way that it does not hurt the tongue; and then leave it so tight as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the wire breaks, then hold it with another wire; and it will remain and serve thus for all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the 2 healthy teeth, and the 2 molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 And when the tooth falls out, one puts it back in its place, fresh by fresh, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and skilled, and sometimes one makes the shape of a cow bone tooth, and puts it in the place where there is a lack, and holds it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 Of copper to cleanse the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Any time this ligament comes from under the tongue by nature, so that one is born thus; or by accident due to a healed wound; and the operation is such that you open the mouth of the patient and let his head rest in your hand, and raise the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and this is due to a healed wound, then push the hook and cut that ligament wide; and ensure that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery underneath; and when you have done this, raise the place with rose water and aloes, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen compress; and let the patient rinse each night, so that the place cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And if bleeding continues, place a vitriol poultice on the spot; and if the blood flow weakens, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and if you see the flesh change to black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it turns to pus and there is moisture, apply onion juice, and make a fine slit with a lancet, and cleanse it from both sides; and if the blood flow weakens during your work, place a vitriol poultice until it is dried up, then return to your work until you draw out all the pus; then lift the flesh gently and carefully, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	 Of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Sometimes there are abscesses in the throat called "glands," and they are properly called the two tonsils. When you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small sense and of dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent bleeding; but let it be until it is dead, and then you will divide it, or it would burst on its own; and if it is of white color again, and the root is thin, have ready the instrument to cut, but first check if the abscess is hot and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his eyes be in your shadow, and he opens his mouth and you take the instrument between your hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, of which here is the form; and let it be of silver or fine bronze like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 When you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take a probe and fit it in the almond, and draw it strongly above as much as you can; and draw something from the tissues along with it, then cut with the instrument, of which here is the form, resembling pincers; however, the heads are curved, one next to the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then borrow it with pincers, here is its form.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 And let it be sharp on one side and named on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water and water and honey, and if blood continues to flow, then gargle the patient with water in which pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves have been boiled, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then continue the treatment until it is cured. And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them as well in the same manner.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I treated a woman of an abscess that was inside her throat, that is to say the abscess of little sense; and it had almost closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so high that it had pushed out two bones through the two openings of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 I hastened immediately, and inserted a stiletto into one of the openings, then drained out the pus, and removed a large portion of bone; then I did the same in the other nostril opening, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I inserted the stiletto into the abscesses, and drained some of it, but only a little blood came out; and thus the throat passage of the woman was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not cease cutting from that abscess for a long time; and the abscess kept growing again, filling the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I cauterized it inside the throat: so it remained without growing; and I left those parts, entrusting her to God.
de l’uve	 of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When pus descends into the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is beneath, large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the aforementioned abscess is calmed down, and it is subtle, then you should cut it; and this one which is round gathered and not long; and it is bloody or of ash color or black, then you should avoid cutting it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 Because there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned before; then insert the awl into the eye, and draw it down, and cut it with one of the two instruments which I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And it is necessary that you not cut more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it injures the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and care for it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient is afraid of being cut, then you must use ingenuity in the cauterization to alleviate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the manner of cautery should be sharp and keen.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient should place their head in your hand, and then press their tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and apply sharp, lively vinegar, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which looks like this:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And there should be on the head a tuft where one puts the medicine, like the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and wound; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press on the eye for half an hour, until you see it is numbed and the biting of the medicine is calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument with all the cotton into the channel above, so that the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often, until the cautery is perfected, then let it dry, and it will fall off after four or five days. And if you need to repeat the cautery of the medicine, then repeat it, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and rinse it with cold water, and treat it with gargles until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 This cure is more effective than incision or cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take camphor and hyssop and marjoram and rue and chamomile and mugwort and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them in a pot, and put ashes in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well covered with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot there should be an instrument made like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And let it be of silver or copper, and one of its ends should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the eye through the tear duct, until the eye is inflamed; then repeat this often until the eye dries up, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the hot abscess, because many things can happen; and do not do this unless at the end of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 And if this instrument is not present, take a dog and place inside its head an eggshell, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the steam to irritate the mouth, and it is a good remedy along with the salt.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 Often a bone or fishbone gets stuck in the throat; therefore, you must extract what you can see. Press the patient's tongue against the instrument under the sun until you see movement. And that which does not open and remains lodged in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps it will come out with the vomiting. If the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of apple, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread, tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it. When it reaches its place, it will expand and you can pull it out; if it does not come out with what we have said, take a lead instrument of this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 And let the instrument be curved at the top so that it may more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised upwards; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest it come into view, nor push any bone inside; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows where the thing is difficult; thus he pushes it down, where he draws it strongly through all the instrument equally, until it passes.
de la sansue de la gorge	 of the phlegm of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 Sometimes the phlegm is treated with medicine, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when that does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, after you have pressed the tongue to the instrument that I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the blood, draw it with the smallest hook, or with subtle tongs that are suitable for this task.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if this does not work, take a heated iron wire, and insert it into the patient's throat, then insert a hot iron into the hollow of the wire, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if the patient becomes thirsty all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a full glass of cold water, and open the patient's mouth, and pour it in without gulping, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, it will stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it does not stop as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the tool I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without hesitation.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And the manner of fumigation is such that you take a pot with visible charcoal, and let the lid be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and through this hole place the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation into it, and have the patient put the head of the reed in their mouth, and close their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but comes up to the blood vessel; and the blood will fall now, and if it does not fall, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty things, and do not drink water; and then it will be necessary for her to come out through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	 And the form of the instrument with which one draws blood is such that, when it can be seen, it resembles curved pincers to enter into the throat; and it should have the likeness of a hawk's beak, and there should be roughness like a file, so that what it takes, it cannot leave; and see here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	 the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 Many types of abscesses are, as recalled hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways that one is exactly like the other, and from which it draws moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second manner is according to the places where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 Car the abscess on the head is different from that at the base, and the fleshy abscess is different from that which occurs in the joints, and each should be judged accordingly in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And there are abscesses that should not be incised until the head is mature according to its development; and there are those which must be incised when they are ripe and do not die according to their maturity, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 Because when an abscess occurs near the joints and it is left until it is rotten around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contracture in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 When the abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay perforation until it is mature, it will harm the main limb; when it is near the anus, perforate it as soon as it is ripe; and it is not appropriate to perforate a ripe abscess before digestion is complete, except for that which is near the anus, lest it putrefy in depth, become elongated inside, and a fistula develops; and it cannot heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And it is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of the abscess which has ripened according to completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the diminishing of the pain and redness, and the discussion and preparation of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you place the perforation in the most dependent part of the abscess, where it opens up; and let the perforation be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there are no folds.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that bend, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed by complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it before this, the body will be filled with its poison, and it is full of much filth; and perhaps the edges and depths of it will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if there is any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And you should bring in small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cauterize, and cover; when they have become as thick as cloths, and are dead, you should act as with blisters: and if there are such that are split into three corners, and if there are such that one cuts like the leaves of myrtle, like abscesses of the angles; and if there are such where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar cutting.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Those who have no head, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it completely; and when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out some of it; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again; do this many times from great to small, until all the pus comes out; likewise if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old decrepit man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the spirit may sometimes jump with the issue of the pus, which can accidentally kill the patient, and you would not notice it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have noticed your abscess, cleanse the wound, and observe if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, bring tenths of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must insert into each one a tent so that they touch against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of skin, and you have taken it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and cure with oiling until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold and clear water, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the bleeding persists, bring management and care, and the powders that I have mentioned earlier in this book. If it is in winter and the place where the abscess is is very sensitive, you must apply tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil; and if it is in summer and the place is fleshy, you must apply cloths soaked in water or cold wine and oil, for three days as we have said. Then lance the abscess and clean and treat it until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 And this must be recognized universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	 of pustules
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 Where pimples come on the head, and are like us who have them in clusters, just like the spines of a hedgehog, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that are fat and like those where there is moisture such as marrow; and there are some that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the art does not interfere.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of cutting is such that you should test with all the instruments that are called "entromissoire," from which the forms come hereafter, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Car if it contains moisture, then open it from above the long [bone].
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape off without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately if anything is left there; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this will heal what remains of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then renew the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you are sure that nothing remains of the night; then heal the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the abscess is large, cut it according to this form, lengthwise; and cast your onions therein, and scrape all around, and put all your effort into drawing out the cloth where it lies; and if the art of healing does not comply, then do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And likewise treat the abscess if it is hard, and in cutting and curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And cut above the hard and moist abscess, for it is lighter because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if any of these abscesses have no moisture at the tip, like the one I cut from the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess hard, rough, and white, and it could not be broken; and had anyone struck it, they would have wounded her as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 En others abscesses coming to the head, except for those which come to the heads of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening should always be in the most dependent place, so that the pus may exit; and care for them as is necessary.
des scrophules	 Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often these abscesses occur at the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin; sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body and are numerous, interconnected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each scrofula is specifically within its own rib, like the nut and the head abscess, as we have said; and there are many similarities to these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In this one, therefore, that you see of good disposition to touch, and it is similar in color to the body, and it moves from each part and is not harsh on the nerves of the neck nor on the artery or vein, and it is not deep; then it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrape each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart to the ears, if you need to, as we have said in the abscesses of the head; and draw little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula not be too sharp or cutting, lest the hand slip, and do not go too far forward, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that staunch blood, and constrict the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to suppurate.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 And when the blood is staunched, return to your work until you complete it; then seek with your finger if there remain any small scrofula, and cut and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 And if there is a great vein in the root of the scrofula, then it is not fitting that you cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you cut all the scrofula, then it is necessary that you join the two lips of the wound, and sew them immediately, since there should be no delay due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 then it is necessary that you attend to cutting the root of it, and pulling strongly, and sewing as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulae that hold superfluity, pierce them where they appear to be dead; and pierce them in the same way as those previously mentioned, in descending order, then apply bandages with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, treat it with ointments containing animal fat, until it heals.
de squinance	 from the shoulder
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 The ancients spoke and discussed the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is a record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 For those who have shoulder pain, it is necessary that the slit in the throat called "epiglottis" be avoided; and do not use this method because all the veins and the pomp of the patient are hot with abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat or in both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 When the disease is in the channel of the pomp (throat), it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid death by strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four, a small transverse cut between two circles or according to the size of the syphac fissure, not in the cartilage; and those places are suitable for the section of the epiglottis because there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat to all the bone, then split the heart until it reaches the trachea; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the hypoglossal nerve as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the trachea which jumps out through the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the hour has passed in which one fears strangulation, gather together the two lips of the heart wound, and sew them up alone without a bandage; then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 Albucasis said that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and there is a lack of breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, which passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, until it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 I saw that a young woman took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the cartilage of the larynx; and I was called to cure her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 I uncovered the wound, and found the blood that had come out of it, even though it had not struck a vein or artery, but rather the windpipe, and the air was exiting strongly through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hurried and sewed the wound, treating it until it was healed; and all that happened to the maiden was that she lost her voice, which later returned to normal; therefore, I say that in cutting the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	 of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess the color of jet, and it is very common in women; and there are two kinds: natural and accidental; in the natural kind there is no venom.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accident is according to two manners, of which one resembles us grease, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it should not be worked on to make a fire except in the small one, and prove and search all the intromissary: if you find it like our grease, and it does not open to any vein, then cut it off, as we cut the nose, and draw out all its hair, if there is any; and examine well soon, and treat it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	 of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 Many ways are of us, of which I will say all the similarities; and now it is necessary that I speak of all the differences that exist between us and the exit.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 I say that the flow is hot and feverish while the inflammation lasts, until the suppuration is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 With this knot there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own bag and corresponds to the body's color, and begins like a blister, and grows large; and they are of two kinds, either dry or moist, and many colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 When you come to the care of the knot, it is necessary that you test and inquire first with all the instruments called "entromissoires," according to what its form will be in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 Et la manière d'examiner les abcès pour nous est que tu prennes le lieu le plus humide que tu trouves dans l'abcès, et tourne tes doigts peu à peu, jusqu'à ce que tu saches que l'instrument ait percé le cœur, puis selon la grandeur de l'abcès; ensuite, retire l'instrument, et fais attention à ce qui sort.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 Se l'humidité qui court à la surface a une couleur, perce-la comme je l'ai dit pour les autres abcès; et si après avoir retiré l'instrument, de l'humidité en sort, sache que c'est gras. Donc, fais-en une croix, prends-le avec des pincettes, et écorche légèrement chaque côté, et fais attention à la couche où il repose pour que tu le traies proprement avec l'aiguille; et si tu ne peux pas le traire proprement, alors coupe-le en morceaux jusqu'à ce qu'il n'en reste plus rien.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 Car if there remains anything, the nose returns by many times; and if a little remains, and the blood coagulates, fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and close the wound, and apply soothing things to the hot abscess, and treat with other treatments until it is healed; and if the nose is large, sew the two lips of the wound, and treat those who eat flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 and if the vein is beating against you or another, then hasten and fill the place with a solution of vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound festers and the bleeding subsides; then return to what remains of the nose.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 See here the forms of the intermittent instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula; and they are like the needles with which one sews shirts, and they are made of citrin bronze, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, and they are more proven with black lead to surround the curves of the fistula; and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The forms of the onions are of many kinds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are onions that have two curves of three types also; and there are onions that have three curves, and they are of three types also; and there are onions that have two curves, and single-curved onions, which are of three types; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The heads of these instruments are cutting, and there are such that cut only from one side, with which one can scrape the nails without cutting into the vein or nerve; and among these implements are the retractors attached to handles, so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses; and they come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are used only on fleshy parts, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the scrapings of figs, according to this form, with which one stops bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 and it is sometimes placed at the site that heals quickly the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes they come according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to decay, to such an extent that they resemble women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, he must follow this form according to these lines from line .b. to line .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medicine that renews flesh, then join the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and continue the treatment until it is healed; and if the breast hangs down and is softened by its size as happens to women, then make two cuts in the upper part, through two similar slits; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line .b. to this line .g.; then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and introduce what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it softens the remainder and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	 Of the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 These abscesses that come under the armpits are hard like scrofula with ribs, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been drained, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with a suitable ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, incise it as we have said for the incision of scrofula, and if the wound lets out pus, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	 of artery breakage
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is closed, it often results in abscesses. The same happens with a swollen vein and abscess; and you recognize it this way when it is due to the artery, the abscess is long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel tightness; and when it is due to the vein, the cause is evident; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the nails or in the angles or at the neck or in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron cure, and the one at the head must also be avoided, and in the case of an artery swelling, make a long incision above the skin; then work the cut with scissors, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues, until it is uncovered; then insert underneath it a needle, and make it pass through to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then stitch the place between the two threads with an intromitter until the pus comes out, and let the abscess be relieved; then apply the cure as before, so that the thread falls off; then treat it as for a wound, until it is healed; and if the abscess is due to the vein cut, it is necessary that you dye your hand with what you can from the abscess all over the skin, then insert the needle underneath the place you hold in your hand, and make it pass through, and let there be a double thread, so that you draw it out on the other side; then bind the abscess, as I have said, with the thread of one of the two parts at the two ends of the thread; and if you doubt that the thread will not come out, then insert another needle all along one thread underneath the entire abscess at the first incision of the needle, and constrict the threads in four places; then cut the abscess until the superfluity comes out, then cut the superfluity of the skin and leave what is bound; then put on a cloth moistened with wine and oil, then apply treatments of bandages and dressings until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	 of the nerves' abscesses
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 Similarly, just as abscesses can occur in the artery and vein, they also occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And this happens most often in the shoulders and arms, and in all places where there are joints, and it is a very severe abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in many positions without pain; and when it is pressed hard, then the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely within the flesh, but beneath the skin; and it moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, or up or down, and those that are in joints must not be struck with iron: perhaps there would be contraction; and those that are on the head or forehead, open the skin to a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, hold it with pincers and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it on the edge of the nail, and scrape it off, then remove it and close the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	 of hanging boils
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 Sometimes it happens in the belly and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, with subtle roots and large heads; and there are small ones and very large ones; and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were already split open, and moisture always flowed out of them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I cut them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces and the other six. And the work in the incision is such that you should consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist and of a subtle root; then you should cut with a wide spatula, and let the cauterizer be in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 For in cutting often comes too great a flow of blood, and if the wound overcomes you, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made thread of linen and tie up the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain it, and do not stop restraining the linen thread until it cuts off the artery, and each one without any effort; and if the roots are thick, there is fear of cutting at once for the abdomen, but you can well cut half, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the vein which is of dark color and poor sense and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 Car it is an infected abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the abscess hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	 When the wound is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of the wound comes from cautery of the skin or splitting of sinew, and is on the belly or in some wounds as it happens in other places, whether it is blood from veins or arteries according to what was said before, or from inflammation; and if it is through the splitting of sinew and exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a minor thing without pain, and opens from various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed between two fingers it springs back, and then returns, and by chance it may become hardened, and greatly increases with hot baths and intense effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it appears well when you press it in your hand, do not constrain at all; and if it is due to blood, then the abscess appears by these signs as large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity; and if it is due to flatulence, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you must see if the appearance is for the blood of the artery, or vein, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 Then you must leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 Because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is for the intestine or bladder, then you must instruct the patient to tie his leg, and be stretched straight, then seal all around the bag; then command him to lie quietly between your hands, then go around the place that you have sealed with all the linen cloth, then extend half of the abscess above all the great knuckle; then tie it around with a strong thread or with a strong silk cord firmly, and let the knot of the ligature be tight; then work half of the abscess stretched over the ligature, and put your index finger in, and search for the intestine; if you find it caught by the ligature, then untie it, and push the intestine out of the stomach; and if you find the bladder, then take it with the knuckle, and cut off the excess; and if the artery or vein opposes you, then go well around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads in them, and put the two needles around that which you have made crosswise that you make perforate; then press the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it rots, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself; or you cut it when it has softened and rotted, then cure of what is necessary, and take away the abscess as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place as is necessary, and sew up the place.
dou chancre	 of the cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 We have said in the division the resemblances of cancer, and how one must work on it with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and we say that cancer infects the flesh, and great care is needed in the cure, and the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where it can be scraped off, like cancer which is in the breast, and in the thigh, and in similar places, and one should remove all of it when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, then one should not approach it, for I have never known anyone to heal from it; nor has anyone ever healed from it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile some time; then make him vomit if he has manifest repletion, then put the patient in a good place to do the work; then cast your eyes on the cancer, and the hair from all sides, and remove it from all sides leaving nothing behind; and let the blood flow strongly, and press well the place with your hand or with something else, and if the bleeding makes you fear the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stanched; then cure with another cure until he is cured.
de ydropisie	 of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 we have already spoken of the similarities to dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of water is done, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure which is made by medicine, and that which is cured by iron; only eclites are cut; and one should not touch iron in these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for they are deadly things; therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy which is called «eclites» with medicine, and the cure does not profit, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as swelling of the belly and similar things; then do not touch iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient to be of strong constitution, and he has no other illness but dropsy only, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should act thus: lift the patient upright in your hands, and the assistant presses the belly from behind, expelling the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the spiked spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 and let it be pointed, yet not so deep that when inserted it can reach the intestines or injure them; then check if the dropsy is towards the intestines: if so, your incision should be on the right side of the navel below the umbilicus, three fingers wide; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the navel; and if it is due to kidney problems, it should be on the right. And it is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluidities do not flow to that weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push it in, and lift your hand along the entire thickness between the skin and the fat as if scraping to a thickness of one nail or around; then pierce the fat until the thickness comes to the watery place, which is the place of the water, then draw out strongly, and pour this instrument whose form is thus:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And it is similar to a fine silver cane, and it is of light brass or bronze, and has in the lower part a small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on another; and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision with which the scribe cuts the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 on the tip above is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it rises now on the instrument; empty then half or a third part, for if you empty more than is needed in that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the release of his spirit by the weapon, or he falls fainted, or approaches death; but empty according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient indicate, and his pulse; then draw out the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the cork that stops the hole which is on the vase, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then begin again with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient enduring this, and draw a small amount of water; do this every day, and be careful not to empty until there remains but a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you doubt the patient and you leave much water in him, cure him with hot sepulture or sand, and by much sweating or bathing in the sun, and let him drink wine; and cure him with desiccative medicines until he is dry, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	 of the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small opening, or the opening is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it should be done immediately by piercing all around the most subtle part of the glans according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then place in the opening a thin plug of linden, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four. And when he wants to urinate, then remove the plug, and let him urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out freely does not require closing.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 He whose opening is small should be treated with the linden plug as we have said, and it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are injured, for some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, so that they cannot urinate forward unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot engage in sex because the matter cannot reach the womb, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on his back, then stretch the head of the penis and the foreskin like the width of a feather's quill, so that the opening comes in the middle, as it should; and beware of bleeding that occurs frequently, and if it happens, staunch it with what staunches blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	 of the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many times these abscesses come in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; some are malignant, others not; so it is necessary that you take them at one time, subtle, and cut and clean all, then put on a moistened cotton with Egyptian ointment; then cure with the ointment definitivum until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the bath is malignant, of foul color and stinking, then you must bring a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have cut it, and if the bath is partly on the stick and partly inside the skin, then you must first remove the part of the bath that is inside; and when it is healed, then treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For when you treat them together, it is not certain that the head of the stick will not be perforated, and blackness and corruption come into the stick and the joint; then all that is black and corrupt must be cut away, then apply the plaster of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranates and beans, then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if there is a flow of blood, then apply the lunar cautery according to this manner:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cautery helps in two situations together: that is to say, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert into the urethra a leaden cannula, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the hair is thick at the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or if there is a wound or abscess, then you must scrape with one instrument until the skin is freed, and the head of the penis is released from all sides; and if it is difficult to describe this, then you should scrape with one spatula some at the head of the penis and the skin; then cut well between the two, and place a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water there, so that it does not thicken again.
de la circoncision	 of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 Circumcision is not a separation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our will and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, the lightest for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 Because I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions around Al-Dal (Old Dal, perhaps a reference to an ancient city or region), and they did so with force and all at once; thus, the heart fled because there are two layers, and by chance if one cuts the upper layer, the lower one remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 And there the patient recovers consciousness, and the pain is doubled, and in the amputation of the finger, the point of the member is not assured; and in the amputation of the nail perhaps the iron slips away, and the work is ruined, and many times it happens that they do not need amputation, which I intended.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 From the amputation done with forceps on all the ligament of the finger, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forceps cut exactly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Because when you press your hand and cut equally on all sides at the same time; but let the thread be well tightened around the skin; and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you are only doing to tie the thread around the finger, then let it rest in all the ways you can; then hold it straight between your hands, and return the forceps between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the finger and blow into the heart, and pull it up until the head of the finger comes out; then clean it well of the accumulated dirt, then bind the place tightly with a double thread, then tie another ligature below the first one; and hold it with two fingers by the second ligature at the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two ligatures, then raise the heart quickly and pull out the head of the finger; then let the blood flow little by little, because that is the mother; and put powder on top and a cloth glued with a mixture of a cooked egg yolk tempered with rose water, made with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and continue to care for it with other cures until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 The shape of strength for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be sharp and cutting, and the heads should be as large as the little finger equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 The mistake in cleansing is when the head inside flees the incision; therefore, you must extend it to your fingernail, so that the place does not become an abscess; and also cut equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tongs, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 And if it exceeds three days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, then let it be until the abscess is calmed down, and lightly scrape off the scab; then cut as you can move, and take care of the part of the foreskin, so that nothing harms it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cure the place of sudden wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if the cut is deeper than necessary and it goes too deep, it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	 of retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is caused by a stone, or congealed blood, or a bone, or a piece of flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees; and let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and let the patient restrain himself as much as he can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted to express the stone upward, so that the urine is released; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe," and here is its shape: and let it be of fine silver, thinly hammered, like the feather of a bird; and let its tube be one and a half palms long, and let it be thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And the manner of the issue of urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie at the end a bag of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the superfluity of the wool and put it to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and wash the bladder and the penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then place the syringe gently into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the scrotum; then push the syringe forward until the bladder, and the patient feels it coming to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order except because the passage through which it goes is twisted; then draw out all the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool, then remove the syringe, and allow the urine to flow; and recommence the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	 Of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 When the bladder is scalded by blood or there is a collection of pus within it, you should infuse water and medicines. Do this with the entire instrument called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you see. And let the place where the medication passes be such that it tightly seals the tube without additional material, so that the moisture can be drawn out and injected when needed. And when you infuse your medications into the bladder, put the end of the syringe in the liquid, and pull on the plunger; thus, you will draw the liquid into the syringe, and then push it strongly back in; thus, the liquid will enter inside and reach the bladder immediately, so that the patient feels it. This is the form of the subtle enema used to enema the bladder: and here it is: 123
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is of silver or brass, and the head is higher; and below at the breast where the ribs fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture with which you wish to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a double thread of good linen, and heat the pouch containing the moisture over the fire; then insert the nozzle of the enema into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder so that all the moisture enters gradually, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it neatly around; then pass a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle like a bucket, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	 of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 We have already said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction along with medicines; and I have told the difference between the stone in the kidneys, and all the signs, and on what kind of stone one must work with the incision; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 I say that the stone which is caught in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the urine flows from the bladder like fine water; and there is blood, and the patient's penis hurts, and he urinates frequently, and then it stops; and many times the root of this occurs; and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, and it is very grave for the elderly, and it is in the middle way, for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster, in order to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For sometimes it hinders the search for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the feet, and throw him backwards and downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it goes up from its place; then let him sit between your prepared hands, and let his hands be under his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then seek and touch within; if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not fall with the touch of all, then moisten your finger in oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent; and put it into his fundament, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press on top of your finger, and expel it out where you want to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand under the scrotum, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the scrotum in the part where the incision is made; then insert the spatula covering, which is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And it goes between the thighs and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the vein; and let it be straight onto the stone, and your two fingers should always be on the anus, and let the cut across be so that it is wide outside, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure from the finger in the anus will make it come out without effort; and know that there are such stones with angles and edges: it is difficult to remove; and there is such which is beneath, similar to a hazelnut, and round, whose removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 To that which has angles and edges, make the cut larger; and if it does not come out, then you must extract with tweezers that are like a file at the tip, to firmly grasp the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert a subtle instrument curved at the tip beneath; and if you cannot manage in this way, then widen the opening of the bladder, and if the urine is turbid, then constrain with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first place the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut it, then pull it out strongly, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, then it must be sewn, making a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 For two things happen to the patient: either he dies or urine comes out continuously through the place where the wound cannot be closed; but nevertheless, you must strive to pull it out or break it with pincers until you draw it out piece by piece; and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with frankincense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bandage it, and put on top a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the hot abscess; then let the patient rest on his pillow, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et quant tu le desliies, so well wash the place with oil and water, then treat it with a dressing of diaphoretic ointment and basil-based ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And if the wound develops abscesses or corrosions, and a clot of blood in the bladder that retains urine in such a manner that it is passed with the urine: then put your finger in the wound and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will damage the bladder and make it rot; then lift the wound with water and ashes and salt, and assist him in all ways you know until he is healed; and it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind his two thighs together and apply the medicines on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra of the penis, and fixed inside, and urine cannot come out; then the treatment for this that I say is as follows: cut it many times, and he is relieved from pain by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already proven this so.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 Take an iron rod according to this shape, and let it be fixed with three prongs on one stake:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the rod into the penis lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod in your hand against the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then the urine will come out immediately, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is immediately broken, and it urinates with the urine, and the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above, then make an incision near the stone between the two threads, then extract the stone, untie the thread, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and heal the patient until he is healed.
de la piere des femmes	 of the female stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 It rarely happens that a stone is lodged in women, and if it ever does happen, the treatment is difficult and hindered by three things: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to reveal herself to doctors, especially when she is modest.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third manner is such that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-versed in this hand art; and the fourth manner is such that the stones of the woman are more deeply embedded than those of the man, which requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear involved. And if necessity demands it, you must take a wise midwife, and one can scarcely find her, and if you cannot find her, then do not seek a subtil male physician; rather present a wise old woman who knows something about the art of life in women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command that she perform what you order for the investigation of the stone; and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the fundament and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she must press it under her finger, and recommend that she insert her finger into the malaide's vagina, and seek and press her left hand strongly onto the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If she finds it, then she must move it from the entrance of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh; then strike against the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the anus, where it is more easily moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first; then push the thread into the incision, if you feel the stone, tighten the wound so that the stone can come out strongly, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and with ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you know the similarities to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 And if the blood overcomes you, apply powdered vitriol to the spot, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stanched; then return to your work until the stone is weakened, and have the instruments I mentioned to you in the extraction of stones from men to help you in your work; and if the blood overcomes you, and it is from the artery that has been cut, apply powder to the spot and bind it with cloths and bandages, and do not attempt this again, but leave the stone and do not remove it, for the patient might die by chance; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the place is cold, return to your work until the stone is weakened.
de hernie carnouse	 About hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 About hernia aqueous, it is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white sap under the heart of the kidney, which contains the egg; and it is called "sap", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, so that one thinks it is another egg; and this is the skin of the kidney between the white sap that we have said. And these do not happen unless there is a pustule.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 And the generation of this hernia comes from weakness in the kidneys, and that matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And sometimes it comes from a blow to the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: it is yellowish like jaundice, or redless, black, or white and watery, and this happens more; these are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is in the white sap that we have said, then the abscess is reasonable, a long pustule like the shape of an egg, and the kidney does not open, because it has moisture all around. 》
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess swells with a part of the egg, and therefore it is thought to be another egg; and if the moisture is between the leather of the cushion and the white silk, one can feel it well; thus when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the introduced instrument, from which the form is made before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 According to what follows the instrument, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we heal it with fire, it is necessary for the patient to be bled according to his ability and the fullness of his body; then make him sit on his back, on something a little high, and put many cloths under him; then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod along one of the two ribs of the chest of the cushion; then take the spatula knife, and cut the leather of the cushion in the middle lengthwise down to near the shoulder, and let your cut be straight while cutting the leather of the cushion until it reaches white silk, and peel it delicately according to your ability; then pierce the silk full of water through a large hole, and drain all the water, and then place your fingers, and stretch the silk upwards; and do not touch the chest of the cushion, but only the silk; cut all or in pieces likewise the side of him delicately, that if you do not cut wisely, the water will return; and if the egg jumps out of your work, put it back in its place when you have completed the work of the silk; then join the two lips of the chest of the cushion with a stitch, then cure him as the other wounds, until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are suspensory, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the ion to all the suspensory, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if water is collected in two parts together, know that these are two veins; then cut the other part as you have done the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put into the wound wool soaked in rose oil; and put outside other wool soaked in wine and oil, and put on top of the two ions, and put on top doubled cloths, and tie it all up with the ligature according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take two cloths, and fill them with wool shreds according to this pattern and sew them together at the top of the breeches, and one of the heads takes from the waist up to the back, and the other on the wrist; and the other two heads on the two angles, and all the assembly is tightened in the loop of the breeches; sometimes this ribbon for cautery is used instead of iron cutting, and it is that you take a thin surgical cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white layer containing water is exposed; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that layer at the corners, and peel with this hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the cauterization in all ways that you can, until you burn everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more beneficial; and change your behavior regarding blood loss, and change the actions of cutting; and if anything goes against you, such as abscess or bleeding or other things, then treat what goes against you, according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure because of its horror, then administer perforation, as I tell you. When you are certain through the indications that we have mentioned that aquous humour is present there, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part to the full extent of your finger width, and insert the perforation into the body cavity; and let the hole be wide so that all the liquid can flow freely. Then place cotton on the spot, bind it, and leave it for the remaining water to drain. Then treat until the wound is healed. And if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out of the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or an instrument used to draw water from dropsical patients; the form of which is mentioned above. Widen the hole in the wound, and know that the water will return and be collected after six months or thereabouts. And when it is collected as before, the patient will pass his days thus.
de l’aposteme des coions	 from an abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 Know that in the incision of this vein there is more fear in many situations, for which it seems to me better to leave it alone; and I will tell you about the operation and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	 I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and especially to the testicles; and this is in very many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 This is to say, due to the spreading of sharp and acute excess humors to the testicles, or from blows; and the color of the abscess corresponds to the body's color; and no pain is found, but it is a serious abscess. And sometimes it is dangerous, perforating, and purulent, with a reddish color, and sometimes it comes from a knot in an artery, or from a swelling of veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is due to the swelling of an artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess when you press it against your fingers; and one must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 He who is affected by the swelling of a vein is known by its disposition to change color upon touching with fingers, and one can well make an incision on this resemblance, and on other parts; and it is that you cut the heart of the testicles, then raise the egg upwards, and draw out the white forcefully, and free the suspending membrane from all around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the egg is already hardened with these parts born, it is then necessary that you draw out the egg and cut it; and if there is air in the white, or within the vessels, it is necessary that you free all this membrane, and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 And if the base of the flesh is at the back, then you must cut all of it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when your work is done, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then care for it with other remedies until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess wrapped in a covering like a bud, accompanied by the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when he walks; and the cure for this illness is almost as dangerous as the previous one, but nevertheless we will tell you the work for it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a high seat, then put the suspender of the testicles down to your thighs, including all the vessels near the penis, and hold them tightly, and stretch them well; then cut with a sharp spatula wide across the vessels, until they are exposed, and then peel from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then insert a needle where it has two threads, and tie it first to the place where the vein came out, and tie it again to the other end; then cut them in the middle straight, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted humors; then cure the wound as the others where one joins the bow, so that no vessel spills over which nourishes one of the testicles; for by this no harm comes, and if to all the vessels comes vein, it is necessary to draw the testicles to all the vessels; so that the bird does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	 From the fracture of the jaw
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The onset of this rupture is from the section that occurs in the jaw or the stretching over the stomach in the area of the hips, causing the intestines to descend from this fracture into one of the testicles; and this fracture is either in the jaw or from the stretching of it, and these two types come from many causes: from striking, jumping, roaring, lifting heavy loads, and similar things; and the sign that it is from the stretching of the jaw is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly; and the abscesses are equal up to the bottom because the jaw presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 And the sign is that it comes from the section of the liver, which at the beginning causes sudden pain, and the abscess has diverse appearances, close to the skin, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body away from the liver.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 And sometimes the intestines descend with it and are retained therein, causing the patient to suffer great pain, especially when pressed upon.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 And in these iron cautery treatments due to fear, which is why one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 And the manner of this work is such that you instruct the patient to reach in with his hand into the wound if he can enter it; then place a bandage around his neck, and lift his thighs; then draw the intestines upwards, and cut all the skin from the testicles lengthwise; then insert your fingers of the tail into the groin according to what you need to open the wound, so that the intestines may exit; then skin the liver that is under the skin of the testicles, until the white liver remains uncovered on all sides; then insert your finger in that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white liver that is under the skin of the egg, and between the second liver; and then separate that which is behind the egg, and between the second liver; and then move to the right hand inside the groin of the testicles, and draw the white liver upwards to your left hand, and lift the egg with all the liver towards the groin; and instruct the attendant to raise the egg upwards, and untie that which is tied behind the binding; and check with your fingers if there is any part of the intestine wrapped in the hard white liver, and if you find anything, push it down into the abdomen below; then take a needle where there are I thick thread made of X threads, and insert it in the rear part of the liver, which is after the skin of the testicles, behind the groin, then cut the knots that appear from the threads, so that there are IVI threads; then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the liver, of which we have spoken which is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong bondage of II parts; then wrap the knots of the threads, and bind them firmly with II parts, so that no servant who cares for him can enter through the mouths, where this aposteme may come; and put again the bondage according to the first long bondage of two fingers, and after these two bonds leave the liver under the groin of the testicles the width of a finger; and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the testicles, so that the veins and arteries run, as we have said before; then apply wet wool in oil to the wounds, and place the bandage that we have spoken of.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 And sometimes the white surface is cauterized after incision due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 For this often happens and let the ligature remain until it falls off by itself; and if it delays in falling off, then apply a hot water poultice and place what we have said on top, until it falls off; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	 Of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 In this situation I have never seen anyone who dared to treat with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is done like the ligature which is tied with the vessel, in such a way that you tie the vessels after lightly lifting the skin below; then cut through the middle, and treat the abscess as we have described, until the vessel falls off; and heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Any time a hernia occurs in the groin, as we have said, it opens the place; and no one should cut into the intestines, and if they do, it is bad, and it heals every hour; and nevertheless, if it stays too long in this state, the wound or hernia grows so that the intestine comes out; and this happens due to the stretching of the hernia in the groin, as we have said, for it is stretched, then the place is softened and swollen and open; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured with an iron in this manner: and let the patient lie on their back between your hands, then cut the swollen place of the hernia wide according to the size of three fingers; and then extract the hernia that is under the skin as usual, then take a needle and place it on the apparent part of the hernia; and press deeply into the abdomen, then sew the two apparent parts of the hernia onto the head of the needle, and sew one and the other; then remove the head of the needle, and do not cut into the hernia or extend any other thing, as I have shown you in the cure of the intestine's hernia; then cure it with the cure for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads, then cleanse and heal the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 The cautery is applied, and has no appearance in the incision, and the cauterization is moved to this place, and is closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 Often the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the membranes within are loosened, and it is easy to see; and it is necessary, when one wishes to cure it, that the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin onto the natural skin; then sew the two lips together with a single stitch, and if you wish, first sew the excess of the softened skin with three or four strong stitches; then cut between the stitches, and cure it as the other wounds, until it is healed, and let the threads fall.
dou chastrement	 Of the cautery
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 Know that cautery is forbidden in our law, and therefore it would please me not to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the physician knows how to respond when asked about it, and knows the treatment; and the other is that we often need to cauterize some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 I say therefore that cautery is done in two ways: by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the one that we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the joints are softened and relaxed; then take them with your hand until they are set and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Of tail castration: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspension, and strike each testicle with one blow, when they are well drained; and leave some of the subtle fat on the vessels; and this method of castration is milder than that done by attraction, because in attraction sometimes something remains of the testicles, causing the beast to desire lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	 Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 A hermaphrodite is in two ways among men: one way is that between the two testicles there appears as if by the nature of a woman, with hair, and sometimes urine passes through it.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other way is in women, and it appears on the wrist like a wand and two tendons.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 And the treatment for men and women is that you cut all the hairs close, and treat it as other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine flows through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	 of the tendon
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 The tendon is a close-cropped hair on the natural part, which is too unsightly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 You should dye the excess of the tendon with your hand or tweezers, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep, lest blood come out, then treat it like other wounds until it heals; and there is another hair that grows at the mouth of the womb, and fills up, and perhaps flows heavily, and looks like a cow's udder, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Si it is necessary that you cut [it], as we have said about the tendon, and treat [it] until it is healed.
de erratique	 of the tendon
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 Erratic [it] is when the woman's nature is not open, or the passage is small; it is natural from birth, or accidental due to illness that has come; whether it is caused by a narrowing of the vagina, or a subtle or thick cervix, and it is done deeply in the womb, or on the side, or below, or wherever; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly menstruation; and the knowledge of this is through the sight of the vulva.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the stupor is approaching, seek to your right or left hand.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If it is of subtle syphilis, and it is close to two pounds, then hurry; the course will be as follows: place your two index fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back, with her legs spread; then stretch out the two pounds very well, until the subtle syphilis is round and covered by the dressing; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman lie down each day, so that it cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the syphilis is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a scalpel similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dressing is of new flesh, then suspend it with a hook and cut it; and have hemostatic medicines such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, along with plenty of egg; then apply a wide lead plate so that the wound cannot heal; and thus let it be for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when in the flesh comes a boil, then it must be covered in this manner, unless it is an infected abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For an infected abscess that is in the flesh, one should not touch or do anything to it.
des emorroides	 of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually occur without cause, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become hard; and we have already said in the division their similarities, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and hard lumps, when they are embedded deeply in the flesh, and one does not feel them, then the treatment is not by cautery. xspace
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who are at the mouth of the wound, which can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Therefore, it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house; then apply the tweezers to the nipple and cut it at its roots; then sprinkle on medicines that restrain blood flow, such as acacia, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things; then soak her feet against a wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there is continuous bleeding, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rind and galls and similar things; then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make one poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if he faints, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If not, have him suck on cupping glasses at the back and breasts without piercing; then take wool, and soak it in juice of plantain or juice of hawthorn with old wine, and apply to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess has subsided, treat the place with onion until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp thistle, for this you must cover as I have said above; then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	 Of abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many types of abscess occur in the anus, such as chancres, purulent abscesses, herpes, styomiatae, fistulae, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and many other illnesses that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Il is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess that comes to the bone, which is not one of those that form a boil; and if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is sharp at its beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Then do not hasten to pierce, but let the abscess mature until the pain is relieved; and then have the patient sit on a stool, and place two small stools where he can lean back, and support his back, and bring his feet together at the sides of the leg; and let his thighs be spread apart, and have him put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good ligature; then give him something to drink towards the left side, and bring to this side the instrument with which one works on the mouth of the abscess, from which comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see this instrument being brought, that you first insert the reed into the abscess to know its depth, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the abscess with cloths, so that the instrument does not harm it; and it is necessary that he put the horn of the instrument on top, and that he moisten the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess opens, and you make an incision in it with your hand gently, then you must cover it at the top with a poultice of fresh milk; and when the pustule is emptied, then you must place on the wound cloths moistened in rose oil or in dried green oil; and put the cloth over the wound to the bottom of the swelling, and put another one over the swelling and on the arm a clean linen cloth moistened in water where mallows have been cooked; then cure it after two days of greasing according to this, until it is healed; and sometimes lift the swelling and the wound with an enema of water and honey, and then of water with lily roots and long-boiled arisotogelon; then return to greasing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is infected in the flesh, you must avoid using an iron cautery, but treat it as we have said in the section on healing.
de l’enfantement	 of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 It is first necessary for the midwife to recognize the natural form of childbirth, and the sign of this is when you see a woman pushing downwards and desiring to smell the air: then hasten the child to come out forcefully; then know that this childbirth is according to the natural form, and the issue is under its head, and the afterbirth with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly, so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends onto its head, the afterbirth comes out with it, and the woman is purified of her superfluities by good purging; and those who come otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 Because it sometimes happens on his feet, and it comes upon the body or the head, and the hands, where it occurs on the belly or the buttocks, and by chance is turned onto his neck, and in other evil forms; therefore, it is necessary for the nurse that she be wise and skillful in these matters, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one should help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 If the child comes out on his head through natural birth, and the woman labors greatly, and her strength is weak, then let her sit upon a saddle, where the women hold her; and raise her nature with oil or cooked fenugreek, and then the nurse puts between his teeth the small spatula whose form is here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And split the secondine, and cut to its fingernail so that the moisture inside comes out; and hold the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must enema the woman with fenugreek decoction mixed with sesame oil; then make her press and sneeze condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands come out strongly, then you must gently push them back bit by bit; and if they cannot go in, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high; then knock over the seat onto the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the falling; and if the hand cannot go in, and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife mentioned before, and extract the child, and set it right.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the child's exit on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes on its feet, then you must push it upwards; and then turn it little by little, until it is even; then take one of the feet and extend it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 When he leaps up to his knees, then command him to take hold of it, and make it sneeze by conditioning; if it is stronger, then so be it, if God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 And if he is not as strong as we have said, then turn him little by little, until he is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 For then he is lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if he does not come as we have said, then take mullein of altitude, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all together in a mortar; and put this ointment on the woman’s nature inside and outside; then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs; and when she is well-soaked underneath, give her a drink of honey, and place it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child now leaps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 Of the child's birth upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this manner, let the midwife put her hands little by little; then let it be supported on its neck, and let the feet hang down, and let it lie on the bed; and bend its hands little by little, and then take the hands up to the belly, and remove the cushions from below, until she is prepared; and if the child does not jump, take its feet and move them strongly, then move the belly upwards, then put your hands in; and take the child little by little; and instruct the woman to hold herself until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 Of the issue of the child that comes with one hand hanging down
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to design a device to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman stand up and walk; if she cannot walk, then lay her on the bed and spread her legs widely; then introduce the muslin cloth that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, and study to bring back the hand; and examine the child according to its natural form, and make it sneeze, and instruct her to grasp until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 of the exit of the child onto its neck, and have its hands spread out, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the midwife touch her hand, then turn it little by little, and examine it gently; and when it is equal, place on top the natural muslin cloth with oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little; and when you have done this, have her sit on a chair, and instruct her to grasp; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 By this same manner to all the secondary
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When it comes out forcefully in this manner to all the secondary, cut the secondary with your fingernail until the moisture is emptied; and if the child turns on its face and on its neck, cut it from the navel so that it is not retained, and the child will die; then push the child back in until you have placed it as needed, and instruct the woman to take a breath: then it will come out easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 Two are an extraordinary thing, and do not live, if at all; I know that they are multiplied by the siphon which divides them, which is attached to the navel; and sometimes they come out as naturally as one alone, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they come out badly, then treat it as we have said, and let the healer be skilled, and act quickly and lightly as she does; and act thus so that it moves to safety.
de plusors enfans	 of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 At times they are formed in the womb, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or many up to fifteen, and all are fully formed like children by the measure of the wise glorious one, and it is necessary that the healer know all these things, for perhaps similar things happen; so act accordingly as is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	 of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you treat the woman for a dead child in the womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out on its own, and you are compelled to use your hands; then it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fear of death; then let the woman be laid on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised; and the attendant holds a thread at two places where she lies on the bed so that she may not fall during the child's descent; then anoint the mouth of the womb with moist oil mixed with muscillaige of althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then let the healer anoint his hands with these oils and these muscillaiges; then gently push them into the womb, then seek one place where she may push the hook that is suitable for this, and take care if the child is ready to descend on its head; then insert the hook into its eyes or neck or mouth or in some part of the palate or under the beard or in the groin or near the sides, and if the descent is on the feet, then insert it in the finger and in the middle of the ribs; and it is necessary that he hold the hook with his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and gently push his whole hand, and insert the hook into any of these places that we have said, until it reaches the empty space; and this is the shape of the hook:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then thrust one hook against the other, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal; and then stretch them equally by moving from one side to the other, so that the hooks may come out, and let the hooks be sharpened to hold better, as shown in this form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if a part remains, then smear the ball of one of his fingers with oil and push it into that part, and pull out the other part; and if there is nothing left, then place this hook in a higher spot, and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be pulled back due to tightness, then you must wrap it in a cloth until it all comes out; then cut off at the base of the foot or with a knife, and so you should do for the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow at the exit, or if there is a sharp angle in the forehead, then you must insert a thorny spatula between your teeth, and split the forehead and extract the sharpness; or you can use the instrument called "almidach," which comes with the instruments in the following chapter; and do the same if the child has a large natural head; then pull the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is constrained by the pelvic brim, it should be split until the moisture that is in the worst exit can come out; and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if the belly or under the ribs is swollen, then you must pierce it until the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 And if the child is standing on its feet, then the attraction is light, and the guidance to the mother's mouth is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And if it is inverted in the belly or the breast, then you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and puncture the belly or the breast, until the moisture that is there runs out; and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, then push the heel of your hand into the depths of the mother's abdomen, and pull it to the mother's mouth; then put one or two fingers in, and pull strongly; and if the mother's mouth is constricted because of a hot swelling that has come there, then you should not strain, but rather administer moist and greasy things; and the administrator applies plasters, and uses warm softening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the child is on his side, and you can set him straight, then treat it as we have said for the living child; and if you cannot, then draw out the arrow piece by piece, leaving nothing of the fletching behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when you have done this, treat it as we have said for abscesses that come into the flesh; and if there is a flow of blood, put it in warm water to stop the bleeding, and give other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 And I saw a woman in whose womb one child had died, then another was born above that one, and the other also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After a long time she developed an abscess in her womb, which swelled so much that it burst open and began to fester greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I was called to tend to it, and thought about it for a long time, yet the wound could not be healed.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I placed on it a strong plaster, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I was greatly amazed by this, for the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 So I thought that it must be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I probed the wound, and took out many bones, until the woman was in better condition; and she lived for a long time thus, and it often oozed a little from the place; and I have remembered this chapter only because, when a master finds something strange, he should know how to apply help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 to return the bone to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 Hereafter comes the form of the press, to which one attaches the weights; and at two turns are the two eyes of the two levers.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the restrainer, and should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the wood should be two thumbs wide, and the margin of the trees one thumb, and in length a palm and a half; and between the two levers there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are fastened to each other at both ends, half a palm long or a little more; and these two adjustments are pushed into the mouth of the bone to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, more subtle and lighter, made from ebony wood or boxwood, resembling pincers; it should have at the two ends two adjustments, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide; and when you wish to open the vulva with the entire instrument, let the woman sit on a bed, her feet dangling and her legs spread apart, then push the two adjustments together into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then work your hand over the entire instrument, as you have done with the pincers equally, according to the amount you wish to open the mouth of the vulva, until the bailiff does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 This instrument are all assembled, and their appearances are varied; and when the physician has prepared them, the work is more urgent, and higher for men due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 Do not despair of the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze gently, and keep your hands over her mouth and nose; if she faints from this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If not, take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cinnamon and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over the fire. Then put a reed or tube from the pot into the mouth of the woman, and hold it until the vapor enters inside her. Then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 If the ligament is quickly torn.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if it remains after this treatment, and is not very strong, then instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand in olive oil or muslin with althea, and then insert it into the vagina, and seek for the ligament; and when she has found it, then take hold of it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the uterus does not prolapse at the extraction; but it must be moved lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; and it will come out and relax.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 And if the mouth of the uterus is narrowly constricted, we have said the treatment for sneezing, and fumigation with herbs; and if it does not do so from all that we have said, then be careful not to be foolish in pulling; but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the uterus, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then give her an enema with tetrafarmacon oil; and it will soften and return, and come strong; but nevertheless, when it softens, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and it hurts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 If it is necessary, therefore, suitable fumigations for this are as follows: some of the ancients have proven fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for retention of the menses and afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 It is made of glass, similar to a reed, and the fine end is inserted into the vagina, while the wide end is placed over the fire; and let the fumigation be on charcoal, and continue until it has been thoroughly smoked out, and then begin again with another.
de percier lou fondement	 to pierce the anus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many children are born with their anus not yet pierced, but rather closed by a thin membrane: it is therefore necessary for the midwife to pierce this membrane with her finger, and she should not pierce it with a sharp point, and be careful that she does not touch the linen with her hand; then place on moistened linen in wine and oil, then continue with ointment treatment until it is healed.  ?>
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 And if you doubt that it will not heal, place a lead tube in the opening, and leave it for a few days, and remove it when the child wants to go into the rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 And sometimes this blockage comes from the sudden closing of a wound or an abscess; then you must cover that sudden closure: and it should be treated as we have said with the lead tube.
de la fistule dou fondement	 of the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular, and those that come near the anus or in the space of the two parts, whether there is one fistula or several; and when this nodulation is old, it works, and also produces more moisture, either white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are known by the fact that something comes out in the evacuation or flatulence when the patient has an evacuation, and perhaps one of them bursts.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 And so with fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and halfway through the penis; and they reach as far as the hip joint, and to the end of the heel.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one knows the fistula penetrating into the anus, and not penetrating: it is that you insert your finger in the anus, and thrust a subtle needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 And if there is twistiness, then thrust a subtle leaden tent or horsehair into it, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and nothing comes out of the hole except wind or dung, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; then hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 And when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the passage of urine, then the urine leaks out, and it cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is perforated to the junction of the thigh, then the swelling comes to that place; if there is no twist and the pain surrounds the area, then it leaks out constantly, and neither medicine nor salve by ointment helps; and in these penetrating fistulas there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish physicians who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In the one that is not penetrating and is not old, there is hope of health through iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he raises his legs up to his thighs, and let his thighs be inclined towards his belly; then insert a probe of iron, or of lead if there is a twist, so that you know where the probe comes out.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must insert your index finger, and if you then feel that the tent has been pierced; and if it is uncovered where you sense between your finger the sinus or flesh, then know that it is a fistula; in which case do not labor over it, for it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 However, it can be said that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely; and the help that is done for them is that one heats a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and inserts it very hot into the fistula until it reaches near the anus; and does this two or three times, so that you know that those fleshy parts are burnt, which resemble a bird's feather; and then cures the wet tent with butter, until that flesh comes out, then cures the wound with ointment, grease, and suturing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If he is healed thus, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If not, he cannot be healed in any other way; and if the tent between the fingers does not penetrate to the bone that is at the base, and there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula where the covering ends at the heart; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push the tent forward always, and afterwards cauterize until it reaches the tip of the tent; and the tent will be freed and fall; then clean away those fleshy parts that resemble a bird's feather, and let nothing remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 And if the pus overcomes you and flows between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or strong medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Car the fire cautery brings together two good things: namely, the burning of these hairs close to each other, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then cure of wet tents in butter or crushed substances, until the place swells, and thus the burned flesh remains in the swelling; then treat the wound with hardening ointments that dry out flesh, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 When it is healed, it is healthy and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 And if the fistula reaches to the very bottom of the anus and is distant from the body, if you push your finger into the anus and search thus.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tent, and there are two layers between it, either linen or silk or flesh, and it is about to perforate, there is no remedy other than by means of one of these three ways: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut through to the bottom, or if you can, place tents and treat it as before; but do not go too deep, lest you cut the ligament that holds the anus, causing involuntary excretion; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will heal, or remove that covering and clean it after it is cut near the anus, either with a tent or with another appropriate instrument; then clean away the dead flesh in the wound as much as you can; then endeavor to restore the wound, and make the fistula remain in the part outside the anus: this will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And sometimes fistulas are like this: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 And put a twisted thread in it, and push the tent along with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is pus in the margin of the anus within, then extract the thread from that opening, so that you put your finger into the anus; and pull the head of the thread, and join the two ends together, and press one against the other, and leave it for one day or two; and constrict sometimes, until the thread cuts these fleshy parts that are between the two, and drop; then treat the wound until it is healed and cured.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 If the fistula does not burst, then make it burst in all ways that you can, unless it is too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it is not right to cover the wound so deeply for healing, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The form of the spatula-shaped needle used for making the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side it is not, so that you do not cut what you should not cut, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	 hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there may be small or large ones, and blood flows from them; and there may be one or several, and they are outside the anus and at the edge of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture, and sometimes a little citrine water or a little blood comes out, and they have the color of the body; and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to wash so as to go into the room, until the anus protrudes from him, and the threads appear; then hurry, and hold it with tongs, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut its roots; and if the fingers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with a small cloth, or with cotton, or with a piece of linen; and stretch them between your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle some hot powders on top that are suitable for cauterization; or cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat with other treatments until healed; and if the anus cannot protrude, then give the patient a harsh and bitter enema to clean what is in the anus so that it can come out openly; when the patient sits down, and the threads come out of the anus, the treatment is light; and it is that you take them with your fingernail or with tongs, and cut them, then treat them as we have said until healed, and let him fear the iron incision.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If you must sew according to this method: take a thread, put it through a needle, then pull the thread out and make the needle go through from the other side; turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and make it wide; tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, leaving one for draining excess blood; then place a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate on the wound, and tell the patient to rest; and leave it until it heals, and when they have healed, treat them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 of dryness from the bottom
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 Often there is dryness in the intestines due to natural constraint, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no use.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then you must scrape off the skin with a spatula or your fingernail, so that it does not moisten; then treat it until it is dry as it should be; and if it cannot dry out, then start scraping again more strongly than before, until it bleeds a lot and is scraped away; then treat it until it heals.
dou fremit	 from shivering
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 Ants are a small insect that lives under the skin and goes very deep; sometimes it feels cold, and one experiences it like death from shivering, and it affects the whole body, but more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the cure is such that you take a quill of a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this quill on the trembling, until the circle encompasses the entire trembling; then turn your hand to all the quill so that you strike around the entire trembling, and insert it deeply, and uproot the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if you see this, do so with a quill of iron or steel according to this form, and let it be subtle below and drawn above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 nor should it be perceived, to move and hold the two, and press more And if you see this, then cauterize the trembling, as it is written in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	 About the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 Any time one makes an enema of silver or copper, or of melted bronze or iron; and sometimes these instruments are made in small and large sizes, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 Therefore, those intended for the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The form of the small and large enema is thus wide at the top, where the stomach is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And there should be an opening where the stomach is tied, as you see, and the head should be perforated inside; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other one; and the stomach where one puts the medicines should be made from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and it should be perforated all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be one finger's width, then insert into these holes a strong thread of twisted wool in the shape of X or O, and assemble the stomach like a goat; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then give an enema; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, and the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold,
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you give him an enema in case of diarrhea, and the medicine rushes out, then restart it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle enema where the skin should be pulled taut:
des plaies	 wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 We have already spoken in the section on the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines, according to their preparation.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere,
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care whether it is from the fall of a stone or similar things, and if the skin is nevertheless torn and the wound is large, and you doubt a hot abscess: then make it bleed immediately with cephalic vein blood, even if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be opposite to the injured part; and advise the patient against overindulgence in wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he does not want to bleed, let his food be reduced, and do not let him drink wine or eat meat; and put on the wound, if there are hot abscesses, only cotton soaked in rose oil or stiptic wine; and if there is no hot abscess, put on the fresh wound with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if the heat has moved it, put on some ointments until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 And if the wound is large, such as from a sword cut or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together with sutures, as I will say for the wounds of the belly, with suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is exposed to the bone, and deep, and does not hold together except at one point, then cut it off; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as cheese and cooked wheat, as well as beans, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find rottenness in the skin, and it reaches to the bone, then cut away all the rotten flesh, and throw it away, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped with tourniquets and cannot be staunched by medicines, then seek the artery, and if you find it displaced, then tie it off with a thread; and if that does not help at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: which is that you put in this powder before the fire has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the method of the powder is this: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; and live coal three parts, and make it into a fine powder, and fill the wound with it, and bind it tightly, until it heals well and adheres to all its flesh; and then tie it firmly, and leave it without untying, if it does not swell; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 And sometimes one does this with only live coal, when one does not have frankincense or dragon's blood, but the fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the fire has moved the wound, even in summer, do not put any of this powder on it; but put some cooked onions, or poultices made from barley flour with water and honey, until it weeps; then continue other cures until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if there is a bone fracture with the wound, and it is small, extract it with fine tweezers; and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	 from the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one in the head, but if a nerve of the neck or an artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is the nerve, there is no other device than to leave the wound alone and not put anything constraining on it, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be lukewarm, like warm water in soft water, mixed with rose oil, and washed with warm water, and other similar stones according to this manner, and moist dressings.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the wound is large, sew it up and bind it with bandages, then leave it to heal.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wound is deep and the vein has been cut and is full of blood, pierce it lower down; and if an artery has been cut and blood flows out, then stop it, and let it lie still, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the windpipe has been cut, or the heart, and the passage is blocked so that food cannot pass, then sew up the windpipe on the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape; and then bind it tightly, and leave it for some days, then treat it with drying dressings until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, draw them out completely if you can, and those that you cannot have, let them remain until the wound rots, and is emptied and cleared of the passage; and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle powder on the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 of the spear or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a blow from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, observe if there are any signs of inflammation when the patient exhales: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it for fear that the blood does not soak deeply, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient; but apply a drawing ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, then put old cotton on the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; and there will be no spasms, nor bad tremors of the heart or outpouring of breath; and when you see favorable conditions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat it with poultices and other treatments until it is healed; and if it cannot be healed, and it continues to drain, know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And if the wound is from the incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple, on the buttocks or back, treat it like those in front; if it is large, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder. And if it presses against the bone and has chipped pieces, seek out the wound, and remove the splinters if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound fester, which will ease the extraction. And for other wounds on other limbs, the treatment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 Of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 The rupture of the belly is great and medium and small; from the great wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, which is why their reintroduction is difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one because it is harder to put the intestines back in, unless they are inserted hot; because the intestine swells as soon as it feels the cold, so it goes back less easily, and that's why the medium-sized wound is better, because it is easier to put the intestine back in place than the others. And know that the suturing of the belly is according to IV manners: the II common sutures occur in the suturing of the belly, and the suturing of other wounds of the body and II other proper sutures are common with other wounds; however, they are more specific with the suturing of the belly, and I will speak of each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestines has come out, and it is a serious matter to put them back, this can be done in two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a piece of cloth in tepid water only, or cook the intestine in hot water with cinnamon and cloves; and rinse the intestine until the swelling is removed; and sometimes this wine restraining, and it is better for unswelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling disappear, moisten the intestine in water where althea and mallows have been cooked, for by this the entrance is made easier; and if it cannot enter, make a small opening in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first cure is better than cutting, for no one should cut without great necessity; and this is the instrument to split it: cut inside along the curve and not outside, and here is its shape.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is widened, and the intestines leap out, then reset them back according to their natural form in their proper place, if you can, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place the head and the chest higher than the lower parts, and likewise if the wound is in one of the two parts of the belly, focus so that the wounded part is higher than the other; and thus you must administer this in large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 And in small wounds, use what you have prepared, then take between your hands a skillful minister who can hold all the wound at his hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common manner of sutures, which is that you take one needle or more according to the width of the wound, then leave two fingers' width from the head of the wound, and there stick a needle where it has a good strong thread; and pierce through the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the hypodermis, which is under the skin inside, until you make it pierce from that side, and bring together the two heads of the hypodermis four at once; then straddle a double thread around the needle on both sides, then bring together the two lips of the wound likewise, and then leave two fingers' width, and there stick another needle; then tie the thread as you have done with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need for the needles, until all the wound is constrained; and let the needles be medium-sized, between subtle and large, because subtle needles cut through all the flesh, and very large ones cannot enter well: therefore they must be medium-sized; and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and tear the wound before the suture; and then cut off the heads of the needles, so that they do not wound the patient in their sleep, and put bandages or cloths on the heads of the needles to keep them better, and leave them until the wound is healed; and this manner of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices with one or two needles in the second suture, which is common, which is that you bring together the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the hypodermis at once with a needle where there is a good medium-strong thread; and when you have pierced these heads all four at once, then turn back the needle to the side where you began, in the manner one sews clothes; and put space between each suture the thickness of a small finger: this suture is known by men, and I sewed up a wound that a man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and welled from the intestines more than two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I returned the intestines to him after twenty-four hours had passed, and the wound was healed for fifteen days, and I cared for it, and it became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not cure him with oil, for I was in a place where none was found, nor any medicine; and I put on the wound twice a day old cotton wool, and I washed it with water of honey until he was healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching: take the needle, and push it from the outside to the inside; when it has pierced through in a straight line, leave the knot on the siphac or thread where you pushed the needle, and make it pierce through again from the inside to the outside; and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew as the furriers make fur, and that you leave the siphac once on one side, and take it again on the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second manner of suturing, which Galen correctly says, is done as some do, who naturally bring together the two parts and apply one of the heads of the needle to the other head in this way: insert a needle into the head of the mirror close by, and make it pierce only that place, and leave the two heads of the needle; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside part until inside, at the two heads of the needle; then make it pierce one and the other from the outside part until inside, in two other places of the mirror which are on either side; and this is the second manner of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galen said these words, and some testify to this, that one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; and one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew straps; and know that when the suture is in the middle of the belly, it is more painful than other places on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the fire has moved it, then you should resume cauterizing the intestine and the seam; then apply a powder made from flesh, and if the fire has moved it, then apply some ointment that is readily available until the wound heals; and pull out the threads, and let the silk and bandage be joined together; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, then as soon as it begins to cast pus, apply old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 For you do not need any other medicine in many situations when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will spread to the main members, then it is necessary that you soak a light cloth in temperate oil or rose oil, and place it around the ankles, and under the armpits; and if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then administer an enema of warm red wine, and likewise if the putrefaction reaches the intestines; puncture it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the thinness of its walls and the subtlety of the whole body, and its closeness in nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the intestine exits from the wound, put it back like the intestines, as long as it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned black or green, then you must tie the black area so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries; then cut the part between the ligatures, and hang the two ends from beneath the wound until it is finished to ease the extraction when the intestine falls out, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	 of the boil's root
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine is cut and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, for I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into an abscess, and from it came pus and flatulence; I applied treatment as best I could, and did not cease until he was healed, and the place was closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I saw it sutured, I feared that the patient had pain in his belly; and there was no pain, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such a manner: take large-headed pins, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the pin has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it draws its mouth up; and then strike the head, and this holds so that it cannot untie itself, then place another pin after in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely grasped; and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 That chief so hardens in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the head of this intestinal thread which should be very thin, and then tie at the head of this thread a fine twisted linen thread, then pass the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and mend it in the rupture; and this method of suturing is not outside of hope and expectation; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal veins, there is no skill or health, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 Of fistula, wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called «fistula», and similarly when it bursts and releases pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And according to the truth, fistula is a hard and white swelling, in which there is no pain, and it is open like the feather of a bird; sometimes it releases clear pus, other times thick; sometimes little, other times enough; and I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound that does not heal and has no flesh is only cured by one of the nine causes: namely, by the smallness of blood or body; or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, on the lips, which prevents new flesh from growing; or there is too much pus; or the place is rotten and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good for the cure; or because the corruption is like a plague; or because the nature of the region is slow in digestion, and slow to heal, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 Or I must inform you of the treatment for a fistula caused by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Know that fistulas can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the spleen, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and also such that comes to the property of the main member, and in similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And all the fistulas that are of this nature are of serious cure, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have said, and you trust in the cure, and wish to know it, then take a probe of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, then search for it; and if the fistula is crooked, then search for it with a subtle probe of boxwood, because boxwood bends more around the curvature; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot search well with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for the moisture runs from one opening to another, and cleans it; then search wisely as much as you can, so that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and cut deeply, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels at the pressing of your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you truly know the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places I have told you, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the corruption and rotten flesh that is inside; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep in a straight place, then you must cut deeply as much as you can, then put moist probes in healing medicine, and push them to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom; and then put dressings of fresh flesh on it, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupt from the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If a vein or nerve is hurt in the main members, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, so clean it until all the corruption is removed, then treat with things that draw flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and returns again as before, know that you have not reached the source: uncover and seek until you are at the source, remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach it; there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature. And if there is a small piece of bone corrupted and you can draw it out with tongs, then draw it out with an instrument suitable for this purpose. And if there are many pieces of bone, then draw them all out, do not leave any one behind; and if moisture hinders you, and there is no error or fear, then cut and moisten and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove [them] within an hour, then place on the wound something that causes putrefaction, and leave it until the place around the bones is putrid; and then the bones will be removed more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then wait only until all the blackness is gone, then close the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption, and it reaches to the marrow of the bone; then you must cut and chop all the way to the corruption, and then cure [it] until it is healed; and I will tell you about an ulcer that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 Il fut un jeune homme d'environ trente ans qui souffrait de douleurs dans sa jambe en raison d'une cause interne au corps, jusqu'à ce que les matières atteignent la jambe, provoquant une inflammation d'un gros abcès. Il n'y avait aucune raison apparente pour l'ouvrir; mais les médecins, par leur folie, ont continué à travailler dessus jusqu'à ce que l'abcès s'ouvre, et beaucoup de matières en sortaient. Il est devenu une fistule, avec de nombreux trous qui évacuaient tous du pus et des liquides corporels; et plusieurs médecins ont traité cela pendant deux ans sans succès. Finalement, je fus appelé pour voir sa jambe et les médicaments utilisés, ainsi que ce qui sortait par les trous en grande quantité; la peau du jeune homme devenait rouge et prenait une teinte citrine.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 Je set up a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that some were coming towards each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 I then hastened and cut into one of the holes until I uncovered part of the bone, which I found to be rotten and perforated, and the corruption reached the inside of the bone; I removed what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and thought that there was no other corruption except for that which I removed; and I began to treat the wound with softening medicines for a long time, but it would not heal; then I reopened the wound and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, which I removed, and then attempted to heal the place; but I could not do so until I cut around a palm's width of the bone, and drew it out completely, then treated it with medicines; and it healed and closed quickly, and there was no need to reopen the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 Because of the evacuation, he often bled profusely, but he was entirely healed, and a hard flesh grew in place of the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in some part of the body, it should be set in this manner: take a ligature, and place it at the end of the bone that is open; and command someone to extend it upwards; and put another ligature of linen thicker than the first ligature, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone, and stretch the end so that you draw the corrupted flesh downwards, and expose the flesh in the place where you want to set [the bone], so that the ligature does not cut into the flesh; and put a glowing ember or a piece of wood under the bone to move the corrupted flesh; and it should be set as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and set again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, and then put a coal underneath; puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, and then saw from one part to the other through the corruption; et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, and let the saw be as long as the corruption is deep, as we have said; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, and if the corruption is in the joint; si cope la jointure corrumpue, and cut the corrupted joint; et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part, and saw the bone where it contains it on the other side; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints; si n’i a autre angien que dou coper, there is no other remedy than to cut; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, or ou poignil dou piet, it is very difficult if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot; si est mout fort celle chose, but nevertheless you must investigate this corruption; coment elle t’apert, how it opens up to you; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, and cleanse it in all the ways that you can; mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire, but that the vein or nerve does not hinder you; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, and know that there are many saws and needles for cutting these bones; selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, according to the position of the bones and their appearance; et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, and their thickness and subtlety; et lor grandor et lor petitece, and their size and smallness; et lor duresce, and their hardness; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument, and therefore you must prepare for each similar work its instrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, and know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need; selonc la conissance de cest art, according to the knowledge of this art; et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient. consider the instrument of which you have need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	 From fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head rots from within or without; and when you have treated that rotting with the care of medicines, and they do not benefit, then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the place where the rotting comes, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater evil of the loss of the limb. And the sign is that the limb turns black, as if it were burnt by fire, and rots after the blackness; then this rotting spreads from member to member throughout the body; therefore hasten the amputation. And if it is due to the bite of some venomous animals, such as a sea scorpion or viper and the like, if the rotting is at the head of the arm, amputate it, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 And if it goes up to the hand, then cut at the joint so that the corruption does not go up to the arm; and if it goes to the arm, then cut with a knife; and if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the quantity of its virtue; and do likewise when the corruption comes to the foot: if it goes into the first joint, then cut after the next joint; and if it goes to the foot, then cut off the whole foot; and if it goes up the leg, then cut at the knee joint; and if it goes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die; and the manner of cutting or sawing the limb is such that you tie it above and below, and extend one cord downwards and another cord upwards, and you divide the flesh that is between the two cords into a wide slit, so that the bone is exposed; then cut or saw, and place on each side a cloth of linen, so that the saw does not touch the healthy place, and thus comes to the patient another injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 Et si découvrement de sang vient quant tu oevres, hâte-toi de cautériser l'endroit, ou mets sur lui des poudres retenant; puis reviens à ta médication jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit accomplie, ensuite lie le membre blessé avec une bande convenable, et soigne-le jusqu'à ce qu'il guérisse; et je te dirai qu'il arriva à un homme dans son pied: il lui arriva une noirceur qui semblait être brûlure de feu, et cette corrosion vint d'abord dans son doigt du pied, tant qu'elle pourrit tout le pied; et quand l'homme vit la corrosion, il se hâta de couvrir le pied, et fut guéri; et longtemps après, la corrosion revint dans le doigt de la main, et il vint à moi, et je mis sur lui des choses répercussives après la purification du corps, et ne put cesser la corrosion; et il voulut que je coupe sa main, et je n'ai pas voulu, car j'espérais repousser la matière; et j'ai craint aussi que si je taillais sa main, qu’il ne meure, car les forces de l'homme étaient faibles; et il se désespéra tout entier, et retourna dans son pays, et se hâta de couvrir sa main, et fut guéri; et je n’ai connu ce cas que pour en faire un exemple, si on en a besoin.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 When there is an abscess in a fleshy place, it stays so long that it forms a large swelling; and then it breaks open and leaks pus, and the place remains empty, like a vessel; and the skin above it is as thin as fine linen, and does not reach to the bone or nerve. Such an illness is called "sinus," and is not called "fistula"; but if it grows so long that it reaches the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula"; and such skin is that you can cut all around the skin, even when it is thin, like fine linen; and it does not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if you believe that the skin has hardened, and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cure it thus with an enema: look if the breast is large, and the excrement that comes out of it is foul-smelling, then use an Egyptian medicine to enema it, which is made like this: take asafoetida, oil, and lead, in equal parts, and put them to cook in a vessel over fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey; and then take some of this according to your need, and make an enema with water and honey, and enema the breast, and close the orifice; and leave the medicine inside for 2 hours, then draw it out by squeezing; do this many times until the breast is cleansed, and the pus is removed; and sometimes use a cinder water enema when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take cinders of vine wood, and pour water over them, then strain it, and enema it, until you know that the breast is well cleansed; and if the patient cannot bear it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the cinder water, then use an enema of water and honey in which there is a little ground lead; or you can make an enema of honey and mixed wine, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the flesh dry; and when you have done this, and you are sure that the breast is well cleansed, then use an enema to draw out what grows in it, and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you can use some medicines and onions, whose properties I have mentioned in the treatise of onions; and if the breast's orifice is small, and the enema tube cannot enter, then widen it slightly with an iron, and insert a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicum ointment, until it is widened; and if the wound is too large, then sew it up and leave only one place where the enema can enter, and if the excrement comes out from above, then cut lower than that.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the abscess is ripe, it should not be allowed to infiltrate flesh; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then prepare in such a way that the abscess runs to the lowest place there is, for when the abscess is ripe, it should not be allowed to infiltrate flesh. And if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, then prepare in this manner: that the abscess runs lightly downward, and nothing remains of the abscess; and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and extend over a linen cloth that covers all the wound; then cut with force against the opening of the breast, the hole wider than the first, then extend an ointment gently over another cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the opening of the wound to lighten the abscess, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days; and that which is over the opening of the breast, often remove to remove the abscess, and know what comes out of the abscess, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see nature rise over the opening of the wound, know that the breast is already healed, and health approaches; and then uncover it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you uncover the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 Et si li seins gete boue indigeste apres maint jour, saiches que li seins ne s'aert mie.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poison spreads after a long time, do not despair of health, for healing approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 And there are people whose wounds heal slowly, and some do the opposite; and if indigestible matter comes out of the wound after many days, know that the wound does not heal; and if the wound is slow to heal and distant, then apply drying medicines, moist in substance but dry in power, as defined ointment, for there is a great deal of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine. Take defined ointment, and make it with rose oil, and sprinkle old wine equal in substance on top; then cook and use it; and when the defined ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them into a powder over honey when it is on the fire; then apply it to a cloth and place it on the wound; sometimes a long-lasting remedy and celestial lily roots are added, which are like vetch flour and centaury; and use simple or compound medicines: grind them into a powder and put them on the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has penetrated deeply, and presses on the bone, or on hard members, or on joints; so treat it as you would for fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 of the abscess on the fingernail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 Paronychia is an abscess that forms under the fingernail of the hand or foot, or it may form in other fingers; and when it ages and is not treated, a similar abscess develops, spreading and swelling until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly the entire nail; and the decay extends to the bone, causing foul-smelling pain, and the fingertip is wide, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the section on division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the remaining excess of the nail with a red-hot iron, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is clean; and if the nail presses into the flesh, and begins to prick and wound, then you must place the ray under the nail that touches the flesh, and push it up, and gently and subtly cut off that flesh, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the rest of the flesh to remove everything; then heal with onion remedies until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if there is corruption in the bone, cut it out and draw strongly, for as long as the corrupt bone remains, it cannot heal; and if you see the finger begin to rot, cut it off at one of the joints as mentioned before, then treat until healed; and if it is wounded, swollen, and causes great pain, you must first cleanse the wound; then cut the nail from the side with a sharp knife, being careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 The pain of the shoulder of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The two thumbs that happen to be born in the hands of some men are sometimes all fleshy, and sometimes there is one with bone, and sometimes there is a nail, and sometimes they are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 That which is born in the nail of the thumb does not move, and that which is born at the joint of the thumb sometimes moves; the shape of the one that is fleshy is light, thus: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	 That which is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; so hold yourself to the hook.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the case of one who is born or should be without an anus, you must first cut the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone with a saw suitable for this purpose, and then cure it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 The swelling that comes to the two together comes by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by the burning of fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Then you must cut that swelling so that they can be restored according to their natural forms; then place between two tents or dampened cloths in rose oil, so that they do not become swollen again; or you put between two thin pieces of lead until the place is healed as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 If suddenly one of his fingers comes with the palm, strike that swelling as is necessary.
des vils	 of villains
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 Veins are large swellings filled with excess of melancholic humor that come in many parts of the body; and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 Therefore, you must administer to him some purging of the bile, and then heal it with balm.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The treatment of iron is in two ways: the one is that you strike them and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you lift the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The treatment is as follows: first, raise the patient's leg with very hot water until the large vein becomes subtle. Then grasp the patient's leg from above the hip to below the knee; then strike the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide cut. Then lift and draw out the black blood strongly by hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's strength can bear; and then bind it, and command him to eat foods that generate black bile; and repeat the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and it benefits the patient. ------ End of Text ------
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The lifting of it is done in this manner: take the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in a bath, and wash the leg with hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins; and if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, then cut towards the vein from the knee to the ankle; then work the skin with the razor, and scrape the vein from each side, until it becomes apparent when touched; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white rope; then push the root down, so that it is lifted from the skin, then pinch it lightly at another place, then cut in another place above three fingers; then scrape the skin on the vein until it becomes apparent, then lift with the razor as you have done, and pinch at another razor, as you did first; then cut another notch, or several if you need them, then lift and cut at the toe of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second notch; then draw from notch to notch, until it comes out completely, then cut; and if you cannot pull and lift, then insert a needle with one strong double thread, and tie and pull, and push down a root, and turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out; and be careful that it does not cut, because if it cuts, then it cannot be pulled or lifted, and it causes harm to the patient; and when you have completely pulled it out, place moistened wool in wine and rose oil on the place of the wound; and heal as much as needed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the face is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not shave it; and draw it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The form of the iron used to shave the face is curved and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein; and it is of thick curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the form:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is entwined in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry earth; and it may also appear elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the rotting that comes under the skin, just as serpents and worms are entwined between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is such that there comes a very great inflammation in the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to protrude, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the head opens, it must be wrapped around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two and a half (spans?), including the knot, and let the cloth hang at the leg. And each time it issues out any, wrap it around the cloth and the knot; and if it is too long, cut off some part and wrap the rest, but do not cut it at its root until all of it has emerged; for if you cut it, it will re-enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad illness. Therefore, it must be treated little by little until the end, so that nothing remains in the body. And this vein, when it is treated from five palms long, or ten, and one man came to me whose (vein) issued ten palms long, and when you cut it, one root or hole will emerge, and pierce it all the way through until everything comes out. Then empty the matter that is inside, and apply medications daily on the place to prevent putrefaction, just as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And sometimes this vein is not painful, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and from it comes much pus, and then it may become painful; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 Of the worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often happens to cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and it goes throughout the body rising and falling, and one feels it well when moving from limb to limb until it reaches the skin where it goes, and it jumps out; and it is engendered by the corruption of some humors, just as worms and snakes and leeches and ascaris in the belly; and one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you see it being healed and drawn out, one cannot do more than when it goes: therefore, it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong ligature very tightly, then cut above and draw strongly, and if the pus has entered deeply into the flesh, and you cannot find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it runs to the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the head of the eye, hold the sorcil firmly below it, then cut above, and draw strongly; and one must use the patient for body cleansing with dissolving medicines for bad humors that cause putrefaction, and feed on foods that prevent putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and can move from one member to another; and I have seen those whom I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was called to an ailing woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and shortly after, I saw it rise up like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, as if quicksilver when it runs from place to place; the pain left that spot and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then a short time later it ran throughout the body until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it was turning around her body continuously, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 I marveled greatly at how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never before seen this illness in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 However, I had seen many who had experienced pain moving from one place to another, but I had never seen it as I saw in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and the veins were uncovered, and for this reason those constrained windinesses appeared; and it did not appear according to this reasoning with those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and full veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you see this illness being cured and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then immediately bind above and below, and then cut open until that constrained windiness comes out; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your own eyes, then cure it with those who dispel windinesses, such as stinking pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	 of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 Arrows vary according to their types and the parts of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The diversity of their types is such that there are those with large points and small ones, barbed and solid; and those with two edges, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and the one that strikes a member does so in two manners: it lodges in a principal member, as in the brain, heart, liver, lung, spleen, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it strikes one of these members and the signs of death that I will tell you about later appear: then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death follows in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not deeply lodged, then draw it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the signs of the skull when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and jumps the bone fragment that is on the skull, are faintness, dizziness, fainting, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of mind, vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is flow from the nose, or from the ears; and perhaps he loses his speech and voice; and from the wound moist white matter like brain, and also as a trickle of flesh; and if these signs appear to you, then hold yourself ready for the cure, and draw out the arrow if it is there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not hollow; and perhaps the arrow moves like a finger, and black blood flows from it, and coldness and cold sweat come on, and syncope: know then without doubt that death will follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 And the sign of an arrow that never leaves the wound is without foamy blood spurting from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And if the arrow falls into the cover of the chest, it is near the small ribs; and it causes great pain and great heaviness and breathing difficulty; and all the limbs from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested flesh will spurt from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 And if the arrow falls into the belly, and some fecal matter spurts from the intestines, there is no hope for a cure or the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 And if an arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine spurts out and flows away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulders and armpits and spine of the back and chest and hips and legs, and similar members, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you that happened to me, so that you may do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 It happened to me once that an arrow fell on the bridge of my nose at its root; I pulled it out, and pushed it through from the other side under the fat of the ear, and healed without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And he shot an arrow from a bow that struck him in the fat of the eye under the eyebrow below, and the arrow was stuck, and he could not reach anything but the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large, like a Turkish bow, with all its iron light without ears; the wound was healthy, and no evil incident befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And he shot an arrow from the throat at a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I shaved the beard, and refined until I shot it, and the Christian was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And he shot an arrow at a man, which had fallen into his stomach, and I thought he would die; but after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his disposition; I cut over the arrow, and fastened it, and shot it strongly, and he had no evil incident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if you see a man in whom an arrow fell into the back, and the wound was closed over it; and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural disposition, nor did he find any harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And if you see another man, in whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was closed; and he remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others like him.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And pulled an arrow from a man of the king's princes, which had fallen into his nose, and was inclined slightly to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded. I was called to the care after it fell for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 Si j'avoie a traitre le sang en luy?
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 Et je trouvai la plaie si estreinte que elle avoit peu d'entrée pour l'air venir dedenz.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 Quant je viz l'emplaistre, il fu si bien ajustez que ele tenoit moult fermement sur la plaie, et ele ne se remuoit point.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 Et quant je le vi, ele fu si bien ajustez que ele tenoit moult fermement sur la plaie, et ele ne se remuoit point.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 Et quant ele fu overte, la tentai et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the doctors judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored; yet I restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was made whole.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 And I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you may apply your cure to those which I do not speak of, for the book cannot include everything; but the wise master compares well from a small thing, and from what is present and defective, he finds new work and new instruments in the practice of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows should not be removed from the members in which they are fixed except in two ways: either through the place where they entered or from another side; and those which go out through the place where they entered are arrows entering into fleshy places, and such sometimes nowadays.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if it does not come out now, then leave it until the flesh is rotten around it, and the opening is clear; and likewise if it is lodged in the bone, and cannot come out, then leave it for some days and move it each day; and then it will come out, and if it does not, then pierce all around with a very fine needle, until the area around is enlarged, and then remove it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and reaches one of the ventricles of the brain, or any of the accidents that I have mentioned happen to the patient: then do not pull it out, but leave it until it has equalized after some days, because if the arrow reaches the brain, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is not lodged deep into the bone only, and does not reach the surface, and the patient remains for some days without bad incident, then use the method of drawing out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is deeply lodged in this way and cannot come out, then apply dressings around it, as I have told you; then heal the place until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And if the arrow is hidden in the body such that it cannot be seen, then search all over for it; and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then widen the wound until it is large enough; and draw out the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has barbs that catch on the flesh, then cut away the flesh that is lodged in two parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow until you can draw it out; and be careful not to break the arrow, so that you would draw it out more severely.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 And if you cannot do it all at once, leave it until the place around it is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easy.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the flow of blood is contrary to you, then administer as we have said in the chapter on healing; and beware of cutting the nerve or vein, and devise a way how you can safely draw out the arrow quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help there can be. And if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrow that comes from another place, or if it brings something out of itself, or the skin is swollen in such a way that one can see or feel it clearly: then cut on top of it, so that the pincers can take hold, and then pull it out: if it is stuck now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 And if it is lodged in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot come out, then leave it still and begin the extraction again until it comes out with force; and if the arrow's shaft is there, push all of the shaft; and if the shaft has fallen off, and you see that pushing is being done, then administer a falling instrument, so that the point of the arrow enters the gap of the instrument; and then push with force, and if the arrow has been pushed out, then insert an entering-point instrument to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if the arrow falls in the pelvis or in the stomach or in the bladder or in the ribs, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut above it, then cut; and be careful not to cut the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound if necessary; and the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 The shape of the tongs used to remove arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 And there are many types of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the end of the probe is like the feather of a bird, to push at the tip of the arrow, as shown in this form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 The form of tongs for pushing and pulling is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	 of the common body's veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The veins from which one bleeds are XXXI, of which there are XVI in the head, namely: II large ones that are behind the ears, called the two "herbech"; and II arteries that are in II temples; and II veins that are in II eyelids, called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the II tendons that are in the neck; and the II veins that are on the upper lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and II veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins that are commonly used for bleeding are five in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, which is located on the left side, and common people call it "vein of the head"; and the median vein is called "faste", which is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is located on the right side, and common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the ulnar vein, and this is the one that is commonly used for bleeding, which appears clearly on the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And the salvatelle vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the wrist of the left side, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is on the other ankle; and in the other leg there are three veins below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The bleeding of wounds that are after the ears aids in ancient catarrhs, and in migraines; and the qualities of the bleeder, as I tell you, is to lift up the head of the patient, and rub the place where the wounds are with a rough cloth; then have the patient constrict his neck with a screw, until the two wounds appear behind the ears in two places hanging from the head: squeeze them then with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse beneath your thumb, hold it there; then take the lancet, and push it under the wound to the bone, then lift up your hand all along the wound, and cut both the skin and the wound very well two fingers wide across, and let out as much blood as you wish; then constrict and bind, until it is healed; and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for an old migraine, and headache, and customary eye inflammation; and the qualities of the bloodletting are as I say: and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly; and he feels the pulse beneath your finger, then signifies with a nod; then raise the chest above the vein high to your finger's indication, and insert the lancet below, and lift the vein high, and cut it as you have done in two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your necessity; then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it; and then bandage it well, and leave it until it heals; and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The bleeding from the vein of the forehead is as valuable as the bleeding from the cephalic in ancient facial diseases, and for migraine, and for rougeur; and the quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur," of which here is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And place the point on the vein, and strike with your hand or something else, and let blood come out according to the quantity you wish; then release the patient's neck, and tie off the vein until it is healed, and sometimes work with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 However, it is not appropriate for the flame to be too sharp; and to bleed diagonally, because the bone is close, and by chance it breaks the subtle flame.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 And if the flame is subtle, by chance it may break; then make flow of the blood, as much as you need, and then bind on a cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The bleeding from the vein of the nose is good for gout and madness and diseases of the face, such as migraine and rougeur that comes to the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of the blood is such that the patient strains his neck, then presses his nose against your left hand, and take a subtle, long flame, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow; and do not go too deeply, and make the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for one night, for it is very quickly restored; and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The bloodletting of the two veins helps with the narrowing of the temples, and with the onset of madness, and with many diseases, and with impetigo, and with erysipelas, and with herpes and styes; and the nature of the bloodletting is such that the patient holds his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then bleed the vein for a while widely, then draw the temperate blood, as much as needed; then repeat the same in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and hold both veins moderately, so that the patient does not constrict; and leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 Of the bleeding of livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 The bleeding of wounds of the lips above helps in healing within the mouth, and against corruption of the gums, and cracking of the lips, and of the nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 And the quality of the bleeding is to make the patient sit before you and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip and look at the two wounds, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by their being black, and because around them there are small black veins: therefore cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them and you are in doubt, then cut the largest from each part, and also do the same with the two wounds that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 of the wound under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The wound of the wounds that are under the tongue thus helps after the wound of the cephalic, and this is for the constriction of the throat, and for the diseases of the eye, and for the diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of the wounder are such that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and looks under on each side a black wound: thus bleed one and the other, and do not go too deep, because below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The wounds of the knife with which one commonly bleeds are bled in two manners: either by pricking with all one flame-shaped broad, or olive-like subtle as sharp knives, and it is called "anesil"; and they are broad and subtle according to the breadth and narrowness of the wounds.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 The shape of the Martin flame is very renowned, and it is wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And it is necessary for opening veins full of thick, visible blood, which contain thick and turbid blood; this is the shape of the olive flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 It is more subtle and pointed, for healing subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The healing of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids in diseases that are under the throat, and at the neck, and at the chest, and at the stomach; and it is necessary for the healer to heal wisely, and to beware of the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow, it must be stopped, as I have said; and the flame should not be pinching, but cutting like a lancet.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the basilic does not open clearly, then you must restrain it and choose another one; or you may seek some remedy from it, or heal in its place the vein in the middle of the arm: it opens clearly; and cut with the lancet flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you see the place of the vein, then you must immediately restrain the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place above it, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with the lancet flame; and beware that you do not strike the artery when you see the place swollen, for that is of the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see it coming out like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is from an artery: hurry then, and place your finger on top for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens; if it does not stop, bind the arm, and leave it like this, and let the patient not move it; and let him be afraid, and do not move it until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	 And if the bleeding is not stopped, and it weakens you, and a doctor is not present, cut the artery if it is open, for the head of the vessel will retract; and stop the blood flow.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And take a strip of linen and split it in half, and take one of the halves and tie it well until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then heal it as we have said, with powders that stop blood flow; and the stoppage is not very difficult in many situations due to the smallness of the wound and the strength of the arm's bandage.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The wound in the middle thus helps that it draws blood from above and below the head, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and it is necessary for the healer to be cautious of the nerve that is beneath, and if he pierces too deeply into the depths, and finds the nerve, and it swells and the patient may be displeased, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve opens very often, and if it does not open in some men due to its subtlety, then you must bleed him with an instrument called anesil; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 And if there is a wound between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The saining of the cephalic vein aids in drawing blood from the head and helps the eyes; one must sang in a pointed manner towards the olive tree or the mirtle leaf, for it is the safest of all veins, because under it there is neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Nevertheless, one must seek the lightest place, and it is not serious if one misses the first time, and one tries again; and sometimes the site swells in some men when one misses the first time, but it is not serious.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you must know about bleeding is that bleeding is only administered to maintain health and to avoid future illnesses; and the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins, which are: cephalic, fast and basilica; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring in the fall and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear; and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no set time, but rather when needed by day or night, at all hours and at all times; and it is not appropriate to bleed children until the age of fourteen, nor a woman carrying a child from the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 Nor should the old who have passed sixty years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever manner it may be, he must first empty the intestines with a light enema if he has retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines the harmful superfluities to the main members; nor should one bleed who is too full of food, or drunk until sober, or suffering from dropsy; and one must refrain from bleeding after a colic attack, vomiting, diarrhea, increased frequency of intercourse with a woman, travel, vigil, fasting, and everything that weakens the whole body, whether by weapon wound or bodily injury; then subtilize the humors if the blood is thick, through food and drink and medicines, if you have the power to do so; then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtilize the blood, and bleed from the vein of the foot around the third hour, as we have said; and guard that day against labor, pain, lust, and similar things; and be joyful and happy, and let the person bleeding you be higher than the one being bled, and rub the arm two or three times, then tighten the ligature moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow; and then rub the place with the hands until the veins swell and are felt; then moisten the person bleeding you with a little old oil, then place his left hand's finger on that vein below the place where he wants to bleed, so that the vein does not flee or fail at the time of incision.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 Car il y a des veines qui fuient comme des cordes au sainier, et il y en a d'autres qui sont pleines de ventosité, donc quand on met le feu dessus, elles reculent du feu et ne peuvent ouvrir la veine, ainsi est-on avec celles-ci; et si on ouvre la veine, alors la plaie est trop étroite, pour cela il faut que le saigneur soit averti de ces choses.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 And if the vein is opened the first time, that's good; but if not, then begin again a little below that place or quickly above, unless the place is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 And if the place is swollen and the patient is alarmed, leave it for one or two days and do not tie up the arm: perhaps such abscesses will form; do not enter into a bath, then resume the bloodletting if he wishes; and if the opening is small or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that enough blood will come out as you wish, then pour all of the fire directly into that same opening; and work a little quickly, before the place swells; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the area swollen, do not begin to cauterize again, and apply a little oil of lily, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the ointment is called the oil of lilies; and thus administer the ointment of oil in each cautery that you cauterize the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and this same action makes a plaster and a poultice from them, when placed on the area; it subtilizes the blood and disperses when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not cauterized strongly enough that only this time and the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and place on the area a moistened sponge in water and salt, warm, and hold it for an hour; and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if some blackness or greenness remains on the area after several days, it does not harm; and if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh soaked in calamus juice, mastic, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 And many times there occurs an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: therefore put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the touch of the hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore avoid putting any of the things we have mentioned on it, for perhaps there is a leak from an artery; but make an I dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 And draw out from each person's blood according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see that it is thick, let it flow until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And he who is strong and robust, if he needs bloodletting, one should make a larger wound for him, and the flame should be wide; and for the weak one, do the opposite, and one must often bleed him little by little, and one should bleed him in cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage, and it is worth more than long or wide bleeding.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 And for him whose body is deficient in bleeding, one should give moistened bread in apple juice; if he is heated, then draw blood three or four times. And if he has a cold temperament, let him chew before the bleeding moistened bread in muscadine syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if he bleeds profusely after losing much blood, then he should drink broth of meat and subtle scented syrup, and use the other things that we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope, to evacuate the veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 And if he wishes to bleed from his arm and to bleed again at another time, then it is necessary that when he is weakened by great bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time, according to the amount of his strength, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 And if he wishes to bleed from his arm after the first bleeding, and he is strong-bodied, then let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 And whoever wants to heal from elsewhere, he must heal on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 Because there is much blood within the body that is already heated and causes fever; therefore, one must draw out a great quantity of it and widen the opening until it flows in a steady stream; then you should consider all the conditions for healing, and place your hand on the pulsating vein when it heals, so that death does not come in the place of the wound, and this happens often when the healer is negligent; and it is not necessary, when you want to release the arm, and make the blood come out a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press very hard; nor if it is curved, should he extend his arm quickly, for that would be bad; but leave it until it heals a second time; or you place at the tip of the flame, so that the frozen blood at the opening of the wound comes out, and put on a little silk bag filled with water, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And if there is a need to bleed for the second time, then heal it in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The veins inside the arm are healed in the place of the head vein because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the manner of healing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the fingertips turn red; then it should be tied moderately so that the vein appears well, and heal it now by traversing, not wide or long; and let the opening be large, and heal it very close to the joint of the hand, and if blood does not come out, put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not put the hand back in hot water, for it is used more in winter than in summer; and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there are neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The wound of the little finger on the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is how it should be done: stretch out the hand, and place it in hot water until the vein swells up, if you see it; and if the wound turns sideways, or if you cut it all the way through, it does not matter; but do not go too deep, for the nerves are bare under all the skin, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary, then place oil and salt on the vein to seal it quickly, and do the same for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 The bleeding from his left hand is worth as much as the disease of the mouse, and does just as I have told you towards the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The bleeding from the spleen is worth as much against all the diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the quality of his bleeding is such that the patient should put their foot in hot water, and rub on the vein until it bursts, and tie above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many veins; then bleed where the largest vein is, or at the ankle, for that is worth more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And if you heal on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and cut across as in slicing; and let the flame be swift.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot back in water, and let the wound drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 And if the healer makes a mistake the first time, then start again the second time a little higher, for the place is salty; do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and thus do with the saphena of the other foot likewise.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 The place of the sciatic wound is at the ankle on the back, and its healing is worth the pain in the hip, when it is for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, and the nature of his bleeding is such that the patient enters the bath, and draws four thumbs above the ankle in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then bleed him in all the manners that you can, and by crossing; and it is better that you cut it, for the place is hollow, and it is very responsive to many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you do not find it, then bleed some vein of him that opens on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and let as much blood flow as you wish, and then unbind the ligature, and place cotton and compress it; she is now bled.
des sainies de ventouse	 Of the cupping glasses
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 Cupping glasses are made of horn, or brass, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking to draw blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And this cupping which is without striking is done in two ways: either at full heat or without heat; and the cupping that is done by striking and extracting blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely on top of the head; and another is in the neck; and two others on both sides of the neck; and the cups below the chin; and the cups on both shoulders; and the cups on the hips; and the cups on both arms; and the cups on both legs; and the cups on both ankles; and this cupping does not draw blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken anyone at all, as one does with venesection; and it should not be administered, neither with full heat nor without heat, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.  ?> And this cupping which is done without striking is in two ways: either with full heat or without heat; and the cupping which is done by striking and extracting blood is done in fourteen places on the body: one entirely on top of the head, another in the neck, two others on both sides of the neck, the cups below the chin, the cups on both shoulders, the cups on the hips, the cups on both arms, the cups on both legs, and the cups on both ankles. This cupping does not draw blood except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken anyone at all, as one does with venesection; and it should not be administered, neither with full heat nor without heat, in any disease that comes from repletion until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if because of necessity or disease one must use cupping therapy, either by habit or custom, we administer it every hour at the beginning or end of the month, and in between and at all times; for there are some who, when they need to be cupped, have a heavy head; and there are those who find swelling and redness on their face, and on their head, and on the neck, and darkness in the eyes; and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are those who dream, and see nothing but blood and wounded and dead people and such things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order cupping after every three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief …
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 The cauterization at the two ribs of the neck is good for headaches, migraines, and strangulation, as well as toothache at the roots, and it is in the place of the sinus of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the patient not to cut the artery when applying.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 The cauterization under the chin is good for mouth diseases, and for rotting of the gums, and similar diseases in the mouth; and it is in the place of the sinuses of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 The cauterization of the shoulders is good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The cauterization of the ribs is as effective as that of the three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient not to strike too deeply, for the place is bare of flesh, and lies under nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	 The cupping glass that is on the rump serves for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases below, and it must be large, and made of brass, so that it can draw well; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 The cupping glasses of the legs heal openly, for they draw blood from all over the body, and they are good for old pains of the kidneys, and of the spleen, and of the bladder, and they remove flows; and they are placed on the II saphenous veins, and on the II ankles, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring fever in many cases.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	 The way to apply the cupping glass is that you first place it empty, and suck immediately, and put it on quickly, and move evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then strike, and replace the cupping glasses, and pay attention to the arrangement of the body, for there are such people who have dark flesh and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and deep enough; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 And if the flesh is thick, you must strike twice: the first time to open the way for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And if the flesh is very thick, you must strike a third time; and when we want to draw out a little blood at a time, we only need to strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we want to draw much blood, then we bleed often; and if the blood is thick, then strike deeply, and the end of it is that the heart should be suddenly pierced; and those who have thick skin and hard, and whose pores are narrow, you must anoint the places of the cupping glasses with oil that opens and dissolves: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, with cress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 And if the superfluidities are thick and cold, then take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the person being healed has tender flesh and large pores, one should not put oil there, but it should be washed after evacuating with rose water, or cold water, or mallow water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar waters.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 And those who have much moisture should be lifted with easel, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And those who have excessive superfluidities should be lifted with old wine, or water of fig, or decoction of dill or chamomile, or other similar things; and one must not heal with cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and they should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that they wash themselves, when they are to be cupped and when they have been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 Et warder if the patient is coleric and if his blood is too hot and inflamed; then he should take cold things such as quinces and endives and lettuce in vinegar, and similar things; and eat less, and chicken meat, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And those with cold complexion should take syrup of honey, and medium-aged aromatic wine, which is between old and new, and eat little, and less meat, and small birds and pigeons; and on the day he will bleed himself, he must drink more than eat; and some men should be given triacle or muscate before or after bleeding to strengthen the main members; and the blood should be thinned, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos mettons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 The form of the cupping glass applied to fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 It should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and it should have on the side around the middle a small hole, just large enough to insert a needle, and let it be of brass, smooth on the inside so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there should be a rod of brass or iron across for placing a candlewick, and both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them; for the cupping glasses for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And one must place this cupping glass on the limb in this way: take the candlewick of wax or linen, and place it inside the cupping glass across the rod that is inside the cupping glass, so that the light is at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, and let your two fingers be on the hole that we have mentioned, so that when you want, out goes the vapor, and remove the cupping glass; and take the candlewick as before, and repeat it often, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the application of the cupping glass in the disease of pleurisy, there is no rod or hole, and it is only prepared when it is full of water, and it is placed on the member alone; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Without being prepared for members where one cannot place cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in places without flesh, such as fingers or noses, and other similar ones; and the quality of use is that when you find leeches that are in clean waters without contamination, take them; and put one nut in clean water, until they become familiar with it, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let them be drawn from vein and cupping glass, then rub the member until it becomes red, and place the leeches on it; and when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where one can place a cupping glass, put one on, because this is very effective afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If not, then lift the place of ease, and then with water, very well, and then press it; and if the place is too healthy after the leeches, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it there until the bloodletting is exhausted; and if the bloodletting is multiplied, then place on vitriol powder, or gallnuts, and similar things, until it is exhausted; or you place on the place half of peeled beans, and leave them until they dry on the place, it will now staunch; and if you need more, then take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the leeches do not want to attach, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you insert a needle until the blood comes out, and then place them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will attach; and when you see that they are full, then sprinkle on a pouch of powdered aloe and henbane, or ashes, and they will now fall off.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Know, dear son, that the foolish doctors cast aside this chapter, as they have never seen any ancient books or read any letters about it; and for this reason, knowledge is lost in our land, for I have never found any good ones; and I know nothing except by the science of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have acquired the knowledge, and by experience, and by the habit of my life; and I have already described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 It is therefore necessary that we speak in the prologue of this book about the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or breaking happens to someone, you must hasten to heal the patient on both sides, unless something prevents you completely, such as physical weakness, infancy, old age; or if the time is not very hot or too cold; and avoid cold food, that is to say cold baths, and bird meat and hare meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess or spreading matter in the limb; then the patient should return to his first governing diet.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods that provide abundant nourishment and viscosity, such as boiled wheat in water, and rice, and heads (of animals), and feet, and cow's udder, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 For with such nourishment the bones heal and do so more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that broken bones of the old and infirm cannot heal or mend according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of young children; but there is no concern, reset above the broken bone thick tenons which tighten and join the limb together, until it regains its previous strength; and if not completely, then at least partially, for this reason the patient must be nourished with abundant foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 For there is a fracture that goes to the shin, and another by sharpening, like the point of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 And there is also fracture with wound, and fracture where there is a small crack throughout.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each kind has its own device and proper instrument for restoration, according to how the memory returns to its place; and it is known that the fracture of the bone because the place is twisted, and it appears well from afar, and sounds on pressing with the hand; and when there is no twisting or sound on touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture; but it may well have twisting, or cracking, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 Si it is not necessary for you to move it with your hand, but apply the following remedies, and then gently restrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that if the break goes into the air and the two parts are disjointed, you must now set them equally point by point before an abscess comes; and if an abscess comes, leave it for a day until the abscess is appeased; then set it in place as you can lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of one with pieces; then restrain it as required hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And if in the bone there are pieces broken, and they are divided into two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small member, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand; and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the limb are freed, you reset by all means the additions in their places as you can, and be careful not to cause injury or pain to the patient through your work; and join well the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 And you can tell it is not right with the hand if it seems to you that it is not: so make it beautiful and do not hold it too tightly, nor press as those who bring about hot abscess and contracture in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limb is in place, instruct the patient well that he not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner; and ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 For when he feels any pain, it is not in place, and it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain; and ensure that it is set straight, lest crookedness come to it when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness, largeness, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as hips and thighs: wrap them with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bandage embraces all of the large limb, and holds it evenly on all sides, so that there is no gap; then bind light wool around it, three or four turns according to the limb, and hold your hand a little taut against all the bandages, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break moves slightly away from the break; and soften the bandage a little at a time, until you take a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage, and turn it again around the broken place; then go back to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too tight or too loose, as we have said in the first turn above; then put linen wool or cloths between the bandages, so that they are all even, then bind everything on top with one bandage, and then place your splints well made on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 And if there is swelling or abscess, apply something that soothes the abscess and removes the swelling, and leave it thus for some days; then press on your supports, and let them be made of half the width of a reed, or of wood from which clives are made, or of palm branches, according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 But the support that one puts on the fracture must be a little thicker and wider than the others; and it should be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large; then press on the supports as you did in the first layer, then tie above with thread, as in the first layer over the break; tighter at first, then less so; and the threads must be medium, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen the work of fools who make their ties from twisted linens, and that is a great error, for the tie cannot be equal if it is too tight, and it should not have less than two fingers' width between each support.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the bones after setting them in their places, place under them linen rags or shreds of wool, so that he does not become wounded.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 When the wound is with a fracture, and the heart is broken, I will speak of its treatment later.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 And know that it is not fitting to reset all the broken bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 Because when the member is large, it is not fitting to place bones until after five days or seven, or more according to your skill in dealing with abscesses; and see here the manner of old emplasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and sprain: and it is that you take flour that stays at the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of eggs, and place this confection, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it; and this is the common manner of the emplaster restoring fractures in many dispositions, and especially for women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 Another manner of plaster for healing fractures, dislocations, and twisting: take 3 ounces of pepper, laudanum, enula, asafoetida, gum arabic, and mastic, 10 ounces; myrrh and aloes, 5 ounces; garlic 9 ounces; and make it into powder, and mix with the white of an egg; if a man's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another plaster for twisting: take mastic and marshmallow, 10 ounces; myrrh and aloes, 9 ounces; acacia, 6 ounces; Armenian bole, 10 ounces, and grind well, and make into a poultice with the white of an egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, and la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, and met sus lou leu.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses and properly removes pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Another way to make a plaster that mends broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth pear leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way to make a plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to absorb any remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take the root of mullein, chamomile, violet flowers, chickpea flour, one part each; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the member is heated, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of plaster, stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of mullein, flax seeds, balsam, melilot, and sansevieria, and violet and chamomile flowers, equal parts of each; and grind, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 Ypocras says in his book that one should not raise the broken limb to restore its strength, but rather use a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 And it seems to Galen that one should raise the broken limb to restore it with dry and slightly warm things such as myrrh, aloes, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Another way to make a plaster that helps with injury and pain: take mugwort, clipped horse tails or bird feathers, marshmallow, and celery, grind them up, and make a plaster out of it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, I have removed everything from it, and you need to use a plaster and bandage, then begin again as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 And if nothing comes to the member as we have said, then do not unbind it before III days or IV or V or VII; and sometimes leave it XX days, according to what is seen, until the fracture hardens, and the setting of the flesh approaches; then restrain it more than at first, and thicken its flesh, as I have said before; and if you see the place drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there; therefore, moisten it with warm water, every time you unbind it, which should be every III days, and release the bandage a little; by this work thus the nourishment comes to the member, and quickly mends what foolish doctors do wrongly: they twist the member badly: this is bad, and such work is fearful, and I see nothing there but to leave it and work on it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	 Of the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 There are many ways of breaking and diverse forms, and the causes are distinct; for there are breaks caused by the blow of a sword, and the blow removes all the bone up to the marrow which is beneath the bone, just as an axe or stick does; and therefore this manner of break is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 Or if the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this manner of break is called "absolue"; and the wound in these two breaks is either large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 And if there is an embedded strike, or a splintering or blow from a stone, or from falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 And if there is a persistent fracture, which reaches to the flesh beneath the bone, or is on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if there is a wound that penetrates into the bone as thin as a hair, and the fracture is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone or by falling or by any similar thing, and causes a piece of bone to enter below, and the place is split like blacksmiths do when they hammer on anvils; then the stone enters.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this happens more often in those whose bones are moist at the top, like a child's head; and it occurs with all these types of fractures that small pieces are separated from them like stars; and I will speak about this later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 Et reconnaissons toutes les sortes de fractures par leur déplacement, et par l'enquête sur les tendons, et par la chair corrompue qui se trouve dessus.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 The hair-like appearance is known by this: when the bone is exposed and rubbed upon, the black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 In the care of the fracture, beware of the patient's accidents, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, swooning, fever, and eyes coming out and turning red, and other similar things in many dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 And if you do not see a frightening accident, and you hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 And when the wounded comes to you first, in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the moon that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the cloth beneath the bone become corrupt, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 And if the bone fracture reaches up to the cloth covering the brain, then you must split the affected part thus: and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover above the bone in every way possible, and on the wound more gently than you can, and if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone, or an abscess like this, if he helps with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and you are sure of the absence of bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two methods: one method is that you cut with a narrow incision from the front, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 And then he makes another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 And the second method is such that you have various cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed and made of Indian iron; and work lightly, so that you do not harm the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 And if the bone is protruding and hard, then you must bore around it before making cuts with trepanations, not too deep so as not to perforate the skull. The point should have a margin or ring above it so that the point does not pass through the bone; and you should have several of these, so that each one comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have trepanations for all skulls; and this is the form of the three types of trepanations:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 The quality for perforating around the broken bone is that you put the auger on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know the bone is pierced; then remove the auger and place it elsewhere a little after, and do this all around, then cut with the scissors the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly and lightly than you can, as we have said, so that you draw the bone into your hand, or one of the instruments you have such as tongs, pincers; and beware not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is necessary that you clean the residue that remains of the bone with all other similar instruments like scissors, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other scissors; and if there remain any small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and onions as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is safer; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 It is first necessary that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture opens, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place under the head of this lancet-like instrument.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut from one side only, and the part is sharp on two sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly tap all around the bone, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath; if it is stuck to the bone, gently lift it up, for one can remove it without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, then you must scrape off that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you should have various quantities, to administer in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 Use first larger scrapers, and then more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 In each of the other fine incisions and subtle fractures, it is necessary to administer treatment according to its nature; and this is something that is not easily answered by those who have studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you take a cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another doubled cloth in two or three layers, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can, so that you do not burden the wound, then administer over it another bandage, and do not bind too tightly except to touch the wound only; and leave it thus for a day or two, until the abscess is appeased, then unbind it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, and vetch flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place on the wound, and administer medicines that are not irritating; and be careful that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any grease, nor allow pus to collect, for when pus collects on the linen of the head, it will run and burst, and great harm will come to the patient; for when something irritating is placed on the wound, it hardens over it.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 Take heed then, if any misfortune befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if blackness comes except for the medicine that has been applied, which has such power, it is necessary that you take a part of honey and III parts of rose oil and make a plaster with it; then apply it to the wound; then treat in various ways as needed until healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 Know that sometimes the two upper parts of the nose are broken, or only one by itself, for these are two bones; and the lower one is made of cartilage, and does not break, but only swells or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger or a probe into the nose, and place that break evenly within your index finger, and push out through the nostril, until the nose returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach it, then you must place a large clump of hair evenly on top of a reed.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 And if the break is in two parts, then do the same, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when that swelling has subsided, then insert at the tip of the nose cloths of linen, if the break is in one part. 》
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 Where you push one bone into another part, if there is a fracture; and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some say that one should moisturize the tendons in butter, and change it daily.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 It does not seem to me that this is good, but the tendons should be moistened in a mixture of egg white and powdered flour; then leave the tendon until the bone is healed, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 Sometimes goose feathers are inserted into the nose instead of tendons, and then a soft cloth is placed around it, and the fracture is held together, and the patient breathes through it; now do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 And if boils like this come to the nose while you are working on it, then put a plaster or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a little bit of dysaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if boils like this do not come to the nose, then put a plaster on the outside, made of sesame flour and powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then place light dressings on top, and do not bind the nose; and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then use suitable instruments to realign it, then stitch the break, and treat with things that encourage flesh growth and healing, such as appropriate plasters and ointments for this purpose; and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat with tenths, and place lead weights until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	 of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the jaw is fractured below and there is no wound outside, and the break is only outside and not broken in two, unless it is splintered inside, then it can be easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your right index finger inside, and push the break lightly inside, and adjust it with the other hand from the outside, and make it equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 And if the jaw fracture is divided into two parts, then you must apply traction to both parts until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And if there is movement of the teeth, or loosening, bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then place on the broken jaw poultice, and place on it a double cloth; and place on the cloth a large, well-made cushion, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it tightly at the chin as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then reset to the original position; and place a poultice on it, with flour from the mill mixed with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after removing the poultice; and place light linen on the poultice. And if the poultice becomes dry and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it heals; often it heals within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 And if such abscesses occur, treat them as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 And if there is both a fracture and a wound, check to see if any piece of the bone has been removed; then carefully remove it with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your needs.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none left, then close the wound if it is wide, and place on it suitable plasters to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	 of the splint
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 The splint breaks in several places towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and shattered into two pieces, and there are fragments, and this is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, that is when the fracture is without a wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the force of the break; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then place the fracture equally between your fingers, so that the form be as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor displacement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth or linen, and let it be thick according to your needs; and straighten and lift the broken part, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you may set the fracture equally as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 And if you cannot pull the head of the broken part outward, because it comes in depth, then it is necessary that the patient lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a medium-sized pillow, and let the assistant push the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the break be raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 And then receive the fracture in your hands, and if you find it broken, you must cut through; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be rejoined due to any swelling, cut off one of the edges with an incisor that you have; but place under the forceps this instrument, to protect the soft tissue:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 and it should be like a spoon, and not made of iron, and it should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and it should have two heads, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, as is the contour of the wound that you have made when you have drawn out the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, sew up the wound, and if the contour is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, fill the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 And if an abscess occurs there, soak the cloth in rose oil and vinegar, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 And the straightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cuts, is that you place on the bone a poultice of milled powder and egg white, and put light wool on top, and put a sphere under the saddle if necessary; then take a very wide bandage of one palm in width, then put a double cloth over the wool, and the poultice; then take a thin strip of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the ends of the bandage are hanging; and put the strip on the break, and turn the bandage up to the neck, and under the saddle of the patient; and tie each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the break well, and you see clearly that the strip does not move on the broken bone, then loosen it daily, and when the ligature loosens, tighten it again; and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the saddle to raise the shoulder up; thus the break will lighten by the lightening of the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless an adverse event occurs, for twenty days; then renew the poultice, if you see that he needs it, and tighten it and leave it so, until it is healed; and it is healed in a maximum of twenty-eight days, and in less time for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	 Of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 When the shoulder is broken in the large part or middle, and there is swelling except by touch; prepare it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the place powder from a mill with plenty of egg, and light stuffing, and put on double cloth; then put on a wide and thin board, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there are hollows under the board in any part of the shoulder, fill those hollows with linen stuffing, so that the board sits evenly; and then bind it all tightly with a large bandage, so that the board does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day; and each time it loosens, bind it again, and make the board equal if it is out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be healed in 20 days or 25. And when this number is complete, then unbind him, and be sure, for this is not a bone that can easily move.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward and points down towards the heart, it should be cut off, and do what we have said in the breaking of the rib to soothe the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	 of the foot's break
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the ankle.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken in the middle, it shifts downward, and the patient feels great pain, and loss of strength, and swelling, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the passage in the broken bone, which can be felt well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the healing is that the patient lies frequently on their back, and one places a pillow between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and brings the ribs together from the second rib with your hands, and adjusts it to be equal in all ways that you can, until the bone shape is as it should be; then place bandages and wool over the thin board of salt or other light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it firmly on the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the bandage smoothly around the back, and bind it tightly, and loosen it every hour, and if it softens, then tighten it; and if you need to loosen it, because of erosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and loosen it, and remove the bandage, and address whatever has come from ways of healing; then replace the bandage, and bind it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	 Of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 Know that the fracture of the ribs comes only in large bones near the back and inside the head, and they only bend because they are cartilaginous; and one feels it well by examining two (ribs).
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the treatment is that you set the fracture straight, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 And then apply a poultice, and bind it with a bandage, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 And if the fracture of the ribs is inward, the patient feels very great pain and sharpness, as from pleurisy, for the bone points at the flesh; and he can hardly breathe, and soon vomits a large amount of blood, which is a serious illness, and the ancients have put much effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And there are those who say that it should be administered food that swells the belly, to push out the breakage in excess.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 We do not do this, for fear that hot abscesses may come to it, if they have not already done so.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 And if they have come, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 And some say that one should put cupping glasses on the place to strongly draw out [the humors], and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping glasses may attract superfluous humors to the place due to the weakness of the patient's constitution.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 And some say that the place should be covered with oil-soaked wool, and tents are placed between the ribs to equalize the breath around it, then treat it with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear because of the bone that protrudes from the wound, and there is doubt for the patient, then one must incise over the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath to protect the lung; and then the bone should be cut, and gently drawn out, and then stitch the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if such an abscess occurs, place moistened cloths in rose oil on it, and put it on the spot; and treat the spot as one would for an abscess, and let it lie so until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	 of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it can happen that it bends; and likewise with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, take note if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is fatal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when pressed and pricked, know that the junction of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is injured or not, take care if the feet are numb, and if there are accidents in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary bowel movements; and when one has treated it on his belly, then there is involuntary bowel movement.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when he has been treated on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Know that it is fatal; do not bother with his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 And if these symptoms do not occur, then the condition is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And the treatment is to check if there is a hot abscess, then apply rose oil or yolk of egg oil on the spine until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on that part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if any bone is exposed, it is necessary to cover on the skin; and remove the bone, then join the two lips of the wound with a stitch if it is large, then treat the wound with an ointment made from fat, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", if you put your little finger of your left hand in it, and make it equal to the other hand in power, then apply a compress and a bandage on top, if you need them; then bind it, and if there is bone exposure, then remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 If it happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, then there is only a little lessening at the top; and it breaks in length, and declines towards the outside, and it causes pain and bruising to the patient in that place, and swelling as if broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it until you are on top of the break; and know what kind of break and its form are; and if the break is only at the top, then align this break so that it is in natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 And if the break is along the length, or it slants inward, then make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare to restore this break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 Et when you have made it equal, then put on the plaster, then put on a splint of wood or horn, and hold the fracture so that it does not move; and fill the place under the ribs, until the joint is level.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	 And if an abscess occurs there, do not touch it until the abscess is healed, and put on what we have previously said; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as needed, unless there is no bad incident; and that is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 The shoulder is that which is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it should be restored in one of two ways: one of which is that you take a stake full of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 And tie at the two heads two cords, and pull them up, and make the patient sit on a seat; then cast the broken arm onto the stake, until it reaches the armpit, and has in the middle a bend of the stake; then pull up some heavy object where the attendant extends downward; then place the doctor the break equal to his hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 And the other manner is that one makes the patient sit on his heels, and ties the hand to his neck; then commands two attendants that one holds that which is above the break in his hands, and the other holds below all together, and each extends at its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold tightly the tendon below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the members to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the fracture is near the shoulder's head, then you must place one ligament moderately below the armpit and another towards the back, under the fracture; similarly, if the fracture is towards the back, a light ligament should be placed without effort until the fracture is level on both sides; then set the fracture as needed, and hold it tightly, lest any abscesses form there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 And if such abscesses form there, do not hold it tightly for seven days, and place a wet cloth on it with oil rose, until the abscesses are soothed; then hold it tightly, and the manner of holding is such that you put the poultice on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast; and apply the bandage, and hold both on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper position, unless anything prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 And if you doubt that the bone moves, use splints, and place on the fracture a wider and stronger splint than the others, and let there be two finger-widths between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends three finger-widths beyond the break on each side; then tighten the splints as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less widely.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see the placement of the splints and the tightening as we have said, in the hour when you restore the broken limb, and you doubt a hot abscess, let it be bandaged until the seventh day, as we have said; then every three days check the bandage that itching or swelling does not come to the place, where nursing cannot reach the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the patient accepts, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such accident occurs, do not unbind it until after three days or more, and the patient should sleep on their back, with hands on their stomach; place one cushion filled with wool under the shoulder, and check every hour of the day or night that the appearance of the broken limb does not change, or that the ligament is not softened; accept it through the power of medicine, and give the patient the food that we have mentioned earlier, in such a way that the first course is subtle; and when they begin to recover, let the food be substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset within forty days in total; and then one must unbind them and administer a bath and remedies made from onions to heal the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, it takes days or months to release.
de la brisure du bras	 of the arm fracture
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "foscile", one of which is small and follows the wrist; and the other is large and is located below, towards the little finger; perhaps only the large foscile breaks, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more serious than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is only the small foscile that is broken, it should be slightly extended and made straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 Et si c'est le grand fémur, il faut alors le serrer plus fortement; et l'étendre sur un coussin, et tenir le pouce de la main plus haut que les autres doigts, et le petit doigt plus bas que les autres doigts, et que le malade soit croisé sur lui-même, et le coussin devant lui plus haut, afin que le malade ne ressente aucune douleur; puis étendre les ministres avec leurs bras à la partie en dessous de sa main, ou au lien, et un autre ministre à l'autre partie au-dessus.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then the physician should place it evenly, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if it is broken into pieces, place each piece in its proper location; and if there is any that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut it out and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	 And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter; so take the treatment from there.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And if at the beginning of the treatment abscesses like these occur, then take a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth on top skillfully, until those abscesses are relieved.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And then remove the wax cloth, and apply a poultice of flour from the mill with plenty of egg, then place splints, and let the splint for the fracture always be stronger, and a little wider than the others; and know that there should be 6 splints on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones or in two; and bind more tightly over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as it heals, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths over the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is bound be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And return the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any evil accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must wash the limb with hot water until the itch is calmed; and let the limb not be constricted or rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then resume the traction, and if the ligament is weakened and the bone separated, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 And if one is careful that the nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted, then you must soften it in the pouch and let it remain like this for some days until the nourishment comes, and then traction it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have said happens to the patient, then do not unbind until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 or around it, then let the patient grasp his hands around his neck, and let his neck be straight, and he should avoid movement and trembling, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps even in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	 of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 Know that on the back of the hand and around the fingers, there are few fractures, and it only happens that there is swelling many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And when the palm of the hand is broken or swollen, it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit straight in front of him equally; then place his hand on a flat surface, and the attendant should extend the broken bones, and let the physician set them straight until they are well joined; and apply the dressing and bandages, if there are no abscesses, then place a splint according to the size of the area; and wrap it in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 And if the break is around the plantar arch of the foot, make a bandage from strips, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken foot; and then bind with a long strip, and let the knot be as large as the palm of the hand, and tie it, as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you place a bandage above and another below the finger, so that the hand remains open and straight; then bind the whole hand around, and tighten the ligament between the two [fingers].
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And if the break is in one of the toes, if it is protruding, then set it straight as needed; and bind with the foot, and if you see [it is necessary], place a small straight bandage to raise the break, and do not move it; and if the break is in another toe, such as in the big toe or one of the others, then set it straight, and bind with the healthy toe that follows; or bind them all together, whatever works best, or place a bandage above, as on the big toe; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the abscess, and treat whoever comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	 of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 The bones of the thigh are often broken, and it is well seen when it turns front and back; and the restoration is such that one ties a ligament above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 And the patient lies on his back, then each assistant stretches his ligament equally to its part; and this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments should be towards the knee, and the other ligament below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And so if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be near the knee, and let the extension be downward; then let the surgeon place the bone equally with his two hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply a poultice, and bandage it, if no abscesses form there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 And if there is a hot abscess, let it rest until it subsides, then return to your work and treatment; the plaster is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 And it is necessary that you wrap over the fracture with a bandage, doubled once or twice, leaving the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, near the knee below, and the ends of the thread should come up; then wrap the bandage over the leg and thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and place one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to evenly distribute the pressure, then begin to bind firmly three or four times over the fracture; and as you go higher on the fracture, bind less; then tie two ends of the thread that you have placed between the leg and the thigh, and bind three splints that are above, then return below to the end of the thread, until you reach near the foot; and bind it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, since no abscess or swelling or other similar thing will occur.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes there, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that prick, then they must be removed, if possible; and if not possible, then the place must be split, and pull strongly; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that stakes are placed there, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in this restoration the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 And know that the thigh is restored in seven days, or a little less or a little more, depending on the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	 from the tendon of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 You should know that in the knee joint there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, then it is only a crack or a hole, and it happens in all wounds, whether there is injury or not, and this is felt by everyone.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the healing is such that one puts equal to what is round on its two sides, so that they are assembled as much as possible; then apply the poultice, and place a round bandage if you need it, and bind it as necessary, then follow all the preparations that we have said in other fractures, such as abscesses or others; thus for each incident, apply what is needed until healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	 of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that the leg has II bones, one of which is rightly called "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and all fractures happen in it as they do in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the workings are entirely the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 And if the smaller bone is broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain and it can be seen clearly; and it turns downwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then apply traction and make it straight and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly and there are several fragments, then the traction should be less and lighter; and align according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you have completed your work, take two splints of wood that fit the leg on either side, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee down to below; then wrap around it two linen bandages above and below, and tie in the middle as well, and at this point the leg will not bend to the right or to the left, and so it is good; and some put a brace along the length of the leg, and it is of wood, and they place the leg in it to prevent movement, and properly done for a fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; then cure it until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	 Of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 At the ankle there is no break, but in the bones of the foot there is sometimes breaking and in two places, and nothing happens except breaking in several ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 And if there is breaking in the bones of the foot and you see these bones protruding over each other, place the sick person's foot on the ground as if he wanted to go, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and dressings on top, and place a small board with two flat pegs under the sole of the foot, then bind the foot tightly, and after you have wrapped bandages around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 And when three days or four have passed, release the ligament, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 And if there are any broken bones, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and it should be a little wider; then place under the foot the plate that I have mentioned, and tighten it properly. And if there are two or three or more broken bones, place on each bone a splint according to its size, wrapped in a single piece of linen, and place the plate under the foot. And let it stand at the top of the plate above the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 Et tu dois ne pas oublier les autres choses que j'ai dites pour les autres fractures, comme nous l'avons dit auparavant; et soigne chaque incident comme il le faut.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 de la fracture de l'os du poignet
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the bone of the woman's vulva is broken, make her sit with her legs spread apart, then incline her towards the back, and hold her from behind; then fill the woman's vagina with cotton, putting in as much as a fistful; then have the woman stand up and lift her buttocks little by little, and then the cotton will jump until it reaches the entrance of the vulva, and the bone will come back with the fistful; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days or more: then the fracture will be healed, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and tie a reed to its opening, and inflate the entire bladder inside the vagina; then blow strongly into the reed until the bladder is fully inflated inside; this will also heal the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like this for some days, until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone of the fist of a man is broken, or of a woman, restore it as we have said in the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from one who puts his study and practice into it, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 For the break, it signifies in many ways the right way of restoration; understand this then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or less, and it will heal swiftly.
de brisure avec plaie	 of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 It is necessary for one who has a break with wound, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone or shoulder blade or similar, that he be bled immediately, so that the bleeding that we have said proves it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the wound heals, then seal it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the break in that same hour, or that day, unless an abscess forms there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 And if an abscess forms there, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you would bring about a bad incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 And if the broken bone is visible on the skin, then you must carefully place it between your hands with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 And if you cannot make equal extensions with your hands, then use this iron instrument which has seven or eight inches in length, and the width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary for the physician to have three or four, as he needs them for each cure of a break; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend at all when pressed upon the limb during your work, and let it be pointed at the end, and thicker in the middle, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And it is called "palainche," for which the curved head must be placed on top of the visible bone; and press it once, so that it returns, and both are equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut off the end of the bone so that the instrument can gain purchase on it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument for this purpose, either a knife or scissors; then scrape away what remains in the bone by means of roughness and small shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 If it is done so that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is in summer; and do not put on the wound any ointment or other thing that has oil, lest it bring about putrefaction and corruption; then administer splints when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the dressing all around, according to the size of the wound, and be well aware that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times have the foolish doctors done this, and have brought upon the patient death or gangrene at other times; and let the constriction be gentler and softer than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is large or severe, and you fear that an evil accident may happen, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not appropriate to apply bandages; but wrap around, instead of bandages, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one day or two swelling at the wound, remove all that you have put on the wound, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as ointment of theriac and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 And it is necessary that you unbind the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the swelling runs down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 Et si many days pass, and it cannot heal but rather worsens, know that there are small fragments of bone, for which you must search the wound with a probe, and remove all those loose pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if an ulcer forms in the place, or another form of corruption, then you must cure it, according to what is said in this preceding chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, as with the thigh or shoulder bones, and other similar large members, do not pull it out, for many times this leads to death, but leave it alone until it rots; perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 Of bruises that come upon the suture
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 They often come after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Take heed therefore if the wound is fresh: then administer stiptic medicines such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and colocynth, and acacia, and similar others, in whatever quantity you take of these things, or all together, and mix them with stiptic wine or plenty of egg or oil; and place them on the knot in bandages, and bind it well, and do not unbind for many days; and then unbind, and start another, until the swelling is gone; or you can bind on a well-made piece of lead, because the property of lead is that it removes all the swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has already hardened like stone, and it must be removed, then shave over it, and expose the excess; or you have it scraped off by some scraper, until it is removed, and cure it until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 Of the limb which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 When the fracture of the bone is healed, and afterward the limb remains weak and fragile, it happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly and not as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or because of very great movements, not at all in their proper time; or because he has little blood in his body, making him weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 And the treatment is such that you should make the patient eat and soften the body until the blood increases in him; and administer baths and give joy and merriment; then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch draws great nourishment to it, and often bleed it with cold water, until the nourishment reaches the limb; and let it return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 of a twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb anew; many foolish physicians have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and possibly death. However, if the nodules and torments are fresh, they must be soaked in hot water, or herbs with softening properties should be boiled, such as leaves of mallow, roots, melilot, and similar things; and make a softening plaster, like dyaquilon well made, and take the juice of mallow, and mix it with lard or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top. Or take ripe figs, and grind them with bran of barley, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes the dislocation is cured by continually and for a long time rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And let there be gentle movement to the member each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And if the tortuousness is hardened and like stone, and it needs to be removed with an iron, then one should cover it up to the bone with a subtle, light incision; and put caution and care into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 When dislocation happens to someone, one must immediately set it back into place without delaying.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Car if one delays, then the place swells, and perhaps one can only barely reset it; therefore, it is not necessary that one move it when it is swollen: often this brings on spasms and other pains; however, when this happens, have the patient fast, then leave them until the abscess subsides; then wash the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as it returns to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	 of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 It seldom happens that the jawbones are dislocated together, and the dislocation of both is in two ways: either they are slightly separated from their place and somewhat softened; or they are entirely dislocated and hang down towards the chest, and saliva runs out of the mouth so that it cannot be held, nor can the mouth be closed, and it wraps the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must quickly reset it, without delay; and in such a manner that the assistant holds the patient's head, and the healer places his finger from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and let the other two hands be free to maintain balance. And instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 And the healer should place it evenly until it returns to its proper place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the returning is difficult, especially if it involves both mandibles together, then bathe them in hot water and oil until you can easily reset them; do not delay the resetting as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are brought back into alignment, and the patient's mouth is closed without softening, place moistened cloths in a cerate made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft bands; and let the patient sleep on their back, and keep their eyes between two pillows, so that neither to the right nor to the left is moved, nor does he strain himself to speak, but take light food, as long as the pains are removed, and the jaws are immobilized; and then lightly chew what one wants, and do not struggle to open the mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well immobilized and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to their proper place within an hour, and are not converted to their rightful position, then fever and sudden constipation ensue, and perhaps intestinal obstruction, and perhaps pure bile is vomited.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 And when you see this, then know that it is fatal; and often he who experiences this dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	 from the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 The forceps cannot dislocate from the side within the continuity of itself and the hip, but it is sometimes dislocated at the elbow, which is quite evident.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And the restoration is such that the patient should lie on his back and extend his arms; then press firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then apply a poultice and bandage, and bind it tightly; and the head which is towards the elbow cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates sometimes, reset it to its proper place as we have said; then apply a poultice and bandage, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until healed; and thus also the shoulder joint is reset when it is displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: one is that it dislocates to the lower part of the armpit; and the second is towards the chest; and perhaps it dislocates upwards, which happens rarely; and it does not dislocate backwards due to the shoulder, nor inwards due to the nerves. And many times it dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially for those who have little flesh, because then it quickly jumps out; for those who have enough flesh, it jumps out with difficulty and goes back with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 And perhaps there are some men who have a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	 It is therefore necessary for you to examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And the dislocation is known when it descends towards the armpit, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and under the armpit on the back the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it clearly on the back; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	 And the manner is that the minister lifts the hand of the patient high, then places his thumb under it, and lifts the joint forcefully high in place; and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it high, then places it underneath; so it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in several days after, then the patient must be bathed in hot water; and the minister should carefully make a poultice that is softening and soothing, such as a decoction of hollyhock and fenugreek and melilot in water, and apply it; then the patient should be seated on their back, and place under the thumb a pad of cloth equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then the healer places his heel on the pad, and lifts the head of the shoulder vertically, and pulls the hand of the patient; and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; that shoulder will return immediately, and if you see it this way, then ramain according to this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is larger than the patient; and he should stand straight beside the afflicted side, and push his shoulder under the patient's thumb, and lift the thumb high, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another minister pulls the hand of the patient down towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too weak, attach something heavy to them, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And one can also reset it in another way: and take a long log and stick it into the ground so that its tip is as round as a spindle, neither too thick nor too thin; then place it underneath the patient, but with soft drapes on top, and the patient should be standing along the length of the log; then extend his hand downward from the other side like this, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these reasons we have mentioned, perform this cure: take a log that is two arms long and four fingers wide, with a rounded tip so that it can enter deeply underneath the seat, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 Then place the patient's head on the log beneath the drape, so that the log does not strike the patient, then place it under the patient's buttocks; and stretch both arms over the long log, and tie the shoulder above the log, and the arm at the top of the hand, then place the arm on the tread of a wide ladder, and let the hands hang down, and let the body hang on the other side: the joint will now be reversed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 And when it is in place, however that may be, it is necessary to put under the buttocks an equal ball of wool, then apply the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and egg white, over all the shoulder and around, then press under the buttocks firmly, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and encircle the hand around its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 And it is necessary that he rests for a long time, as long as the limb is comfortable, because it will heal more quickly; and then rest again after V or VII days, and move it; and if it is stiffened and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come into it, or for another reason, then you must apply three cauteries, as stated in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after VII days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm up, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place. 》
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The dislocation that is towards the foot and the breasts, or behind, is done by impact and extension of hands, and another remedy is administered there; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 And if after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and gradually in movement, then the patient should bathe many times, until that stiffness is relieved, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	 Of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated by points, and returns by points; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not responded to, because one sees it well and feels it well; and it is dislocated according to each shape. 》
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the sick person with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 Because the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 And you must reset it before abscesses form there, because if abscesses form there, it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is in the back; this is worse than other dislocations, and is more painful, and death may occur. 》
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 And the reset is like this, when it is such that you can reset it, that with your two hands you extend his hand; and let his arm be spread out, and place the hand of the healthy person around the arm above and below, and push the joint back together at its root, until it returns to its place. 》
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and strikes the root of the palm with the knife that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and let two administrators extend the arm, and hold it with two hands so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from side to side, after you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it; and when the patient joins the joint to his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint strongly until it returns; and when it is in place, put on a dry poultice with egg yolk, and hold it firmly, and tie the arm around the patient's neck, and leave it for some days, then unbind it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	 And if the joint is firmly in its place, loosen the ligament and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then apply the poultice and the ligament again, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if he feels tightness after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is eased; or place on the joint a greasy sheepskin, leave it there for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then replace the sheepskin, and have him re-enter the bath; do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see, place on a warm, moist cow dung mixed with butter, and bind it on; thus it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	 The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more than other joints However, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the very hour that it is dislocated, lest the place become swollen or develop a hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And the remedy is such that you place the sick hand on a table, and the attendant extends his hand, and the physician places it evenly, so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns However, you must see if it is well in place; then the patient places the back of his hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then let the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and the physician places his hand on that part of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it returns now, that is good. If not, then constrain with soothing plasters for these abscesses, and leave it thus without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and it does not harm the patient more than while his hand is weakened, and he cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to cauterize near the wound, and perhaps nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 And when the hand is in place, apply the poultice as we have said, then hold it and leave for V days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it cannot be moved well, and there is some difficulty, then soak it in hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in each part, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the front; then stretch the finger, and push the dislocation towards your fingertips until it returns to its place, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the side where it is dislocated; and leave it for II days, then bind it again that day; and bind it as we have said, and unbind it after a day, and make it move, and rebind it; and do this often, until it is straightened, and do the same if it is dislocated at the front of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 About the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several dislocations, there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the sign of this is that the excrement leaps out without control, and he cannot hold it in, and often some members are paralyzed, either both thighs or both arms or one, and often the spine moves into four parts; the one that moves to the back is called "gibbosity": the cure for this is that you return if the gibbosity comes from childhood: then there is no cure or healing of all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And the one that comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancients describe cures with great words, where there is not much benefit in all of them; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the condition called "gilbositeit" which affects the chest in front, there is neither intelligence nor health; and likewise that which comes directly on two sides, and it cannot be cured except by that which properly affects the back, as I say; and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his back in one equal place, and have restraint underneath him so that he does not injure himself; then drive a log into the ground at the head, and another at the feet, and tie a rope underneath the saddle of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two assistants should know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two logs; and let them be well secured, the logs as we have said, and the doctor should place his palms on the spine firmly, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if it does not return with this cure, then take a board of three arms in length, and place it under the patient, and let the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the patient, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and let the physician put his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do the same with the arm that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And it is that you fix two stakes at the head of the patient with an arm's length apart, and towards the feet two others, and there be between each stake a palm's length apart in length; and let there be in each stake one hole, where the arm passes through, and the stakes should be firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each of the two stakes there should be a turning stake on which the rope turns, and between the two turning stakes there should be two small stakes of a palm's length to turn the arm; and then tie the rope that is among the seats to the arm towards the head, and the other rope to the other arm towards the feet, and each of the assistants turns his arm all along the rope, and the master sets the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it is equal, put a desiccating poultice with plenty of egg, and then the dressing, and then the bandage of a tablet three fingers long, which should cover the place of the yellowness and the part of the healthy spine, then bind with a cord, as we have said, and let the patient use delicate nourishment until he is healed; and if anything happens at the end of the healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the bandage that we have mentioned before; sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, because of which one should not have presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	 Of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 Know that in the joints of the hip and the shoulder, dislocations occur alone, not like other joints. The joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and it is more commonly dislocated inside than elsewhere, and rarely in front or behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the sign of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick person's knee opens more than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend his knee at all; and the place which is near is swollen with an abscess, hot, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 And the sign of that which comes to lack, is that this event is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 And the sign of that which comes to the front, is that he straightens his leg according to the completion; nevertheless, do not bend the knee with pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot move forward, and he retains his urine, and his throat swells, and when he walks, he steps on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 And the sign of that which comes to the back, is that he cannot expand his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the throat is softened, and the head of the thigh is in the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 The remedies for this type of dislocation are such that if the dislocation is old, it remains according to its nature, and there is no treatment for it; nor should one have any expectation for it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 And for that in which the dislocation is fresh, and this happens in four ways of dislocation, then you should hurry to turn the joint, and stretch it inside and out, and move it from right to left; by chance it may return, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this manner, then you must have one strong assistant, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with one hand bound above the knee; and another assistant should extend his hand over it in such a way that he places his hands under his armpits, then pull up softly with a cord on the thigh; and another should hold the end of the cord; and they all pull up and down at once, so much so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 This manner of extension is common to four similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If not, then you must put the cure in its likeness. When the dislocation is at the hip, you must have the patient lie on their healthy side, then place the ligament at the root of the thigh, and the place that is below the groin, then extend the ligament upward toward the groin and toward the pubis; then let another minister take his arms, and embrace the thick part of the unhealthy thigh, and stretch it very strongly: it will now return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 Et si tu ne peux pas serrer ainsi comme nous avons dit, alors il faut que tu lies les deux pieds du malade ensemble avec une corde solide et douce sur les deux talons et les deux genoux, et la jambe malade doit être étendue deux doigts plus loin que l'autre. Ensuite, qu'il soit suspendu par la tête à un bâton, et qu'il soit à deux bras de hauteur au-dessus du sol. Ensuite, donne des instructions à un assistant pour qu'il serre fortement le haut de la cuisse, et qu'un autre assistant suspendu avec le malade serre également fortement la cuisse, car les articulations reviennent rapidement maintenant.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 Et lorsque la dislocation est réduite, le malade s'allonge comme nous l'avons dit pour celui qui a une paralysie, et serre une corde sur la jambe malade de manière appropriée, et sur le pied aussi; puis mets deux morceaux de bois, un à la tête et un autre aux pieds, puis place un morceau de bois entre les cuisses du malade au milieu; et qu'il y ait des bandages humides autour pour ne pas blesser le malade, puis que chaque assistant se penche vers lui, et que le médecin aligne la dislocation avec sa main.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If she returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place him on the table and press as we have said in the swelling, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to quickly extend the diseased leg according to what I have said; and let the physician place his hand on the diseased shoulder, then press with the other hand, and draw down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is behind, it is not necessary to extend the diseased leg downwards or lift it off the ground, but rather let him be as if his hip were dislocated behind, as we have said about lying on both hips; and let it be on its back, and the cord extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be ready when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then bring the thighs together, and apply a poultice, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for 3 days or 4, then unbind him, and apply the poultice again; and if you see that they are even, then bind as before, and leave it for 3 days; then unbind him, and let him walk well, until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	 Of the knee dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	 The knee can be dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and out, and from behind; it does not dislocate from the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not bend to his thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee between your palms, and draw it towards yourself with your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee strongly; and another assistant extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he can lightly bend his leg to his thigh; and apply a bandage, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, then unbind; and the patient should not try to walk until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not at all, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	 of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 The ankle is sometimes raised, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inward and outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the sign is that the ankle is swollen and protrudes forward in the direction where it is dislocated: the resetting should be gentle, and it must be gently extended with one's hands when only raised.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is fully dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and have two assistants hold the leg above the ankle; then draw the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and nicely push the foot upwards; and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, restart the procedure, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and drive a stake firmly into the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around, so as not to harm the patient; then have one assistant hold the thigh, and another extend the foot with his hands or with a rope, which he ties above the ankle of the foot; then each assistant stretches equally, and the stake should always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient while being extended; then place the physician equally opposite the dislocation in their hands, and another assistant holds the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it is ready, apply the bandage and gauze on top, and bind tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and protect the nerves that are above the ankle in the back, so that the ligament is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligament softens, bind again; then release at the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before that time, it is not safe that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if pustules come there, then you must soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	 of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 When the fingers are dislocated, you must straighten them gently without strain, and that is easy to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the dislocation is in any knot of the foot's back, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat seat or on a table upright, and place your foot on what protrudes from these joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns; and when it is equal and nothing protrudes, place under the sole of the foot a board with two heads, then press strongly and leave it for three days, then release it; and make him rest until he is cured.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation and one wants to heal it, it often happens that the patient dies; so do not be presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, but not bold; and at first use things that calm abscesses and leave the patient in God’s hands if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then immediately reset the limb to its place before the abscess comes there; and when the limb is in place, administer things that calm abscesses, and treat the wound as needed with dry onions; and if with dislocation there is also a fracture and small bones are displaced, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and beware of entering into a way of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worthless according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your arms and body.
Amen	 Amen means "so be it" or "it is true".
