O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the culmination of the knowledge of medicine along with its practice, and I have brought it to an end through its explanations and clarifications.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 And because the work of hands is lost in our region and has become foreign to everyone, thus the knowledge has perished and disappeared, and there remains nothing of it except for the small descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 And from this come errors and vanities, and intentions are closed off, and knowledge is made distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 Or it seems to me that I want to bring this treatise to life according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And I will also discuss the forms of the irons for cauterization and other tools used in the work with the adjustment of the declaration and their preparation as needed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 And because in our time no good master of hands can be found, the art of medicine is abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to be knowledgeable in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of them, and their movement and resting, and the place from which they issue. ‌
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 And because Ipocras said that the name with the name is much, and with the work it is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	 and likewise in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 We tell you at the beginning of this book that if one is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, he should guard himself against falling into error and harming men;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 just as I have seen many times with those who dabble in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 For I saw a foolish physician who cut into an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 causing so much blood to flow out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 And I saw another physician who extracted a stone from a man's eye, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 and carried away with it a piece of the eyeball, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 And I had already been called to remove it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if one cut him, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 And I saw another physician who undertook to treat a Duke of our land whose leg was broken, and with the fracture he had an open wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 and the physician, full of ignorance, pulled on the fracture over the wound with forceps, and left no salve at all on the wound, and left it thus for one term.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 And he ordered him not to dislocate it at all.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 And so it remained until the leg was completely swollen and the foot became gangrenous.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I was called to come to him and hurried to come and dislocate the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 And when I heard it had been dislocated, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But nevertheless, the corruption had already taken hold in the limb, and could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 And the corruption did not stop spreading through the limb until the whole limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 And I saw another physician who opened an encysted abscess and then inflamed it through the malevolence of his practice.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 For chancre, when it is purged of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corruption can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 That is to say, works where there is danger in many ways; abei li oevres que nus ne pued faire sanz peril. Et por ceu est li mestiers asses prou et difficiles.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 Therefore, you must be careful so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 So take up your arms in confidence, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to safety and be praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 And leave the dreadful diseases to those who have great knowledge.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 And remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may pass from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 Galen says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Ne take not in charge bad illness, lest you be called foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 The first chapter is about fire cautery and also about medical cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 And of the shapes of the instruments, and of the tools for cauterization, and of all that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 The second chapter is also about cutting and boring, and about cupping and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 And this chapter is organized according to the shapes of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 and is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 As we remember the work, it is necessary that I speak about the quality of each temperament and its harmfulness.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest speech and most subtle knowledge and secret answers.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 and many wise men have spoken of this and agreed upon it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 but I am not satisfied with their words, for I fear verbosity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is material, except for two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 that is to say, hot complexion without material and dry complexion without material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 In hot and dry complexions together with material, some have discussed and said that cautery is great help there;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 And others say the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 That cautery is not good for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured with heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 And those who say the opposite claim that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that occur in the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 Because when you examine the man's body and its moisture according to the fire complexion, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 Because I have found it so by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 And yet, do not interfere with it except for those who have experienced it, and who know through long practice the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and duration of time;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 And all the physicians gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 And know, son, that cautery with fire is among the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than cautery with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 For fire is simple, and does not extend beyond the member that it burns, and does no harm to any other member if possible.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 The burning medicines come from one member to another, spreading, and cause disease with serious healing in the affected member.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 And by chance kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The fire, because of its high intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 And this I have found through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it was based on the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 And for this reason I apologize for the length of my speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from the body, as the philosophers say, demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 Or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 And know, son, that they agreed upon the time when the cauteries should be made, and chose patients.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harm that occurs is remedied by the aid of cauterization.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 And also if the cauterization is necessary for urgent and pressing pains, which cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 And do not think of it, dear son, as foolish doctors do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 for the disease that is healed by cauterization does not recur;
et il le dient ensi;	 and they say it thus; 》
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is nothing more than a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and it is more effective than other medicines due to its quick action, and the power of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And it is possible for the illness to come sometimes according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the illness and its power;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 and the superfluous elements are gathered in him by the consumption of food and similar things, except for cauteries applied to a place where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as tooth cauterization for pain, and similar things, and this kind of pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	 but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 but they do not believe that cautery is worthwhile after medicine, but their belief is false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer remedies in some illness and they are not effective, then we apply the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 and they said that cauteries of gold are more effective than those of iron, as they have declared.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 and if it is heated too much;
si font au feu;	 They do at the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 And for this reason, we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet, so that it may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	 of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and it has two effects: it is done because of an illness called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, due to excessive dreams and toothache and throat pain, and especially for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a cleansing medicine, changing the head (i.e., making it wet) for III or IV nights, according to what the virtue and nature and custom of the patient can bear;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 then make the head of the patient dry again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 Then have him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on a soft cushion;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 after that, place the root of your palm at the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 and where your two fingers meet, make it bleed first. Then warm the cautery called "olive," for this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And put it on the spot with a stamped ink mark, and make as you descend and press your hand little by little in turn.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 then immediately lift your hand, and return to the spot if you see a bone appear a little.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 and if you do not see it, then begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 afterwards take a small amount of silk, and put inside it soft cotton, and place on the spot, and leave it there for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 afterwards place a moistened cloth with butter on top.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 and leave it in place until the burn has healed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And the ancients said that the longer an open wound remains, the more it purges itself.
et por ce si aide mues.	 and for this reason, it needs to be moved around.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 And some said that one should let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burnt, and then scrape off what is burnt from the bone, and it should be treated.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And others say that one should leave the cautery on for so long, and press it so hard that you remove the bone as wide as a spindle that women use for spinning, so that the humors may flow out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 and one must leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 afterwards, it should be cleaned and sewn up.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 And these two methods of cauterization do not seem entirely good to me, except in some men where there is reason for fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 and I think that I should leave it; xspace 127
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 and likewise when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more healing and healthier to me, then I work on that together with healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 When chronic pain comes to the whole head and lasts for a long time, then the patient should use irises and pills that are called "cock's comb", and of purging of the head and of oils and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 and if one performs the cautery that we have spoken of before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 Take care that the patient's head is not of a strong nature, and that it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Then cauterize under that cautery a little bit, as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 After that, make a cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place called "vessel".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 And it is the place where one puts cupping glasses.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 And lift your hand so that you do not see the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 The patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it elsewhere.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 And the cauteries of the horns should be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the method.
dou cautere dou chief	 of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the eye is purged with cleansing medicines, and other treatments have been done as I said in the division of diseases, and none of these help.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 Then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, namely with hot iron and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 The cauterization with hot iron is done by taking a piece of alder wood, removing the bark and chopping it into two pieces, then making an incision in the place where the pain is felt so that you can insert the piece of alder wood under the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 and when it has been inserted, tie it and press it firmly, leaving it in place for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 and then untie it and pull it out, and leave the wound open for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 then place a cotton ball soaked in butter on it until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the wound has healed from the ointment treatment;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 And if you see it done thus, do as with some burning medicines that I have written in the twelfth chapter about burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery is performed in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery whose shape is as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 And it is called "clo" because the head is made in the shape of a nail with a hollow at its tip, and in the middle it has a small opening.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 And place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand steady and turn it a little lightly, so that half of its thickness is burned.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 And lift your hand so that the part outside does not burn, and there will be an abundance of blood flowing out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 Afterwards, place cotton wool in vinegar, and put it on the spot for three days.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then put moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cautellare", then do so at the very tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	 of a migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 When you cure this migraine as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the previous cautery of medicine and iron does not help him at all, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 And thus on the painful place a line of half two units long, and remove your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cut the artery and do not go as far as the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 And beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerve should not have regard for it or spasm come to the patient, and beware of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, where there is great fear in cutting, and also for him who does not know about it, who is not learned and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 And leave the work halfway;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 But I will tell you how to staunch blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you the place where it is needed in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 And if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction, along with the cautery that has two knives.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And this cautery is better and more helpful than that one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 of the ear pain due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When ear pain comes from cold, and one has worked with solvent medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 After pointing all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and you move away a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 And it should have ten points around each ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	 Of the mouth's torment
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 Ailment that must be cured by cautery is none other than those that originate from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 And not to make a cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When you treat this similar condition of pain that comes from the flux of humors and purges of the head and gargles, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 one on the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 and place the cautery in the healthy part of the body, and give a cautery on the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as one finger.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 and let the cautery remain until half of the hair is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And it resembles the knife that we mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and the knife should be a little larger.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after curing the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 When the stroke is old and you treat it as we have said, and there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the place that is called «vasselz» as we have said before, and the last cautery on the stomach's opening.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 And let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	 of lead
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 For this illness, one should give the patient large doses and pills that modify the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 then wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and apply a mustard plaster to the occiput, as written in the section on plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 and this is the manner of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If he is cured in this way, good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 and if he is not, then let him undergo three cauteries in the middle of the head descending to the neck, with two fingers' width between each cautery;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 and treat him as the others, and if you see it worsening, and the patient is tolerant, let him undergo one cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if necessary, two more on the two horns, and continue the treatment until it is healed;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 And let the cautery be called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	 of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hair and of what we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 after shaving the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is tolerant, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 and leave it until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 After the treatment, until he is healed, and let the cautery called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned be done.
de l’epilempsie	 Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 The epileptic should not use the cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and able to take medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him a gargle and chew, softening the brain often with good meats;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 After washing his head in the middle, and there make a cautery according to what we have said before, and make a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if the patient is strong and tolerant, make him a cautery as I have said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olivier according to the method that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If the patient is a child, perform the subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 When due to melancholy there are corrupt and excessive humours or thick phlegm, then use the cautery of thin needles as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And if the superfluidity inclines towards melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will purify the brain, as was previously explained in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After washing the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 then make a bandage of linen well made, like a circle, and place it on the head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 and let the patient sit with their arms crossed, and be held firmly from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 then present the linen cloth, and anoint it well with old sheep butter.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 and heat it over a moderate fire, so that one can touch it without being burned;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 then place the circle inside on the head, and let it cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and do this for the patient once each week with other good treatment until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 And if you see cauterizing the wound by making several points throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This method of cauterization moistens the brain equally well;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 And then place moistened cotton soaked in butter and goose fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	 from the movement of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 When the movement first comes to the eyes by the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to cleanse the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 Then instruct the patient to lean their head back, and perform a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on each of the temples if the flow is into both eyes at once, or one if the flow is into one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 and cut off all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then staunch it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incisions how to staunch it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 And sometimes one performs cautery or branding under the two bones behind
dou cors des larmes	 du corps des larmes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When tears of the eyes are old and customary and are on the veins or near the arteries that appear on the head outside;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic excesses, then make the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the eye, descending to the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 perform cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries with the brand under the two bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 And if more is needed, then cauterize it wisely on top of the skull with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 Of the body tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then give the patient three nights of cold drinks;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 after the king of the head, and makes a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 and makes two cauteries of the type called "nail" on the two shoulders, one a little below the armpits
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 and beware of the artery so that you do not cut it
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the papilla of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	 de la raison pourquoi cela se produit :
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 And if you see [it] this way, make two cauteries on the two shoulders as long as the shoulders are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 and do not leave [the fire] there except until the third part of the skin is burnt, according to the method that I have said
dou poil qui point l’oil	 of the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes turns backwards and pricks the eye, and then one makes cauteries in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 This means "it is to know about fire, or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 Instruct the patient that they should let their hair grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 And if they prick at their base, he should hold his eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow out.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your hand;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 Next, trace on the skin of the eyes a shape that is like the leaves of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then place moistened cotton in egg white and musk on the eye, then heat the cautery which has this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 Après cautériser sur le visage où tu as placé un peu de poche, fait-le plusieurs fois afin que l'endroit soit brûlé.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 And the sign of the healthiness of the work is that you see the skin shrink and the hairs raised to the point of the eye.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 Then raise your hand and leave it like this for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burn is gone.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the cure of ointment as long as it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 And if after this the hairs come back and the skin is softened, then repeat the cautery in the same place, as you did first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural place, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a form from parchment like the leaf of myrtle.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 Then take one .З. of French soap and one .З. of quicklime, grind them well together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 and make it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it on the form you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelid paper.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 And if the patient is affected in only one eye, one should work on that one, and if in both eyes as well.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 And place moistened cotton beneath the eye in vinegar.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 And let the head of the patient be in your hand and place your finger on top of the ointment, and press the pouch and move it each time the patient feels the burning of the ointment, for they feel the burning as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 When you have done this for some time, remove the medicine with your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 And when the burning has passed, lift up the skin, and look if you see the flesh raised as if it were lifted by the constriction of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 and if so, then all is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 If not, then apply more ointment to the place where the ointment has not worked, until your work is equal and your eyes are focused;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then place a piece of cloth soaked in butter over the burned area until the heat subsides, then treat the ointment area, which is called "diaphenes" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you must watch carefully your work with great care lest any of the medicine fall into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin the treatment again on the area that has been softened by the skin properly, just as you did before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 after the healing of the treatment until it is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 and this is the shape of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this should be your constraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 and the right way should not be denied to those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you burn it with a cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Command the patient to place his head in your hand;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 and let the servant hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor should he lower his head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 After, place moistened cotton in egg white or parsley juice over the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 After, heat the iron which is thus:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 And it is shaped at the tip like the quill of a feather, together with the nail being the cauterizing iron.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If you wish, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, let it be like a tent pole.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 However, this shaped one is more suitable for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After, press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 And if it is closed, then open it, and draw out the head.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 After, place the hot iron strongly on [the wound], and hold your hand on the iron at the side of the nose above the eye, so that your hand does not slip.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 And place the cautery in the oil’s fat, and it corrupts.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you approach the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 If not, then reapply the cautery once more, or again if needed, and leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 afterwards place a moistened cotton ball in butter, and use the dry dressing until it is healed. If forty days pass without healing, apply a corrosive medication until the bone is exposed;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 And the king according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a manner of cautery for fistulas that some ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 Understand a fistula, and open the site;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Afterward, place in the opening one subtle camphanum of this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 and it is made to the amount of one-third of an ounce of lead;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 And hold your hand firmly on the cauterizing iron, and let the patient not move at all, lest the molten lead run to his eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 And it is necessary that one place on the patient's eye moistened cotton in white of egg or in water:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 The lead is also useful for the place of a fistula, and the healthy one by marvelous healthiness.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have spoken of, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then a perforation must be made in the nostril, and the fistula should be brought back to the body of the nose according to its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	 cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 Mouth ulcers often occur on the lips called "hair", and similarly on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 When you treat these ulcers as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat a small cautery knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 And put it quickly in those cracks until it reaches the bottom;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat the place with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 of the throat abscess
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and afterward it becomes putrid and rotten and is swollen and becomes a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 And you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not benefit at all:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 Therefore, it is necessary for you to have the cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 after the hole or opening of the fistula, and keep your hand so that the iron comes to the bottom of it, and in the lower place;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this once or twice, after the treatment that we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 and if it is treated thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	 of the teeth's movement
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the patient in your hand;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 After heating the cautery, which will be described hereafter, place a reed over the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 And quickly insert the hot cautery into it, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 Afterwards, remove your hand and restart the cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 Then let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water, holding it in for an hour and spitting it out forcefully.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 And in this way the tooth that was moving is made firm, and the softened gum is restrained, and the moisture causing corruption is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	 of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 When toothache comes from cold, whether it is in the air or wind, and medical treatments do not work, then there are two methods of cautery needed.
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 And that of butter and that of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 Cautery with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and put the end in an iron or bronze spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent peg, and moisten it in melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it is cooled;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 and thus do often until its power comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and put hot iron on it until the heat reaches the depth of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 The cautery with fire is such that you take a reed of iron or bronze, and it should be thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 après que tu as chauffé le cautère (de sorte que sa forme vienne comme indiqué ci-dessus), place-le sur la dent et maintiens ta main en place jusqu'à ce que le cautère soit refroidi.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 fais ceci souvent, car la douleur disparaîtra le même jour ou le lendemain.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 Et il faut que le patient remplisse sa bouche de bon beurre avant l'application du cautère, puis qu'il rince sa bouche.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 et voici la forme du cautère :
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 Et fais un cautère sur n'importe quelle dent que tu veux, en fonction de tes capacités.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 et voici la forme de la canne :
des scrophules	 of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 Lorsque les scrophules sont causées par des humeurs froides et humides, et qu'elles ne répondent pas à la digestion par des médicaments, alors chauffe le cautère comme indiqué ci-dessous. Il doit avoir deux ouvertures pour permettre aux fumées de s'échapper du côté opposé du cautère.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it there for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 And place a cotton swab moistened with butter over the burn until the blister is removed.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterward, treat the area with onions and linseed until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the dog:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When moisture prevails on the channels of the brain, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be emptied by purgative medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 Afterwards, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go as far as the throat, but only a little way into the esophagus.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 After that, he makes another cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavicle" as we have the form before;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and treat the place as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	 from the heat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 When the disease is due to cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor dryness, and the disease is chronic, he should make two cauteries on the temple in close places;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 and let the cautery be called "clavicle" according to the form that was said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 And if you wish, make a cautery by pricking into the entirety of the cautery that is called "finger" as its form is described here in the case of ear disease;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And let the points go as far as 30, or around that number.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the place according to what was said before, and let the cautery be at three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 And because the cauteries are lighter, therefore you make three in succession.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 Of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 Afterwards, have the patient lie on his back and on his side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 afterwards lift the heart which is inside the ribcage with your left hand's two fingers;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has 2 nerves below it, as follows:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the side, and let the shape of the cautery be accompanied by 4 other cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 and for this reason, make a cautery with the 3-nerve cautery, so that the figure of the cauterization is made up of these 6 cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the 3-nerve cautery:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, so that there are eight cauterizers.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 After place the cautery made of burnt hemp seed;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 then make the patient rest, and do not move the member for a long time until it is well rested.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if it is dislocated on top, which happens rarely, then make a cautery above the thick part of the burn, or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When cold and much moisture come into the stomach to such an extent that it strains his complexion, and many catarrhs befall him, and in the usual ways of treatment he does not benefit, then the patient must be placed on his back, and stretch out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 Then afterwards make three cauteries: one below the heel of the foot by the width of a finger, with all the cautery blazing, and two cauteries on either side so that the shape of the cauteries is in three corners, and there is such space between them that they do not touch each other when they emit pus;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 and let the cautery be so deep that it reaches the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without deviation:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 Et si vous voyez cautériser avec un grand cautère dans l'estomac selon cette forme ;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 et celui qui aura peur de ce cautère, cautérisez en piquant et en touchant l'estomac à ce point selon la quantité que vous voyez d'en haut ;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 ensuite, faites céder tout le pus qui est appelé « poin ».
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, until it heals.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 Lorsque le foie a de la douleur due au froid, à l'humidité et à une grande flatulence, cela signifie qu'il a été fortement altéré par des excès de substances ;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 et le patient n'est pas guéri par les moyens que nous avons mentionnés précédemment, et cela ne lui apporte aucun bénéfice, alors il faut qu'il soit traité sur la base de ses propres caractéristiques ;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 And make a sign of three cauteries according to this form and this shape and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the ribs of the man come.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press too much with your hand on all the cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 And let only half of the cautery be burned, and let the patient stand on his feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 And if he cannot, then let him be lying down, and extend his legs, and lift his arms.
et c’est li forme:	 And this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 And if your intent is to, then cauterize these cauteries with the cautery knife, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn all the heart, for you would dry out the whole body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And let it not reach the boiling point, for the heart is very sensitive there, and you should know this for certain.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not very strongly;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 And if it is in the membrane, then the patient feels intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 And then, when this treatment should be carried out by the doctors, it is necessary for the patient to be seated upright on his bed;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And then have the place where the abscess is hot and then heat the cautery that resembles a grape, for this is its shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 And cauterize with the cautery until the heart is burnt, and reach up to the spleen, so that the entire viscera are all outside.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 after the care according to the care of the excrement until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 and it is not fitting that of this cautery anyone should use except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and through whom many of these diseases have been corrected at some point.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can boldly work, nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave him.
dou cautere de pleuresin	 of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 The ancients said that one should make for pleurisy cauteries from the roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 And wet it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the collarbone and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the part that is beneath the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind a little;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 And one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the ribs of the chest opposite the cautery that is between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 And do not press with your hand, but rather hold it openly as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 And some old people say that some men use a cautery like a razor, and heat it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And so it is with pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work there is danger that the patient may die now or a fistula may occur which cannot be healed.
de la mice	 of the urine
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 When you treat the disease of urine according to what we have said in the sections on treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways of fire cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 From which there is a manner such that you make three or four cauteries, lining according to the length of the bladder, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 And do not press your hand onto the entire cautery, and let the patient be leaning on their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 And lift the scrotum which is near the bladder, or the side of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the scrotum be according to the size, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 Afterwards, he applies two inflamed nerves so that the heart is pierced from the other side, and then draws out through the cautery, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 And if you see, then cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment when it has excreted pus for a long time, and this is different from the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	 of the dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery is not beneficial to those with dropsy, except in the manner called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 When you heal according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your healing does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the buttocks, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the bladder, two behind the back on the spine, and one in the place of the breast;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 and let the cautery be very close to the heart's breadth.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time to release pus, and do not neglect the patient's care after the cautery;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 And if healing is hastened, then the two intentions will be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 The form of the cautery for the stomach should be the tool that we have previously shown;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 And that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is placed here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	 Of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical and full of citrin urine, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 Et ne pénètre pas trop profondément, ainsi tu risquerais de toucher l'os citrin, et que le fer à cautériser soit conforme à cette forme:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shinbone;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 And let one of the long cauteries be below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 And let the cauteries heal over slowly without cure, for the awl comes out.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 after the cure of other wounds that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	 de la ménopause
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 When an intestinal solution comes from cold and moisture, to the point that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by ordinary means of treatment;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 and you see the patient well-tolerating and of strong virtue, then make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before in the stomach cautery, in the circular cautery.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 and four subtle cauteries around the navel, each one subtly clavicle, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each eye, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	 of the cure for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 When hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or several, and they are old and consist of large, cold, moist, corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in sections, and it does not help, then make cauteries.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 Three on the spine of the back, which are entirely below the navel, point by point in a triangle, and one cautery below the anus two fingers.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 And if you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face place one great cautery on the stomach, as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the bladder with all the cauteries closed.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 And let the cautery remain open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the cure of the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 of the fleshiness which is named "tegula
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you cut the nail, heat the cautery that looks like a razor, and then place it entirely ablaze on that cut nail;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 and leave your hand there until the cautery comes to the base of the vein, so that the blood flow is stopped;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 do this once or twice, and if there is much nail, cauterize each one as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 afterwards, care for the wounds until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 and if you cauterize with a large cautery on top of gold, it will have greater benefit.
de plaie mal curee	 of a poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 When the patient cannot tolerate cutting or opening, which we will explain in its place, such illness occurs that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When someone gets a fistula, and it is open and emits foul and corrupt moisture, you should probe it all with a fine tent, and make sure that you know the depth of the entire tent.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 Afterwards, heat the cautery that looks like a razor and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the tent has entered, and restart the cautery until that rotten and corrupted flesh is burnt, once, or twice, or three times, according to how much is needed;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 And guard yourself against drawing out the nerves that are within, and from large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, guard yourself against these places, and do not perform such fevers except in a fleshy place, and consider that it is not persistent;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 After curing the place until it is healed, and if the place is healthy and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 And if the matter is not removed, know that the place is torn, and the bone is corrupt at its root.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 And thus as one of those which we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	 of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and from a great flatulence, and she does not want intercourse, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the clavicle cautery that we have previously mentioned;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 And if we cauterize in the middle, she will have three cauteries in a line, and they will be of greater help.
de la vessie	 of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the opposite side above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one to the right and one to the left, and let each cautery be as long as the thumb of a man.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 And make the cautery on the back, or two if you need it.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 And let the cautery be clavicle according to the shape previously mentioned.
de la marris	 Of the uterus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 And when they come, there is great pain.
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 Then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two on the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 And let the cautery be clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	 Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When the viscous moisture descends to the hipbone, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 And the place of separation is found, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip bone with a circular cautery, and sign before the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is within the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And let the cautery be such as that with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive cauteries, and let the cautery be as deep as all the hearts.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And care for it until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	 Of hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 When pain comes in the hip bone and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not help, and the disease is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 then it is necessary that you purge the patient of heavy humors with stinking pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 Afterwards, make a cautery on him;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 that is to say, with burning medicines together, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 you should cauterize on the hipbone three triangular cauteries in this manner, and make them deep and large, and let there be between each cautery a space as thick as a finger, and let the cautery be olive-sized;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the hipbone, for which there are four, like this:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 And if you see, then cauterize it with the circular cautery that we have previously mentioned for hip dislocation;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the thickness of the flesh is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the manner in which one proceeds in sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip, and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 And if it goes as far as the thigh and the leg, then make two cauteries there where the patient says he feels pain, and one cautery above the ankle at four fingers' width, a little to the left side;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 and let the cautery be cupped, and let the thickness of the flesh be burned.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near there, then cauterize where he feels the pain with three or four points at the cautery which is called "point".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 And if necessary, do more of them;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if he knows that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, make him a knife or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and thus cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it for so long that the entire leg was swollen, as well as the foot, which was then punctured and rotted completely.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a colic from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 And the wise say that for the hip cautery, which is of this kind, make such an iron and let it be at the tip as thick as a penny or a little less, and let it be barbed, and from one barb to the other let there be the thickness of a pea.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 And let the assistants be in two parts, and also like knots, and there should be one handle of iron well-made.
et c’est li forme:	 And this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then place it on the sore of the ill hip, and turn it over onto the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 And the cautery once, the cautery returns and leave it for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 And then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the care of dressing until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Al-Zahrawi says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and if one sees little who uses it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 And yet this is of good cauterizations, which he can endure, and there where it fits.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 The cautery of medicine is such that you make the instrument between the teeth in which descends the margin of the door, and let it be of brass or iron with one long side, and at the height have II holes, and between each the size of a finger's thickness;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 And they should be open from without and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 Afterwards, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and then your hand very high on the box of the hip;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 afterwards throw between the two circles of the hot water which should be heated over the fire with a bag, and let it stay for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and burning of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 Because there is biting, as if by fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 and when the biting has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip; leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until what is blackened by the burn is removed;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 and let it sit for three days so that pus can be drawn out.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and this would be the last aid after the treatment of onion until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or the leg, make an instrument that dyes with alum in the same way that you have done on the hip.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And this is the manner of hot alum, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take quicklime and live coal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 And if there is a small hole except for where the point of a razor can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 and put another well-sealed pot on top of it, and put alkali, heat, and sweet water on top, so that there are two powders on top until you have well held it in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 and leave it thus until the water descends into the sealed pot, then take all that water and throw it on heat and on alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 And then it will be very hot and is used in many works of medicine and in the cautery of other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 For it performs the same work as fire, and there are other medications with which one can cauterize the hip well thus, such as terebinth resin, honey of cardamom, heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a treatment whereby a man was healed from the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, praising it greatly, saying that no other treatment was done, and that he was cured at once when this treatment was performed, and then he bathed as is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 And says in such a way that you take green and dry tin, and grind it very well with a little fat, and place it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and leave it there.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And let it remain for three hours, until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then have him enter the bath so that his body is slightly warmed, and put him to bed, and all the pain will leave, and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 Et sachez que nul ne doit user de cautère de telles médecines, si ce n'est après l'évacuation du corps.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hairs, it helps greatly.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Prenez de la laine et badigeonnez-la d'huile vieille, puis placez-la sur la fosse située entre le gros orteil et le suivant, appelée fossile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 Afterwards, take dry goat hairs and hold them in the fire until they are charred, and place them on wool, and leave them until they are stained;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 and do it again in this way, and do not stop doing so until you feel that it reaches the hip, and that the pain ceases;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat.
de la dolor dou dos	 Of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 When pain comes to the back, from falling or blows or too great evacuation, or similar to cold matter spread, for none of these reasons is it worth using cautery, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 It is necessary that after the patient has been purged with stinking pills or other similar things, one makes on his back, where the pain is, three lines signified by an inch, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 And let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "point";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 and if you see fit, do III or IV cauteries at the midpoint of the nail-shaped cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 Often this disease occurs in small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow forehead when they wake up, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 And you will find at the end of the spine on the back, and we see an appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see this, and wish to cure it, then cauterize with the hot iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 So that the iron touches each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed iron two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, beware that you do not apply cautery in a place where there is a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	 of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that spreads throughout each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which physicians call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicines, it is cured by cautery in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 Make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary that you cauterize on the surface of the foot, then make a full cautery at what is called the "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 And if the pain extends to the knees and other joints, which often happens, then make three or four cauteries on each knee from each side, making the entire cautery olive-shaped.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if you need more, do it more, but do not hold your hand outside the length of the heart's blade.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend as far as the knee and the back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 And if the pain is in the hands, make an incision around the wrist two lines long;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make an incision on each joint and on the palm of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pain reaches the ribs or the shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and administer medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you take good care of him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	 of the rupture of the shoulder
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When vomiting comes in waves, and the bowels descend into the kidneys and this is recent, it should be that when you see him being treated, he should not eat that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 And that he uses things which cause wind to leave, so that the feces descend from his stomach;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to take his thighs until the buttocks are repaired, and bring them together with your fingers, and sign from below the root above the wrist bone, and all in one sign which should be similar to half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 then heat the cautery with what is used for this purpose:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it becomes white and falls out.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 Then reset the buttocks in their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 and the practitioner should take his hand such that they do not return behind.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 and firmly hold the thighs of the patient, and place a pillow and a bolster under the thighs, and another one under the feet which he should hold with his hands; ︎
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 Then place the cautery on the sign as much of your hand as possible, and hold it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 And be careful that the boil does not burst when you apply the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	 so that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 and so that the patient does not die from this or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not go as far as the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 And it is necessary that the cautery for children be fine according to their size, and also large for adults according to their size.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 after three days, cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is gone.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 after curing with other ointments until it is healed, let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary that his nursing be prolonged for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he tries to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, let him be provided with a well-made splint, and carry it for another forty days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against too great repletion of drinking and eating, and from laughing too loudly.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And when he does this teaching, then he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	 of belly rupture
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, let him make the cautery of the cautery again according to its size, and let it be burned a third of the heart.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 after the treatment as we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-pronged cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the place of the cut and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and then place your hand in the middle with the whole cautery nailed.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cautery is lighter and easier.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 Of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes to any limb, from falling or striking, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poin
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 if it is healed from the first cautery, that is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 if this is not the case, commence another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it should move to the nearest member, therefore you must do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	 of mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 Mixtures are sometimes helped by cautery with great benefit, and likewise the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 When you see her being cauterized, take care if the illness is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not abate or stop, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: ‌
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 I insert the needle into the head at the nape, and the other towards the forehead at the hairline.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 and the second above the two temples, and one behind on the occiput.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 and let your hand be such that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out freely so that the vapors of the gross humors can exit.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 and cauterize on the bladder according to what was before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 And if the disease is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 and it clearly worsens, then you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, and one cautery at the base of the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the buttocks and another nearby, and two on each shoulder.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 And two on each rib, and two on each tendon of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the lower part of the spine.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 And sometimes one performs a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 And know that the more cauteries are performed, the more help is provided, and the greater the benefit.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After the cure, treat the place with flour of peas mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauteries on the member according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 and let the cautery be a little inside the thickness of the heart.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then the treatment should continue until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 And sometimes one performs the cautery both on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 yet no one should interfere with it unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	 Of cauterizing
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 When the disease called "albaras" is aggravated and medicinal remedies have no effect, then one should cauterize with a cautery that is a little deep, according to the thickness of the heart, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 Then take flour of vetch and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of a pigeon and blood of an almond tree, one part each;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it all be mixed together, and bound with a cloth, and applied to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 The treatment of cancer by means of cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When cancer first appears and you see it stop, then cauterize it with a circular cautery all around the tumor.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 Yet the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the cancer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupt, and I have seen it happen sometimes.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around it, with the cautery that is called "circular," as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 of the swelling that cannot subside
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati," it delays death either due to the excess of the disease or because of the weakness of the patient when he is old and lacks blood, or due to time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 and you see that it hastens death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	 afterwards, leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 Because she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you see her pierce through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" so that the cautery pierces through to the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it on the surface in such a way that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the treatment until he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	 The fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 There is another type of illness called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than the consumption of a limb, for it consumes the limbs just as fire does dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 If you see this disease in a place that can bear the fire of cautery together, then heat up the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is needed for the place where the disease is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 afterwards, cauterize from all sides until you remove all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupt may be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for III days, and apply a soft bandage with oil on the cauterized places until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment of burning wounds producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if after three days healthy flesh does not grow, this is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 and if not, then restart the cautery on that which remains of the corrupt place.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 And this disease has sometimes been cured by liquid medicine instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 but nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already described the treatment with liquid medicine in the section (on that topic).
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 of leeks that grow near the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 It often happens that on the soles of the feet, according to our understanding, there grows a disease called "tumor," which is a large, hairy growth that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cautery for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 Fire cautery is that you heat the cautery like it is a feather of an owl, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and there should be subtle edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 after placing everything hot on the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the head of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 and leave it there for three days until it begins to putrefy.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with silk and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the site of burn with warm ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 And if they are turned outward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, you should apply a hot water cautery to it.
et est en teil maniere:	 and it is done in this manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 take a reed of iron or brass, or a goose quill, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, on the small warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 and put the chain on so that it touches all around, then place a pouch of hot water on it, hold your hand well, and press your hand in circles so that the edge of the chain reaches the base of the nail, and let the hot water find its deep way to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 and let the patient bear the scalding of the hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 then leave it like that, and it will be uprooted from all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Thus do one after another, so that you exhaust all those which are in the body, then cure the wounds which produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	 cure the trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 When someone trembles from cold of the nerves, or from quartan fever or another, then you must make four or three cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 And in the case of cautery on the foot, and also on the stomach for the liver cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 it will cause the body to shake, and speed up the healing process from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	 stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes appear on the outside of the body as baths or stinking pustules, which come from large corrupt substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 if necessary at first when they appear, then cautery should be performed on each head of the boil:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood, with the tip grasped in fire, or a long root of Aristolochia, or a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they cannot grow afterwards, but the superfluousness from which they come is dissolved, and the person is healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 But this must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	 when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 Often there is a great loss of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 And it is a very serious matter to lose blood.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 And yet when this happens to someone, you must hurry to put your finger on the vein of the wound, and press it very hard until the blood stops flowing under your finger, so that no drop comes out anymore;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 then put on the fire several small and large olive-shaped cauteries until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 Then take I, whether large or small according to the wound and the place where the vessel is cut, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery until the blood is coagulated.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 And if it spurts when you lift your finger from the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stopped;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 and know that when the blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well coagulated, even if the artery is large, except by one of the four methods that we have said:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 or by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to coagulate blood.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 And it must be bound and held firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 Whoever administers stopping by tightly tying cloth or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, if it does not benefit, it can be of no use.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a mirror or medicine at hand, then he must put his finger tightly on the vein's wound as we have said, and press firmly until it is constricted above the wound and above the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 And do not move the finger, but frequently apply cold water until it is very cold and the blood becomes thickened and constricted.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 And make inquiries beforehand about those who need cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 Here begins the second book of the cure for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require fire cautery or hot medicines, and the questions and causes, and the instruments and forms of cauterization.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 And I have placed this chapter from the top of the head to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same route so that one may find more easily what one seeks.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 if they are of such a nature that they have taken care of themselves with their illness to the point where they die quickly because of the madness that they experience from their illness and the severity of their sickness.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 And of these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 And there are some who give you their mind, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 "wait, I am healed";
et li maladie est despitouse.	 and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 You should not agree with those who come to you in this manner, but put more importance on your honor than on your greed. Do not open yourself foolishly, but wisely to that of which you are certain and from which you can receive benefit and praise.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 and use prognosis and diagnosis in the treatment of your patients, so that health may be restored;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 and this will help you to acquire good renown, glory, and praiseworthy memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 Very dear son, may our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 Now I have arranged this chapter in discussions by chapters, following what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you may find more easily that of which you will have need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 full of water from the head
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 You should know that this disease often comes to children during childbirth, and when the midwife holds the baby's head too tightly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 and sometimes it happens for no apparent reason.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all the cases I have seen, death comes quickly.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 Therefore, it seems to me that I should refrain from treating such cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled each day so that he could not support it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture is collected under the bone on the forehead, between the brain and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 And the operation is such that if there is moisture between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should cut a wide slit in the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 and let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 and see here the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, as shown in this figure.
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the seams of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out strongly when you press it with your hand inside, and this is not answered to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 then you must cut three slits in the head like this:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, draw out all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After closing the slits with lint and powder, put wine and oil on them, and leave it like this until the fifth day.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Then dislocate it, and treat the wound with compresses and ointments, and let the head be pulled evenly, and then give the patient dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 And another method of incision is that you observe where the abscess opens and the gathering of pus;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 for sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	 sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	 sometimes to the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	 and sometimes to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 Therefore cut there where the abscess opens, and the accumulation of pus, and make the incision according to what you can do about it;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 and beware that you do not cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 And let there be a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	 De la règle
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 Lorsqu'il arrive à quelqu'un une maladie appelée «catarrhe» aux yeux ou au sein, et que la maladie est ancienne, et que le traitement par médicaments ne profite pas, alors le dernier recours est la cautérisation avec ce dont on coupera les deux artères.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 Therefore, when you see them covered, the patient should lean back.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 After rubbing the area with a rough cloth until the veins appear, the patient should pull their neck taut against the entire cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 then look where the vein beats, and the location of one and the other are behind the ears, and they are found rarely;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 then mark the places with ink, then cover each one with a sharp spatula of two parts, as deep as the cut goes to the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 And if you see, push the spatula underneath the artery and cut above it, cutting as one should across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 And when the vein is cut, the blood jumps up continuously outward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And if the artery does not open to touch, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three fingers' width, then take hold and cut down to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 And that which should be put out of the blood is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	 Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If there remains a point on the bone like a spike, then cut it so that such abscesses do not come there; then press the wound and bind it, and continue the care of bandaging until it is healed.
de emigrainne	 of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 Quant old age comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples, and ancient insanity and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine and all this does not benefit him at all, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 And the manner of their extraction is that the patient should let the hair on his temples grow long, and pay attention to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its pulsing, and it protrudes little outside except in some men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 and if it is broken, let the patient pull its neck with some cloths, then rub the place with some rough cloth, and rinse the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 then take the spoon of which there is the form here:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then draw it up with forceps, and carefully separate it from the tissues that are underneath each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 and if the artery is thin, turn it with the point of the hook, then cut that part according to the quantity of the two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 For if it is not cut, then the blood does not stop at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 And draw blood for the VI c/j until III;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that putrefaction does not occur before the wound is healed, and let the blood flow out gradually.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 Then cut the excess that is between the two ligaments in that same hour, and then, if you see fit, use the cautery knife to cauterize down to the bone until the joints are severed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 And this is a moderate work, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 Because the cautery serves to dry out moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 for this reason it is of great help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 Where, for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and apply well-made bandages on top.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when they are unwrapped, let them be treated with dry medications that promote the growth of flesh and bandages until they heal.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if there is no bleeding from the artery as long as you work there, then hasten to use the copper with the caustic, and apply it to the place where you have put the vitriol and hold it in your hand until the blood is cauterized.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 And if you do not have this available, then place your finger on the spot until the blood is frozen, and wash the spot with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it as needed.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 And one who is more skilled and lighter in extracting the artery is that you should cauterize the wound with this sharp caustic from two sides, but let the incisions be well spaced to retain their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 Because when the instrument is too damp, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 And there should be a finger's width between the two knives, and then when you have burned both places with the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the wound in two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 And let there be a space between the two heads, for it is not fused by this cautery entirely.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	 tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are on top of the head of the shoulder, and no medical treatment benefits it, and you see the face of the patient redden, and he feels a throbbing in his forehead as if trembling;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 and the eyes are cloudy and moist so that the hair of the eyelids has fallen out, and the eyelids are heated and scalded by the burning of the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 And the ancients called it "treatment for bruising," and it is that you should instruct the patient who has this disease to let the hairs grow on his forehead. Then make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 And let one of the incisions be like this: two fingers' width across the forehead, running down to the nose, and the others, two fingers' width apart, above the ribs. Be careful not to cut the arteries that are on the sides, above the ribs.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 Keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be three fingers' width wide.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And have ready a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping away the blood, then apply the pointed spoon in two parts as shown here.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 From the incision by the temples down to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 And scrape all the skin that is between the two incisions, along with the soft tissue that lies on the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spoon firmly.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 If you insert into the first incision the instrument called "scalpel," which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, it is this form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And place the sharp side towards the flesh to the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle of the incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the heart, and then make another cut in the middle fissure until the other extremity.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 And then drain the blood equally, and press the area where the blood was taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 Then place in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on damp cloths soaked in wine, oil, and garlic, and ensure that any abscess does not develop there.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a large poultice of hot water, then treat with ointment made from basil and rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	 Of the moisture of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When a person has an acute catarrh, and you see the eyes dimmed and small, and the vision weakened, and the eyelids burnt;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 and the hair falls out, and there is sharp pain in the head, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 then know by these symptoms that those substances and this catarrh come from many veins, and the appropriate treatment for it is as follows:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And it is that you command the patient to shave his forehead, then make a great incision in the middle of the forehead, and another on both temples.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be down to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during chewing;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then remove between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen bandages there;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 then place on it cloths soaked in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying substances that promote the growth of flesh.
En teil maniere:	 In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 and administer it to these wounds to promote the growth of flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 Of ear blockage
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 All that falls into the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 or grain, or beast, or stone from a mine or similar thing like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 And things flowing like water and easily, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear, stone or other kind of thing that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see the stone, then let some drops of violet oil or sesame oil drip onto it, then bring about its extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 and make him sneeze with pepper, and stop up his nostrils when he is about to sneeze, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 and stretch the ear upward.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 Many times this cure succeeds;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 and if it does not succeed, bring about the extraction with fine tweezers, of which here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 If it succeeds with tweezers, that's good; xspace Car il n’i ad point de perill, et ne desnature pas li membre.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 if not, then bring about the extraction with a subtle little instrument of small size
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 and if it does not come out by that means, then make a tube of bronze and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal strongly, and stop up what is around the tube with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the tube
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 then pull very hard, for very often it comes out as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 and if it does not come out in this manner, then take birdlime and put it into some instrument that is suitable for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 then press the birdlime onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull hard.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 And if it does not jump out of all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear before an abscess or spasm comes.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 And the manner of the split is that you first bleed the patient from the temples, and draw blood according to the measure of his strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the fat or hanging place;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 And let the cut be like a crescent moon, until you reach the bone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck on it quickly to your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 And if there is pus which is inside and it swells, then administer extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 And if it cannot come out, then administer a fine thin sponge according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision in that abscess
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not make it when you think that the pus is moist because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 Then strain it through fine sieves and in a press, as we have said, so that the extraction may be light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 When water falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze first with condiments, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let him lie on that same side where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 if it jumps through this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 And if not, then take many stones according to the length of your hand, thin and light, and heat them a little in the fire; xspace
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 And put the patient on one side of his ear, and make him sit on his feet on the other side, and strike another stone against the stone that is in the ear;  xspace abei
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 And do not stop making as if of stone on stone until all the water has come out, and so it jumps out all at once;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 And if you see it, take a reed and put one end in the ear, and set fire to the other end until the reed is completely burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 Then do this again with other reeds until all the water has come out, as we have said before regarding stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 In extracting a small creature, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the section on division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 but if it is large enough to be felt, then use an extraction by puncture;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 And this is the easiest way to remove anything that might be in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 In the extraction of maggots from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must look at the ear towards the sun.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 If there are any maggots present, draw them out with fine tweezers. And if they cannot be seen, then take the cane as we have described its form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 And insert the finer end into the ear according to the amount of the patient's suffering. Then suck on it until the entire cane is empty.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Do this frequently until all the maggots come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 And if they do not obey in coming out, then stop up around the cane with cotton as I have said in the previous section.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 And if they do not protrude strongly as we have said, then administer the distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, then the form will be like this as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 And whether it is made of silver or bronze, let there be small holes at the bottom and an opening above for distillation.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 And to press in the distillation, use a well-made bronze instrument for this purpose. And if you wish, take a razor and wrap it tightly around the point with cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 Then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you wish of your medicines into the reed, and let the reed be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 Then put inside the ear all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is dripped into the opening of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 and let the patient feel inside, and let the drops be heated in a pot over the fire before they are dripped into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 and ensure that it is not too cold, for then the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 Of ear blockage
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 Some children are born with no opening in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 and the same thing happens to adults due to the obstruction of a wound or born flesh inside the ear, and these obstructions sometimes go very deep into the ear, so that it cannot be seen.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 and sometimes the pot pours out of the opening, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 That which comes from the deepest part, if it cannot be seen, is of grave healing in many forms. And in that which can be seen, you must place the patient's ear to the sun;
et regarde dedens:	 and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 if you see the hairy part appear, then work with all this spatula of which there is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 And let it be sharp and cutting both in front and behind fully, so that it does not wound the ear.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 if the hair is of flesh or body of the ear, hold it with fine tweezers, and trim lightly until all that flesh is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the excision is deep in the ear, then take a subtle and light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it in the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 If you feel the hair which causes the patient discomfort to hear, prick lightly and ensure that you do not damage the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 Then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisturize it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on top.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary to remove the tent and insert another tent moistened in ointment made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling has subsided.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then continue the treatment until it is cured.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 And if bleeding continues, soak a sponge in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatise on distillations.
de la char des papieres	 of parchment
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 This athelul that comes in papers from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and scrape it off with a spatula made of its roots. 》
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 Then put on the place a preparation of vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 And if it comes out, then cauterize with the subtle lens-shaped cautery, and afterwards the cauterizer should move around the incision.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 and many times they return, until something remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 and when they are cauterized with fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	 of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 Many times there come in the eyes something that seems like hail in its form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstone," and it is a mass of thick moisture in the eye, both above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	 the procedure is as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 take care if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and this is a slight matter to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 make it wide, then lightly scrape each part, then take with tweezers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 if you cannot cut without piercing the skin a little, it does not bother the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 and if the tear is large, stitch it together with one stitch, and treat until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 and if it is small, do not use force, because the salve will restore it soon and generate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 And if the earwax has descended into the ear toward the upper part, invert the skin, and extract the earwax with tweezers, and cut and press from one side and the other.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 and if the skin is separated by the incision, it does not matter;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And when a carbuncle is cut, lift the eye with salt water, and treat the place of one who eats flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	 of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 Exinach is a fat that is eaten on toasted bread, and this happens more often in children than in other people, and it afflicts their eyes greatly, and in the mornings they have catarrh, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 and therefore they always lie on their faces, and sleep face up, and their eyelids underneath are moist because the inflammation and appearance are covered by the exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you squeeze the place between your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 And the manner of this work is such that the patient places his head in your hand;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains externally each part, then place it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 and press with your two hands from both sides, so that the edges are gathered into the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit wide enough, and let it not be larger than the wound that is made for bleeding veins;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 and pierce the skin completely until you reach the edges;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 and in many ways the edges of the slit come out, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 Pull out then all at once a piece of cloth between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 And be careful not to approach the opening, so that you do not reach all the way to the eye and injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 And if the skin does not open at the beginning of the incision, gently widen the incision a little until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 Then pull it out as we have said, then moisten the cloth in oil and water, and place it on the area, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And there are men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, then cure with soothing plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	 of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 When hairs that are not natural appear on the eyelids and become entrenched, they harm the eyes and bring about various illnesses such as persistent tearing and softening of the lids and cornea, to the point that it causes blindness.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 And there are four methods of treatment:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 either by cautery with fire, or by administering a drug according to what is said in the previous chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by canes, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 You must place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid towards your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 if it is inside out, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 if not, then you insert a needle with all of its thread above.
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 and place it near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near these hairs, and draw the thread all the way along the eyelid, and turn it towards the nose.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 Then make an incision in the area under the skin, under the attached hairs, covering the entire surface, from the large lacrimal gland to the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 Then pull the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the skin, then sew a figure on the skin, such as the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount you wish to raise the skin which is divided for everyone.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 And so, for someone who needs it, one should cut a large amount of skin according to how the skin is softened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 Then make an incision across the entire surface along the two lines you have marked, and begin from the large lacrimal gland down to the small one.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 and let one of them be a split near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the tip into one of the two corners of the heart, then peel it all off;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle with all one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make the superfluousness of the threads on the two edges stick to anything gluey, if you wish to do this;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 and if not, then don't worry about it, but leave the stitch and the threads for three days or four;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 then cure the wound without stitches with dry and constricting things, for the skin heals by the healing of the wound and the assembling of it, but stitches are harmful (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	 And there is another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 and it is that you trace the paper with a shape similar to the leaves of myrtle, as we have told you, three times devoided according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 Then cut that which overhangs the small forces equally according to the form that is here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 And if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and put it into the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 and put another thread near the large tear duct, and a second thread near the small one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have traced, as we have told you, then join together the two lips of the wound with stitching, and care for it until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar ointments that ease.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 And sometimes it happens that the hair of the skin is turned:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 then you must use what we have said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 but the stitching in one and the other is more artful.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The treatment of dogs is according to this method:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 and it is that you turn the skin and the split inside as I have said, and then make two dogs by art, and two thin ligatures as long as the width of the spatula; 👉 And it is that you turn the skin and the split inside as I have said, and then make two dogs and two thin ligatures as long as the width of the spatula.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 And cut both heads of two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 then assemble one with the other carefully on what hangs over the paper of the eye, and firmly hold the two handles of the two parts;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is held will die and blacken and rot, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If it delays, then cut with force, then care for it until it is healed;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 and when the wound has healed, and the paper has been lifted off, and the hairs will no longer grow.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 and this is the shape of the two handles that you will make according to this drawing, and according to this quantity in length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 The work is such that you take a fine needle, and put a thread of soft and fine silk through it.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 Then join the heads [of the needle] and knot them together finely, and let the length of the threads be one palm long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 Then put another fine silk thread in the quiver [needle holder] briefly, and knot the ends of the thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 then have the patient place his head in your lap.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 and let it be by the sunlight so that the work may be illuminated, for this is a subtle and small work. Then put the needle all the way into the quiver at the root of the hair, and make it pierce the skin quickly until you draw it over the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 Then pull out the hair until it reaches the flesh, and push into the flesh that hair, if there are one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 Then pull your hand until the hair comes out completely from all the flesh into the skin with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 And if the flesh is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, then you will pull the flesh down to all the thread that you have ordered there, until the flesh comes out from the hole above and you see it with your eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 Then pull out the flesh and the thread, and close the eye and the wound for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh rises.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the hair is small, then accompany it with a long natural hair, and let it grow with that one until it is lengthened, and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	 of the eye's infection
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 When this disease called "aleacrati" or purulent matter comes into the eye, there are two kinds of it.
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 One is natural, and the other is unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting, or from cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And the manner of treating it is to cut open that membrane, and separate its lips, and put inside linen threads, and leave it there until it heals.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And it is not necessary to use in the treatment of it things that dry out and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 Because if you do this, then the disease returns worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 But for softening agents, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 And let the rose of water or althea and flax seeds be cooked, and onions of the same type melted in some of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and this is the cure for that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the treasure of your treatment is to be careful that it does not close according to the shape it was before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 and this treatment that we have mentioned is not effective except as a remedy for this disease, so that it does not return to the shape it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This illness, which truly is called "axacrati", is both natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The accident comes from a wound and from a cut and from cautery and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 and the way to perform the treatment on it is that you take a needle with which there are two double threads, and the shaft in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left side of the cheek as far as the right, so that the thread comes out at two places in the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 Then the flesh should be raised above all the needle, and the cup should be wide like a spoon.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 And if the appearance of the stone returns as it should, this is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 If not, then take a scraper and place it in the cleft, and turn the stone, and make two clefts on either side within the stone;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 And the heads of the two clefts should be at the two corners of the incision that you have scraped, and make such angles that when they are assembled, the appearance is like the letter which is called "Y.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 Then remove that flesh according to the quantity whose sides are sharp beneath, following the stone, then join the two freed parts and sew them with a thread of wool.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then, regarding the treatment of what we have said about softening medications and tents, until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 And if the illness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, then you must make a clean cut under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 Then, drain between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 And one should perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an engine with all his might so that he may bring back the figure to its natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 And the patient himself, according to what is necessary for work and instruments in many positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	 from the joining of the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When this suture happens to some men in such a way that the skin above is adhered with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must push the point of a razor under the skin, and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 and use tweezers to cut it away, until you reach what is under the delicate membrane, which should not be too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer from the membrane being too sharp and hurting the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 and let your incision, with which you cut that assembly, be gentle, so that the skin returns to its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 and all that assembly is healed, and sometimes there is salty water in the eye, and lift it with fresh water, and with wine.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye abundant wool soaked in egg.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and after the third day use collyrium and other soothing things until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	 of the fingernail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 Know that the nail is according to two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 it is nervous and similar to a hard cicatrix, and another which is not nervous but is similar to white frozen moisture, so that when one touches it with iron and tries to grab it with tongs, no one can.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 and both likenesses begin towards the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 And the manner of the incision is such that the patient places his head in your lap, then closes his eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 and lifts the skin to your hand, then twists the nail in the tweezers with fine pliers, and extends it upwards.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 then take a needle, and insert into it a hair of a horse or cow or ox, and make the thread strong;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 and bend the tip of the needle a little and insert it into the nail, and push through to the end of the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and extend it upwards, and scrape off all the skin on the side of the nail that follows the vein and the silk along the hair until the head, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with all the subtle spatula and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh in the tear duct, so that through the incision does not come the body's usual tears.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 And sometimes the nails extend to the nail bed, and to the thread, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 then after skinning, one has all the soft mucus from which this form is made;
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 And ensure that the mucus does not touch the fleshy tissue and break it, and that the little plum is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And after the incision, throw into the eye a bit of boiled silk, and from the kohl made of lead oxide, and let it stay until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the treatment of those who need it so that they may heal.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 And if the nail is not fleshy, and you cannot insert the needle, and the instrument cannot enter, this appearance of a nail is often cured with medications.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 And they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see them covered, work with the eye of the patient, and take the fine spatula little sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And gently lift the nail above, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason approaches, then drip from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of lead, red and burnt collyrium, and plug the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 then repeat the other work according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If nothing is wrong with the eye, such as an abscess, then leave it alone, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid night in the eye causing great harm, then suspend it with the hook, and cut part of it but not all, so that the body of tears does not come there;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 Then distill into the eye red choler made from lead.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 Of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 In the eyes of some men there sometimes appears red flesh, and it covers the pupil and stretches onto the eyelids and turns outside, and it resembles a bawdy rose.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 and the procedure is such that the patient places his head in your lap, then you open the eyes, and scrape all that flesh with appropriate tools for this purpose, and support it with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 then scrape the first layer of flesh, and continue scraping with the razor until the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the procedure.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 and let the incision of the spatula be such that we have described in the incision of the nail and small veins from which one removes the pus, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 And when the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, fill the wound with burnt oil in which you have distilled red-hot iron or similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton wool over it with a layer of egg white to ensure that the abscess is hot.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 And if there is anything remaining, and the pus overcomes you, and you doubt that the abscess is hot, then leave the wound alone and treat the abscess with things that can soothe a hot abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Then return to your work until it is healed, and do the same when flesh grows in the wound in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 But nonetheless you must adapt the treatment for each weak wound according to its natural way.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 And of the way of accident, in the work of iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 And do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is able to endure the work.
des voines des eulz	 of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 If they are red veins that cover the eye, and take away from sight its function and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 Therefore, first you must check if the eye, in which the arrow is lodged, is sound and there is no other disease besides the arrow.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 Then take the eye in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend those veins with all skill according to one's wisdom, and let the thread be fine and doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 And let there be two ounces by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 Then bind those veins firmly and tightly, and wipe away the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins retreat from the eye.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 And be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not cut more than those veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 And when you have done this, drop into the eye green and red choler to corrupt what remains of the humour.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you cannot remove all of it in that hour, then make a plaster for the eye with soothing substances to relieve the pain, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and assured of heat from an abscess, then begin again according to this manner as before until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	 And this is the form of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	 Of the anal fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 The physician thus calls "healed" fissures:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 when you cure it by cautery and with hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is pus in it that you should incise over the abscess where it should die, and draw out all the moisture there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 And when the bone is exposed and you see the putrefaction and blackness, then clean it with all the instruments whose form is described here.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 and it is called "sharp hook," and should be made of iron, and should be pointed like a file as shown in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And place under it the rotten bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the putrefaction is gone.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 and do this several times, then restore it with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 if the place is healed, and flesh grows there, and the body of the wound is healed, and it remains so for forty days, and does not reopen or become infected, and no bad accident happens, then know that it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the neck's opening according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with an iron instrument, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, then take a drill according to this form, and let the iron head be at three angles, and let the shaft be narrowed up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 Then place it on the bone next to the eye socket, and move your hand away from the eye socket, then turn the whole auger until it pierces the bone, and the patient feels this because the air comes out if he keeps his hand on his nose.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 And then restore the place with dry medicine, as I have shown you, and when the flesh heals and the place hardens, the matter goes to the nose.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 It is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	 of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 When the eye is completely open and nothing interferes with the nose or makes it smaller, then you must tie up the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 then heal it, then apply cupping glasses or cauterize without burning to draw out, then place on the eye a plaster made of alum and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then bandage the eye, and put a compress on top of bandages and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 and the manner of bandages is such that you take sufficiently soft bandages, and fold each one in four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 then hold it firmly in place with a strong bandage, and reapply the cupping glasses to draw out without wounding;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 then remove the cupping glasses and keep the eye bandaged day and night, and if the bandage loosens, you must bandage it tightly;
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye improving, that is good;
se ce non;	 if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then reapply the poultice and the bandages and the bandage and the cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 Of the breaking of woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, then it opens, and comes forth from the papers like a grain of resin, and is horrible to behold.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 Then if you see it open, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper one, then thrust another needle where there is a double thread from the edge of the arm.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 and make it pierce through, and leave the first needle according to its position.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then cut off the place of the double thread and tie a part of the vein around it, and hold it well, then withdraw the needle and place on top of the wound a wet linen cloth soaked in plenty of egg.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 And let it stay until the thread comes out with the pus, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And sometimes the wound is confined by a circle of cloth on every side until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 And if the eye gives a great appearance of it, pierce it with a fine spatula that reaches to the bottom of the eye, and let the whitish moisture flow out, and immediately put something in.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	 from the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but mucus that accumulates in the eye, resembling water descending, and it is not water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 And the manner of the appearance of the work is that you have the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then take the head between your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the vein coming above to your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 Then insert a needle, ensuring it does not descend and obscure the light, and let the patient see things as usual.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 And if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the vein is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 Then have the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and make an incision on the horny tissue at the junction with the horny layer and the corner of the eye, until the vein comes out.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when it comes out, drip hot water mixed with honey into the eye, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	 of the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have the likeness of waters in their nature, and those which must be pierced;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 do so according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and close the healthy eye and press very hard;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 Then place the tip of the instrument next to the corona through the thickness of a ray in that part of the eye called the minor lacrimal gland, then push the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and turn your hand until it pierces the eye's white, and feel that almagda reaches the empty space;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 And the measure of the path of almagda should be exactly equal to the measure of the space from the plumule up to the end of the pupil;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 and this is the corona of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 then you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horny tissue, and then place the instrument where the water is, then press it along one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 if water flows now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 After resting for a short time, and if the water rises again through the second passage, place the finger with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise, then gently pull out the amalgam while turning your hand little by little.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 And then put in a bit of fine salt, and remove from this the finger with the instrument.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then place over the eye a compress or wet wool in rose oil and plenty of egg, and bind with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those of our time, use horseradish with plenty of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the almond cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 And then pierce only the conjunctiva, do not go too deeply into it, but make a subtle place, then put in amalgam as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 And at the completion of the work prepare a suitable bed for the patient, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 And he should be free from all movements, and take light foods, and not move his head to the right or to the left, and let him lie according to his condition until the third day.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 then dislocate it in that same dark room, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 and it is not necessary to do this at the time of the treatment or after the incision now, but you must lift it up, because water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 if swelling occurs, dislocate the eye before the seventh day and apply a poultice that relieves swelling;
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 and when it is calmed down, dislocate the eye again and place an eye patch on his face for some days, and he should always be in that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 Then he should leave the house gradually, and return to his usual activities;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And one came to us who was from Yrach, and he told us that in his country they make an almagda pierce, which is used to draw water, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I read of it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 and perhaps this is something new.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 And these are the likenesses of the forms of the almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	 and they should be made of pure brass:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 And the heads of them should be of this same subtlety, and the rears in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	 of the flesh on the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 Sometimes they are born or attached to chariots in various ways, so that some seem like scorpions with many legs;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 And so there are of such where he has flesh with a fox-like color, and also flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 In that case, with this type of flesh which is smooth and not rough, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 open his nostrils, and throw some incense on those smooth fleshes, and pull them out.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 then cut what you can hold with a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that all the flesh is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 And if anything remains that cannot be cut, then open it with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 And if pus forms there, or an abscess, then treat it as needed.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 And if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize until the pus is dried up and all the flesh removed, then apply a mixture of honey, vinegar, and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If the honey works, and moisture comes to the palate, know that it is healed;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 And if moisture does not come out as needed, know that there is flesh born in the bone above, which prevents the instrument from cutting:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 Then it is necessary that you insert a small length of linen thread, and it should be knotted at each end by hand, with a space of one digit or less between the knots.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 And let the patient put the head of the thread in his nostril as best he can, and pull gently until it comes out through the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 And often children do this in schools, and it is an easy thing for someone who wants to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 Then hold the end that comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and tie them together just like us who are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 Do this until you know that the knots have destroyed that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and wet it in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 Do this for three days or more, until the dressing has dissolved all remaining flesh.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 And then put in its place a plaster of lead for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 And this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, into which one distills the oils and medicines.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a plaster, and with the same shape.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 And if you wish, make a closed plaster, and let the instrument be full to cleanse the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 And it should have a handle for holding it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	 of the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 Often arises on the head of the nose a disease called "telul," and grows and becomes great immediately, to such an extent that it is a visible thing.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 And therefore you must cut it at the beginning and remove all of it, then place on it the cautery or burning medication.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 And if one delays in cutting it until it is large, then beware if it is hard, of foul color, or of poor quality.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 Do not touch it with iron, for it is an infiltrated abscess. For when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 And if the abscess is of soft touch and not foul in color, and you see that it can be entirely cut out, then let the patient empty themselves and cut it without fear, and heal the place with drying and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 when the nose is cut and bruised
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when a solution for continuity comes to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 It therefore happens to anyone when this occurs, so examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and then bring the two lips together in a stitch, then cure it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 and if the lips have already separated from one part to another, then it is necessary that you cauterize all the parts of their heart until they heal, then bring the two lips together in a stitch, and hold them steady, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and ground incense on top.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and place a piece of strong plaster or another adhesive plaster on the powders, and let it stay until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The method of sewing is such that you gather the thread:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the abdomen;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 or with thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	 of the lip abscess
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 In many people, hard abscesses form within the lips, resembling millet seeds, some smaller and some larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 then you must turn back the lips and cut above each knot, and take it with tweezers and chop it into small pieces;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 then fill the place after cutting with crushed vitriol, until the blood is stained.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and then apply oil of ashes, and dress the wound with dry materials until it heals.
de la char des gencives	 Of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 Often grows on the gums a skin called "albulus" by the ancients.
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 so you must hold it with pincers, and cut it at its root, and let the wound or blood flow.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 then apply powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders on the spot.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 and if that skin returns after cutting, which often happens, cut it again the second time, and cauterize it:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 if it does not return after cautery.
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 and these are the methods for cutting skin growths.
des sordens	 Of the teeth
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 Sometimes there are gatherings at the roots of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 And sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green due to decay, causing the gums to rot, and the teeth become foul-smelling.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 Then you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his chin should be in your sight, and clean the teeth or the scurf until nothing remains;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 And thus do with blackness, greenness, and yellowness, and other stains, until they are cleaned.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 And if you remove what is there at the first root, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 If not, then repeat the second day and the third, until you have cleaned everything.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 And know that teeth require different types of instruments for cleaning, as the work demonstrates, because the type of scraper used to clean between the teeth is different from that used to clean behind them.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 And these forms and others be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 It is necessary that when you treat the tooth of its pain you delay drawing it as long as you can, for this should not be done.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to draw it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then when the patient is forced to pull out [the tooth], it is necessary that you be certain of the ailing tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Many times the pain deceives the patient and thinks that it is in a healthy tooth, and makes the good tooth drawn out;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 yet the pain does not depart from this, as long as the evil is extracted, for we have seen it happen to these gentlemen;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 and when you are certain of the painful tooth, then it is necessary that you cauterize around the tooth on all sides with strong cautery to protect the gums from all parts;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 then move it with your fingers or with fine tongs little by little and bit by bit, until it is well dislocated, then secure the tongs firmly;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 and let the head of the patient be between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and push it gently from each side, and remove it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 And if the tooth is rotten and decayed, you must fill it with cloths where the holes are;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 and hold it firmly but gently with the tongs so that it does not break when pulled.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 and you must work very skillfully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And be careful not to break it, so that a part remains, and the patient suffers greater pain due to the root than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 And beware that you do not act as the ignorant healers do, who in their haste and boldness sometimes break the jawbone, and do not bring about what we have described;
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 but sometimes bring about great diseases due to the roots that remain there, or for the cartilage they break, as we have often seen;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine, or vinegar, and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 and if there is a flow of blood from there, which often happens, then fill the place with pounded vitriol;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 and if that does not work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The forms of the instruments, with which one pulls teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	 and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 And they should be of strong material so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made from good iron, and they should have teeth to hold firmly.
de la racine des dens	 from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 When the root remains after pulling, it is necessary that you put on the place cotton moistened in butter for one day or two, until the place becomes soft, then insert the tongs which are called "algefri", with which the jaw seems like a beak of a hawk;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 And let them be made inside like a file, and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots do not want to come out with these pincers, then you must uncover all the flesh around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," that is to say a forceps, in this manner.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 And let it be thick and large enough so that it does not break, and if its root jumps out because of this, that is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 but if not, then help yourself with all the instruments by which the shapes come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 And one uses this instrument which has two branches, as shown in this form.
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 and other iron implements that are before the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, whose form is shown here.
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 And let this instrument be thick so that it cannot break, and know that there are many tooth instruments.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 and likewise other instruments, which are not counted.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 and the wise master subtly finds his instrument by himself, according to what his work and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to their diversity; and if one does not break the cartilage or other bones, where it can, then look for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and help with the gestures, by which here is the shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 And they should be thick and well-gripping to hold the bone, that it does not slip, but can grip and remove it;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And then restore the place with suitable medications, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then remove everything from this tool.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 When the teeth appear not according to nature, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, you must know if the tooth is new after the milk teeth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be sawn or filed.
adonques lou raie;	 Then extract it;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 and if it is stuck with the tooth, take this tool whose shape is like a small beak, and is made of iron at the tip.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And the pliers little by little in many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is visible so that it can be ground, then grind it with such a file as here is the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 And it is like the wax from which needles are made;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 And in wax little by little each day slightly, so that it does not move until it sets.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 Then plain it at the end with any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then you must plane the roughness until it is smooth, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	 when the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 When the front teeth are loose, from a blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew what he eats without them falling out, and you have treated them with strengthening medicine, but it does not work;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 then they must be secured with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never moves; bidden:
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And let the thread be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between two healthy teeth, then place the wires between the crooked teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach sensibly to the other healthy tooth.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 Then begin the covering again from the place where you began, and gently and wisely strain your hand until it does not move at all.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 And let your lace be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then cut the wires of the thread with wire clippers, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy teeth, so that they do not injure the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 And then he leaves it so tight as long as it can remain, and if it dislocates again, or the thread breaks, then he holds it with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 if it remains and serves in this manner all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the meeting of two healthy teeth, and two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when the tooth falls out, then one puts it back in its place, little by little, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes one makes the shape of a tooth from cow bone, and places it in the place where the defect is, and holds it as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 of copper to suture the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 Sometimes this string comes from under the tongue by birth.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 or by an accidental wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 and the work is such that you open the patient's mouth and hold their head in your hand, and lift the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 then cut the nervous string widely, so that the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or a knot, and this is due to an accidental wound, then push in with the hook and cut widely that tendon;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 and take care that the cut is not too deep, because of the artery that is beneath.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 and when you have done this, raise the place with rose water and alum, or cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 And every night, the patient must comb out lice so that the wound cannot scab over.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 And if bleeding continues, apply a poultice of vitriol to the wound;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 and if blood becomes thin, then cauterize with slow-burning cautery, which is good for that.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 then continue treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 and if you see the wound turn black or hard, such that the patient cannot feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 and if it is inclined to suppuration and there is moisture, apply onion juice, and open the wound with a fine probe, and drain it from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 And if blood overcomes you in your work, then apply vitriol broth until it is scorched, then return to your work until you have drawn out all the strength;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then lift him up on a bed of straw and silk, and treat him with other treatments until he is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	 Of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 Sometimes there appear in the throat boils that are called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 if it is a hard abscess of little sense and dark color, then do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the reason of bleeding;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 but let it remain until it is dead, and then you will cut it off, or it would burst on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 and if it is of white color again, and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument to cut, but first look if the abscess is cooled and appeased.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 Then make the patient sit before the sun, and his head be in your hands, and he open his mouth and hold the instrument between his teeth, and press the tongue down under the whole instrument, which is thus shaped.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 and it should be of silver or fine tin as sharp as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 When you press the tongue against the entire instrument and see the abscess, then take a hook and place it in the almond, and pull strongly upwards more than you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 And draw something from the cloth with it, then cut with the instrument, which has this form, like tongs.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And yet the heads are curved, and one against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you do not have this tool at hand, then take the tongs, of which here is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 And let them be cutting on one side, and notched on the other.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and cold water and vinegar, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water, or boiled skins of pomegranates, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stanched.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then heal until it is healthy;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them in the same way as the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 And I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat, namely one small abscess;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 and it had nearly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the blocked passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like this for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 et avoit ja bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez,
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 Therefore, I hurried quickly and inserted into it one needle, then I drew it out, and I drew out with it a large amount of pus;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 Then remake another part in the other hole of the nose, and he opened his mouth and pressed his tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 then they inserted a needle into these abscesses, and drained some of it, and only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 and so the woman’s throat passage was unblocked, and she began to drink water first, then wine, and did not stop draining that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 and the abscess always recurred and filled up the place that I had emptied, so much so that it became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 then I inserted a device into it and cauterized it inside the throat
ensi demora sens croistre;	 thus it remained without growing further
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 And let these parts depart from me, and let God alone have made them after me.
de l’uve	 of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 When the vein descends into the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 And if it is below, thick and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 When it is cut as we have said in the division, and the cutting does not benefit, and you see that this abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then you must cover it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 And that which is roundly assembled and is not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 And it is bloody or of the color of a rind or black, then you must avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 Therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have said, for its whiteness and length, let the patient sit facing the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we made mention of before;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Then insert the awl into the vein, and pull it down, and cut it with one of the two instruments that I have mentioned for the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 for if you cut more, then you harm the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and after the incision, use what we have said for the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient is afraid of being cut, then you should use ingenuity for the cauterization to remove their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the manner of cautery is very sharp.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 And it is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and cauterize with live coal water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And in the use of this instrument, here is its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 And at the tip it has a hair through which one puts the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 And the patient should be lying on their side so that the saliva and mucus run out of their mouth with the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat and wound.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it soften and the stinging of the medicine subside.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 And if you see (this), take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument with all the cotton into the canal above, until the cotton hardens on the eye.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 And do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and it will fall off after four days or five.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 And if you need to start the cautery again with the medicine, then do so, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and let it be rinsed with cold water, and be treated with gargles until healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 This treatment is safer from incision than the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calament and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and lavender and similar herbs, and put them all or some of them in a pot, and add vinegar, and make it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 And the pot should be well-glued with strong earth, and within the pot there should be an instrument fitted in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 And let it be of silver or bronze, and one of the ends should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapors rise through the vein to the eye, causing the eye to become numb.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 afterward it is often repeated until the eye dries out, and be sure not to do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things happen there.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And not to do so unless at the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 And if this instrument is not available, then take a reed and put inside the head a piece of eggshell, so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 because the cliff of egg does not allow the vapor to harm the mouth, and this is a good cure together with salt.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 Many times it sticks in the throat as a bone or spine of fish, or some other thing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 so it is necessary that you draw out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can move the thing;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 and what does not open for you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 perhaps then the hard thing will come out with the vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 or if the patient has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of wool, or a lettuce root, or a morsel of dry bread; etti
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 And attach a thread to the sponge
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 And when it arrives at the place, it will harden, and then you will draw the thread.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 And if it does not come out due to what we have said, then take a lead instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 And let the instrument be curved at the top so that it may enter the throat more easily, and have the tip raised.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 And beware not to touch the epiglottis, so that all does not come out, nor push the bone inside.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 And it is better that the patient himself places the instrument there, because he knows where the thing is hard.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 If he pushes downward, draw out the thread equally with all the instrument, until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	 of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 A certain time is treated the blood, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 And when this does not help at all, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, after you have pressed the tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the blood, draw it out with all the small hook, or with fine pliers that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if this does not work, then take a sharp knife, and insert it into the patient's throat, then insert into the hollow of the knife a hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if the patient is burning all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 Then take full one vial of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without choking, and move it with his hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 And as soon as the blood feels the water, it will fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 Do this many times, for she will fall without hesitation.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 And the method of fumigation is such that you take a pot with live charcoal in it, and let its lid be covered with a sieve pierced in the middle, and through that hole should be the head of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 then cast your fumigation, and the patient should put the end of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that no smoke escapes, but it goes all the way to the blood vessels.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 and now the blood will fall, and if it does not, then repeat the fumigation many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and such, and do not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And then he will need it to come out by this means.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 And the shape of the instrument used to draw blood is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved pincers designed to enter the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 And it should have the appearance of a seagull's beak and be rough like a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot release.
et vez ci la forme:	 And see here its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	 The chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 There are many similarities to an abscess, according to what is remembered hereafter in this book about one and the other, and they differ in penetration and cutting.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 And it comes in two types: one is exactly like it, and the other contains moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second type is according to the location where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 for abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses of fleshy parts are different from those that occur in joints, and each should be treated according to its own method.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 And so with abscesses that one must not pierce, until the boil is dead according to its development;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And so with those that one must pierce when they are ripe and do not die according to their development, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 For when abscesses come near joints, and they are left until they become gangrenous all around, by chance then the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is why it causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 Or if the abscess is near a principal limb, and you delay the piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 Or if it is near the foundation (of the body), then one should pierce it as soon as it is ripe;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 And one should not pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for those near the foundation (of the body), lest it become gangrenous within and cause a fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 And may not heal in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 And it is necessary that you know the hour of the opening of the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain is appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the diminishing of the pain and redness, and the softening and the maturing of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 And you must make the opening seat itself in the most dependent place of the abscess, where it opens and moves.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And let the opening be long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints, and near nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no folding.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those who are sick, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is healed with complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 Car if you pierce it before this, then the body will be elongated with its poison, and it is full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 And perhaps it hardens the lips and the depths of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess is perforated according to the width of the body, according to how much the limb needs it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 And you must bring in small abscesses, small holes;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 and in large abscesses, large holes, and many splits according to the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover the heart, and to cap;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 When it becomes like a piece of cloth and is dead, then you must do as one does with children:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 And if there are such that are split into three angles, and there are those which one covers like the leaf of myrtle, as with abscesses of the anus;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And if there are such cases where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar chopping.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 Those who have no head, such as a soft superficial abscess, you must pierce it completely;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 and when the abscess is large and it has formed a great pustule, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the pus at once, but only part of it.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 then pack the abscess until the next day, then draw something again.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 do this several times from big to small, until all the pus comes out.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old and frail man.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 For the spirit may jump sometimes with the issue of the pus, which may cause the patient to die, and you may not notice it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 Avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have perceived your abscess, cleanse the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 and if it is a simple incision, then apply bandages of linen or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you must insert a bandage into each one so that they come together;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 and if you have cut into the abscess some part of the skin and have pulled it over, then you must fill it with old cotton or shreds of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then remove, and treat with ointment until he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold and fresh water, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 And if the bleeding continues, apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the place where the abscess is very nervous, then you must put tents and cloths soaked in hot wine and oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if it is summer, and the place is fleshy, then you must put on cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, up to the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then lance the abscess, and dry it, and treat it, as needed, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 Et cela doit être reconnu universellement dans le traitement des abcès :
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 and I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	 of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 Where headaches come from small abscesses, and they are similar to us who are in tissues, like the pustules of a chicken, and there are many such things.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 There are some that are greasy and such that contain moisture like pus.
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 And there are those that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the surgeon does not do otherwise.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of the cut is such that you try with all the instrument that is called "scalpel," from which the form comes here after, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 Because if it contains moisture, then open it from above the lung.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 And when the moisture is emptied, scrape off the skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately if anything is left behind.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And those who remain from the night will run.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 And then repeat the cotton treatment, as before, on the second day and the third, until you are sure that it does not remain from the night;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the wound with ointment suitable for healing, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 And if the abscess holds a lot of pus, then open it according to this shape, lengthwise;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 and put your thumbs in it, and scrape it from all sides, and put all your effort into pulling the skin above where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the artifact gives you trouble, then do what I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And do the same for an abscess if it is pus-filled; cut and cure it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And slice through the pus-filled and moist abscess, for it is lighter, because they are made of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if any of these abscesses in the head where there is no moisture, and of these was the abscess that I opened in the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 And I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if one had struck it, one would have made just as much of a wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 In other abscesses that come to a head, especially those which come at the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made in the most dependent place so that the pus may issue forth.
et les cure si com il covient.	 And treat it as is necessary.
des scrophules	 of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come in other parts of the body, and they are many, and they are connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 And each scrofula is properly within its rib, just like the node and the abscess of the head, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And there are many similar scrofulae.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 Il y a de telles [dislocations] qui retiennent l'humidité, et il y en a de malveillantes qui ne veulent pas obéir à la guérison.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 And in that which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the body, and silent on all sides and is not harsh on the nerves of the neck nor on the artery nor on the passage, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 so it is necessary that you cut above it, and scrape each part, and extend the two lips of the wound with tweezers if you need to, just as we have said in head abscesses;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 and draw little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and let the scalpel not be too sharp or cutting, so that the hand does not slip, and do not advance too far, lest you cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 And if you cut the vein or artery, and that does not allow you to work, then put in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And let it sit until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to suppurate.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 And when the blood has been staunched, then return to your work, so that you may complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 Then examine with your finger if there remain any small scrofulous swellings, and cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofulous swelling, then it is not fitting that you cut this swelling at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you cut all of the scrofulous swelling, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound, and stitch them immediately, since there should not remain any excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 it is necessary that you aim to cut the root of it, and pull strongly, and stitch as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 Those scrofulous ones that have swelling, prick them where they appear black;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 and prick it as mentioned before, then bring tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and when the wound is well cleaned, then bandage it with a pleasant ointment until it heals.
de squinance	 of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 The ancients spoke about cutting the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 For those with scrofula, it is necessary that the slit in the throat called "epiglottis" be cauterized;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 And one should not provide aid by this method, because all the veins and the flesh of the patient are affected in those who have an abscess that is hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the two almonds.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 When the disease is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid suffocation that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it under three circles or four, a small transverse cut between the two circles or according to the size of the hyoid bone's cut, not at all in the laryngeal cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 And those veins are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis because there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to its full extent, then cut through the heart until it reaches the chin.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 And cleanse the vessels of blood, if you see anything, then cut the syphilis, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 And it is proven by the incision of the phlegm from the throat which jumps strongly through the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 And leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 And when the hour has passed in which strangulation is feared, join together the two lips of the heart wound, and sew it alone without a dressing;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then administer medicines that produce flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 Al-Zahrawi said that this should not be done until the throat is completely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect has healed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 Therefore, cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 And for this reason, the elders commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness has passed. And it passes in three days or four. Then they commanded to suture and cauterize the wound until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 I saw that a maiden took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the tendons of the neck.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 And I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 Je découvris la plaie, et trouvai le sang qui en était sorti, et même s’il n’avait pas coupé de veine ni de canal fort, la gorge saignait abondamment à travers la plaie.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 I hurried and sutured the wound and cauterized it until it healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 And nothing happened to the maiden except that she was hoarse of voice, and later returned to her former state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 For this reason, I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should not be fear.
de la grosse gorge	 Of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a great abscess of blackish color, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	 and there are two types of them:
naturez, et accidens;	 natural and accidental.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 or the natural one has no fever.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 And the accidental type is of two kinds, one of which resembles a boil on us, and the other kind resembles an abscess that comes from our artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 and there should be fear, and it is not necessary to work with fire except on the small one, and test and search throughout the throat.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 if you find it thus as we know fat, and it does not touch any vein, then cut it, just as one cuts the nose, and draw out all its hair, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 and bandage it well immediately, and treat it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	 us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 There are many types of noses, all of which I will describe;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 and now it is necessary that I explain the entire difference between a nose and an outflow.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say that outflow is hot and feverish as long as the inflammation has not passed and putrefaction is complete;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 With the nose, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a pus, which is its own bag and according to the color of the body, and it begins like a blister, and grows larger; }}}
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 And there are according to two similarities, either fat or moist, and many colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 Il is necessary that when you come to the cure of the nose, you test and examine first all the instruments called "entromissoire," according to what its form will be in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And the manner of inquiring about the abscess is that you take the most moist place you find on the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that the instrument has reached the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 Then remove the probe, and take care not to allow air to enter.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 If the running moisture has a color, then incise it as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 And if after the probe no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then incise it in a cross shape, and take it with forceps, and lightly scrape from each side and guard the skin where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the knot.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 And if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 For if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if there is a small piece left and the wound bothers you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and bind the wound, and apply soothing things to the hot abscess, and continue other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 And if the pain is great, then suture the two lips of the wound, and treat it as if it were an open flesh wound.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 And if the swelling of the vein is troublesome to you or otherwise, then hurry and fill the place with crushed vitriol, and leave it there for two days or three, until the wound festers, and let the ebullition of blood subside.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 Then return to the top where some of the liquid remains.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 Here are the forms of the intromissory instruments, and there are three types:
grans et moien et petit;	 large, medium, and small.
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 and there are three squares called "albaret," and one called "breb," and they come in three types.
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 large, medium, and small, to enclose the abscesses of fistulae;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 and they are similar to the needles used for embroidery, made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow in color are more effective, coated with black lead to encase the roots of fistulae;
et sont de III manieres:	 And there are three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 great, medium, and small, according to the size of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The shapes of boils are very similar, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 great, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 and there are boils that have two curves of three kinds as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 and there are boils that have three curves, which are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 and there are boils with two curves, and boils with only one curve, all of which are of three types.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The heads of these [tools] that are made are cutting, and there are such that cut only from one side, which are used for skinning fingers so as not to cut the vein or nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 And from these intrusions are made the sleeves, so that the patient does not notice them when the abscesses open.
et sont de III manieres:	 And they are of three types:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 great, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 And one should not use them except in fleshy places, such as the legs, arms, breasts, and joints, and similar locations;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 And sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the bark of figs, according to this form, to stop bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 And sometimes it is put in place that heals quickly of veins, and of the arteries, and sometimes it returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 Sometimes men's breasts swell up when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts. ︎ Et c’est poour coi li preudome ne vont mie a leus nus quant il sont malades, por ce qu’il ne seent pas de la honte qui les est avenues par la maladie;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 And they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must proceed according to this form from this line .b. until .g..
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medication that promotes healing of flesh, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 And if the breast sags downward and is softened due to its size as happens in women, then cut it into two ribs above, through two similar incisions.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 So that one is held by the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g..
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then peel the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply that which we have said of stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 And if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, then you must fill the wound with damp cotton and a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 And leave it until it melts away the rest and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	 of the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 This abscess that comes under the armpits is like hard scrofula with bones, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Those that contain moisture should be cut in this shape, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with suitable ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, incise it as we have said for scrofula incisions, and if the wound exudes pus, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	 of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 When the artery has burst and the skin on top is closed, it often happens that abscesses form, and it also happens in the case of a swollen vein and an abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 And if one knows this way when it is by the artery, then the abscess is long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 And when you feel it with your two fingers, you sense the constriction.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 And when it is by the vein, then the abscess appears very red.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 And it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and in the joints and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the use of fire cautery, and one who is chief should also avoid it, and in the case of inflammation of the artery, make an incision above the skin along its length.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 Then proceed with the cutting as usual, and neatly separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 Then push under him an awl, and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places, just as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 Then prick the place between the two ligatures with a probe until the pus comes out, and let the abscess be relieved.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 Then proceed with the care that should follow afterward, until the ligature falls off.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat it as for an infection, until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 And if the abscess is because of the size of the vein, it is necessary that you take into your hand whatever you can from the abscess on all the skin. Then push the awl under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through to the other side; and there should be a double thread so that you draw it out from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with a thread between two of its extremities.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 and if you doubt that the thread will not hold firmly, then insert another needle through all of the thread underneath the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the thread in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 then cut away the abscess until the pus comes out, then cut away the pus from the core and leave that which is tied.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then provide dressings of lint and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	 of nerve abscesses
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 Similarly, as an abscess can occur in the artery and vein, so too can an abscess form in the nerves when they are wounded or subjected to excessive strain, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 And this happens most often in the shoulders and arms, and in all places where there are joints, and these are serious abscesses, and their color resembles that of flesh, and they are in many forms without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 And when one strongly stretches it, then the patient feels pain, which is not in the depth of the body, but beneath the heart.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 and it moves well on all sides, neither forward nor backward, nor below nor above, and that which is in the joints must not be struck with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 perhaps there will be contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And that which is on the head or forehead, make the skin into a small pouch.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If the abscess is small, then hold it with tongs and strike at its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is large, then suspend it to the hook, and scrape it off, then remove it and sew up the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	 of hanging boils
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 Sometimes it occurs in the belly and not elsewhere, and it is an illness called "fungus" because of its similarity to mushrooms, and it has a subtle root and a large head.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 And there are some small ones and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 And I have seen a man who had two in his belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were always moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I cut them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces and the other six pounds, and the operation in the incision is such that you should consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the tumor is white and moist with a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If he strikes the spatula broadly, and let the cautery be in your presence with fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 For in cutting often comes a too great outpouring of blood, and if the blood overcomes you, then hasten with cauterization.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of linen and bind it around the wound as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 And then bind it tightly, and do not stop pulling the linen thread until he cuts the wound, and each time without difficulty.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 And if the roots are large, there is fear of cutting into the intestines, but you can cut half, then cauterize it so that it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Then treat the wound, and take care not to cut the thin layer that is of a dark color, weak sensation, and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 Car this is an encrusted boil, and I will come to the cure of boils later.
quant li boude ist fuer	 When the pustule is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 If the swelling of the abdomen comes from cauterizing a wound or a skin cut, and it is on the stomach and in some other areas as happens in other injuries, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries as described above, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 and if it is from the injury of the skin and the excretion of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and it opens in various places.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And if it is from the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers, it resists, and then returns, and perhaps swells, and greatly increases at the entrance to the bath and due to intense labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 And if it is from moisture, it is a light thing, and when you press it with your hand, it gives way well, without any resistance;
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 And if it is due to blood, the abscess reveals these signs: it is large and hard, and fixed according to a certain measure.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the operation is such that you must consider whether the appearance is of blood from an artery or a vein, or of flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 Then you must leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 And if the appearance is of the intestines or stomach, you must instruct the patient to take a bath and lie straight, then sign all around the abdomen.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 then command them to lie down between your hands, and go around the marked area with all the spatial awareness, then extend half of the abscess upward with all the large hooks.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 Then tie the limb around with a strong thread or a sturdy silk rope firmly, and let the knot be tight.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 Then work the half of the abscess stretched over the ligature, and insert your finger into it, and seek the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 If you find it trapped by the ligature, then loosen it, and insert the intestine out of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 And if you find the bowel, then take it by the end, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 And if the artery or vein opposes you, then go around it well, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads in them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross as you made it pierce.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 Then restrain the abscess in four places with needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the place until it suppurates, and each of the dead flesh will fall off by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 or cut it when it has been softened and suppurated, then treat as needed, and remove the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 and drain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as needed, and stitch up the place.
dou chancre	 Of the cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 We have said in the division the similarities of cancer, and how one should work with it using medicines, and how one must avoid treatment with iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 and we say that cancer begins in the flesh, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when a cancer is in a place where it can be scraped off, such as a cancer on the breast, or on the thigh, or in similar places, it should all be removed when it is in the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 And when it is large and old, then you must not approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal from it.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 Nor has anyone ever healed from it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 And the work, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you should purge the patient of black bile some time.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 then make him fast if he has evident fullness, then put the patient in a good place to perform the work.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 then throw away your nails and scabies, and shave all parts, and remove it from all parts without leaving anything behind.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or any other thing, and if the continuous bleeding hinders the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat him with another treatment until he is healed.
de ydropisie	 of the dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 We have already spoken in the division about the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of water is done, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment that is done by medicine, and that which is cured by iron:
si est eclites soulement;	 this is only an exudate;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 and one should not use iron in these two resemblances:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 that is to say, tympanites and ascites, because it is deadly;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 therefore when you treat this resemblance of dropsy which is called «edema» with medicines, and the cure does not help, then see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as abdominal distension and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 and if you see the patient of great strength, and he has no other disease but only dropsy, and he is not too young nor too old, then thus should you work:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 take the patient upright in your hands, and the attendant presses the belly at the lowest part of the foot, then take the thorny spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 with its point, yet not so deeply that it could reach the intestines when inserted, and not injure it;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 then observe if the dropsy is located towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 in this case, you must cut three fingerbreadths straight down below the elbow;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 And if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the navel, three fingers' width.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 And if it is due to the spleen, then on the right side; and it is not necessary for the patient to lie upon the incision so that the excesses do not run to that weak place.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and push through, lifting your hand to all the subcutaneous tissue between the skin and the fascia, as if scraping, to the amount of one nail's width or around it.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 Then pierce the fascia until the subcutaneous tissue comes into view, which is the place of water, then draw strongly, and insert this instrument in the shape of a hook.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and is made of light brass or steel, and has at its lower part a small hole.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 and on one side there are three holes;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 and two on the other side, and one on the other;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 and the head is cut like a quill, and it is the form of the incision that the scribe cuts into the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 at the top is the handle, so that when the instrument comes to the water, they now float on the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 empty it therefore half or a third full, for if you empty more than necessary at that time, perhaps the patient may die from the loss of their spirit due to the weapon, falling into a coma or approaching death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 mais according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's virtue indicates, and his pulse.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 then extract the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held by the heart which stops up the hole which is on the sponge, about which I have spoken, that you should pierce in this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 then begin the instrument again the next day, if you see that the patient can endure this, and draw out a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 do this for some days, and beware not to let any more remain but just a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water in him, then heal him with a burial or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing in the sun, and let him drink wine.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And the treatment with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the fluid, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	 Of the obstruction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If he needs to be pierced immediately with a very fine needle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 Then insert into the puncture a subtle plug of beeswax, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four, and when it wants to make urine, let the plug be removed, and make urine, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 And perhaps it is not necessary there, for the violent urine does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 He whose opening is small, let him be treated with the linen cloth, as we have said, and it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 Those who do not have the puncture in its proper place are harmed, for some are born with the puncture at the tip of the penis, which is why they cannot urinate forward unless they lift their penis upwards;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 And they cannot deceive because the material cannot reach the bone, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 And the way to perform this is for the patient to lie on their back, then straighten the head of the rod and the handle so that they are even with the width of a feather quill, so that the hole meets in the middle as it should be;
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and beware of excessive bleeding that often occurs there, and if it happens, staunch it as one would staunch blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	 of the pustules on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 Often these ablations come to the rod, and there is an appearance of ugly flesh;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 and some are malignant while others are not.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 So you must take them at one time with subtle pincers, cut and clean all of them, then apply damp cotton in an Egyptian ointment.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then continue the cure of cleaning until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the bath is foul, of bad color and stinking, then it is necessary that you bring a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 When you have cut it, and if the bandage is partly on the stick and partly outside, you must first remove the part of the bandage that is inside.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it is sewn together, then treat what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 Because when you cure them together, it is not certain that the head of the stick will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption will occur in the stick and in the wound.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 So it is necessary to cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranates and beans, then continue with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if blood follows from bleeding, then apply the lunar cautery according to this manner.
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 The cautery helps with two conditions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 that is to say, in the stopping of blood, and in the process of decay.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 And if the head of the bladder is rotten and retracted, then you must insert a lead pipe into the bladder's channel, and have the patient urinate through it.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 And when the hair is thick at the head of the bladder, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, due to a wound or abscess, then you must carefully shave it with one instrument, until the tissue is freed and the head of the bladder is released on all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 And if it is difficult to remove this, then you must shave the top of the bladder and the skin with a spoon-like instrument.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 Then take a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water, place it between the two, and do not remove it again.
de la circoncision	 of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 Circumcision is not a disruption of continuity like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 Nevertheless, when we perform this work by our will, especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best and lightest work for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we only know what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 For I have seen that most of the masters and physicians who performed circumcisions did so on the penis, at the foreskin, and on the entire glans.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 and blood flowed because there are two skins, and perhaps one was cut and the other remained.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 Then it has to be recut, and the pain is double, and at the cleansing of the penis, the tip of the member is not assured;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 and in the cleaning of the nail perhaps the iron slips, and it ruins the work, and often it happens thus that there is no need for cleaning and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 From the mundification which is done with files, I have found the benefit of the experiment, because the files cut as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 Because when you press your hand, cut equally in every part of the nail always;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 but let the thread be well stretched around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 and the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child, if it understands, think that you are only doing it to tie the thread around the nail, and then let him play in every way you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 then hold it straight between your hands and hide the strength in your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see it, nor any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 Then put your hand on the rod and blow into the heart, and draw it upwards until the head of the rod is inside.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 Then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then bind the place tightly with a double thread, then tie it under the fold to another loop.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 And hold it with two fingers of the second knot at the wrist and index finger, and cut between the two ligatures, then lift the heart quickly and draw out the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 Then let the blood flow drop by drop, for it is the remedy.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And apply powder over the wound, and on top of the powder place a cloth glued with a mixture of egg cooked in rose water, infused with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it there until the next day, and continue the treatment with another treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 The form of the strength for purification is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 both heads should be sharp and cutting, and the heads should be as large as the hand equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 The error in purification is when the heart escapes through the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 Therefore, it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail before the place makes an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 And if they pass three days and that which is under the membrane is swollen, then leave it until such an abscess be appeased, and lightly scrape away the skin.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 If you move the cutting edge as well as you can, be careful of the part of the rod, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 Then cure the place of a sudden wound with powder, as we have said in the treatment of powders, and if you cut into the heart too much and it goes upward, it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	 regarding the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 The retention of urine is due to the presence of stones, or frozen blood, or bone, or dead flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone stuck in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 And let the patient's feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly over the top of his back, and let the patient hold his breath as much as he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 And then the neck of the bladder is constricted for the expression of the stone above, causing the urine to be released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction with the entire instrument called a "syringe," which looks like this.
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And let it be of fine silver, lightly hammered, like a bird's feather;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 And let the tube be one and a half palms long, and be thin at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 And the manner of urine flow is such that you take a double thread, and tie it to the top of a wool or cotton bag, and push the end of the thread into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 and cut the excess wool and push it up to the end of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and lift the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis down towards the scrotum;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it approaching the empty space, and this is not done unless because the passage through which it goes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 Then they stretch the thread along all the wool tuft by tuft, and the urine follows the wool, then squeeze strongly, and make the urine run.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And start the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	 Of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 When there are scorching or blood in the bladder, or rotting is gathered there, and you put water and medicine to distill, do it all with an instrument called a “clepsydra”, which looks like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 It is closed, and has three holes:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 And the place where the instrument passes should be such that it tightly seals the penis without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 And when you see your medicine enter the bladder, put the tip of the cup in the moisture, and draw while it is inside.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 If you extract the moisture from the socket, then firmly push the bone back in.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 The moisture will enter and go to the bladder immediately, causing the patient to feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 And this is the form of a subtle enema with which one gives an enema to the bladder:
si est ci:	 Here it is: ène
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 It is made of silver or brass and has a higher head.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 And underneath the shoulder where the ligaments fall.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a double thread, and warm the pouch with that moisture on the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 Then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder so that all the moisture enters at once until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce it roundly all around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 Then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle like an almond, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And do as you did with the bladder, by pressing in your hand until the moisture comes into the bladder.
de la piere	 of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 We have already said in the division the ways of stones and their extraction along with medications;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 And I have said the difference between the infected stone like gravel, and all the signs, and in which stone one should work by cutting.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 And in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 And I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 I say that the stones which are found in the bladder are more common in children, and this is a sign that the water has leaked from the bladder, similar to water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 And it opens the urethra, and it makes the patient's penis swell, and he urinates frequently, and then it becomes inflamed;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 And in many of these cases the foundation is lost.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 And healing is easy in children up to the age of four, and it is very serious in the elderly, and it is in moderate degree for those who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 And the treatment is lighter for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the impurities that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 Because sometimes it hinders in seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it will jump out from the high place sometimes;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 Then have him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely tilted downward;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 Then search for it and touch it inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 If you feel the stone in the area, then quickly proceed to cut into the stone now.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 And if it does not fall out from being touched at all, then moisten your finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is a grown youth;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 And it thrusts it into its base, and seeks the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then guide it to the neck of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 Then press upon it with your finger, and thrust it out from there where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the place where one makes the incision.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 Then insert the catheter there, of which this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 And make an incision between that which is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the scrotum.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 And let it be straight on the stone, and your two thumbs should always be on the base, and the cutting edge should be made so that it is wide outside, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 perhaps the pressure of the thumb on the base will cause it to jump out suddenly without effort.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 and know that there are certain stones which have angles and edges:
si est griés a issir;	 if you cut into them, they can cause injury.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And there are some which lie below, similar to a bean, round, from which the passage is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 Therefore, for those with angles and edges, make the cut larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 and if it does not jump out, then you must use tweezers that are like a file at the end, to pull out the stone so that it does not escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 where you place below it a subtle instrument, curved at the tip
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 and if you cannot insert it thus, then enlarge the opening of the wound, and if the flesh tears, bind it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 and if there are more than one stone, then place the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut into it, then draw it out forcefully, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, then it must be sewn shut, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 because two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 either he dies, or the urine continuously flows through where the lesion cannot heal.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 but nevertheless, strive to extract it, or by breaking with pincers, until you remove it in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 And when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and place on top a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the hot abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 Then bind the patient on their neck, and do not unbind the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you dislocate it, wash very well the place with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of lavender and ointment of basil until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 And if such abscesses and corrosion occur in the wound, and if blood coagulates in the bladder, causing the urine to be retained in this manner that it does not pass with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 then put your finger into the wound and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then lift the wound of water and oil and silk, and help him in all ways you know until he is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And it is necessary that at every hour you care for him, you tie the two thighs together and gather the medicines on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 And if the stone is small, and it is in the channel of the penis, and stuck in, and the urine cannot come out.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 so that the care I speak of now, that you cut it many times, is released from the cutting by this care.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already proven so.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 Take an iron rod according to this shape, and it should be fitted with three pointed tips at one end:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot return into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 then push the drill into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 And turn the auger towards your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Soon the urine will come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the bladder.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 Then it is immediately broken and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 And if you cannot do this because of any obstacle, then tie a thread under the stone and another on top, then make an incision in the bladder where the stone is between the two threads, then pull it out forcefully, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; ‌
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And cure him until he is healed.
de la piere des femmes	 of the woman's stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 Poc it happens that stones are in women, and if this occurs, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 And the second is that one cannot find a woman well-trained who exposes herself to physicians, especially when she is modest.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-versed in this manual art;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 And the fourth manner is that the woman's stones are deeper than the man's stones, so it requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear. And if necessity demands this, then you must take a well-versed midwife, and rarely does one find her, and if you cannot find one, then seek a subtle and modest physician;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 And it presents a wise midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instructs her to do what you command her concerning the investigation of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 and looks very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 then she must put her finger in the vagina and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 and if she finds it, she constrains it under her finger, and recommends that she insert her finger in the vagina of the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand strongly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 If she finds it, she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where it is moved and positioned, and you will feel the stone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 and do not move your finger on top of the stone or beneath it, and let the first cut be small;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 then insert the reed into the cut, if you feel the stone so narrow the wound that the stone may come out stronger, and know that there are many types of stones.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 If you know the signs, you will know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if the blood overcomes you, apply powdered vitriol to the spot, and keep it there for an hour until the blood is stanched.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 Then return to your work until the stone is weakened, and have the instruments that I told you about for the extraction of stones in men to assist you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 And if the blood defeats you and it is from the artery that has been cut, then place the powder on the site and apply a tourniquet and bandages, and do not attempt this again, and leave the stone alone and do not extract it, for fear the patient might die;
puis cure la plaie.	 Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the place is dry, return to your work until the stone is broken.
de hernie carnouse	 of flesh hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 Rancid humour is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white sap under the heart of the kidneys that contains the egg.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 And it is called "sap", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, so that one might think it is another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 And this is the skin of the knee among the white tissues which we have mentioned.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 And this does not happen unless there is pus.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness in the testicles, causing that substance to spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 And sometimes it comes from striking the knee, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 where it is a yellowish color or without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens most often;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And these are the signs to recognize this collection, for if it is in the white tissue which we have mentioned, then the abscess is reasonable, and the pus is long like the shape of an egg, and the knee does not open, because there is moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if there is moisture in the very tissue, then the abscess is reasonable with one part of the egg, and because of this it seems that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if moisture is between the skin of the legs and the white flesh, it is felt well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the introduced material, from which the form comes before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 According to what follows after the intromission, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be bled according to our ability and the fullness of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 then have him lie on his back, on something a little high, and place many blankets under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 then sit on his left side, and command the attendant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs at the hip.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 then take the lancet, and cut the skin of the thighs lengthwise from top to bottom, almost to the bone, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the thighs down to the white flesh, and delicately scrape according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 Then pierce the sponge full of water with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then place your thumbs, and lift the sponge up.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 and do not touch the center of the thumbs, but only the sponge;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 cut it all or in pieces like this, that if you do not cut well and skillfully, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 and if the water jumps too much for your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the sponge's work.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then sew the two lips of the thumbs together with a stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 And if you find the water corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary to bind the vessels that are hanging down, suspecting the flow of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 Then cut the testicles with all the suspensory apparatus, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 And if there is an artery assembled in two parts together, know that these are two arteries;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 then cut the other part similarly to how you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put moistened wool in rose oil on the wound;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 and put another moistened wool in wine and oil, and place it on the two testicles, and put double cloths on top, and tie it up tightly all over with the bandage that follows this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 Then take two cloths, and stuff them with shredded wool according to this appearance and sew them together in the crotch of the breeches, and one end should reach up to the buttocks, and the other to the groin area;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 and let the other two heads rest on the two angles, and let all the reinforcement be gathered into the loop of the bridle;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 and sometimes this thread is cauterized in place of an iron incision, which is to take a fine, subtle cautery knife, cut the skin of the scrotum, and heat it as we have said, so that the white layer containing the water is exposed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 take the cautery in this form, and pierce that layer at the testicles, and peel it with this heated subtle cautery;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 And cut in all ways you can, until you have shaved everything clean;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 And know that this work is more effective;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 And take care to avoid bleeding, and be aware of the operations of surgery;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And if anything goes against you, whether an abscess or bleeding or anything else, then treat what is going against you, according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo this operation because of its horribleness, then use perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have spoken of that aquatic water is there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 Then pierce the abscess in the lower part as wide as possible, and insert the perforation into the length of the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And let the holes be wide so that all the water flows freely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 Then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and let the rest of the water drain, then treat until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 And if the white cloth does not let the water out at the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to draw water from dropsical patients, as described above.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And widen the opening of the wound, and know that the water will return, and it will collect again after six months or around that time, and when it has collected like before, then the patient will pass his days thus.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 Know that in cutting this vessel there is fear in many cases, so it seems better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 And I will tell you about the operation and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 I say then that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the kidneys;
et c’est par mout de cas.	 and this is very common.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 This is to say by excessive acidic and sharp humor that spreads to the kidneys, or from bruising;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 and the color of the abscess depends on the body's color;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 and it feels no pain, yet the abscess is serious;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 and sometimes it is a painful and perilous abscess of red color, which can come from a clot in the artery, or an inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 When it is from a clot in the artery, it is known by the hot state of the abscess when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 And you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 That which is made of a vein inflammation is known by its tendency to express upon the touch of fingers, and one can well make an incision on this appearance, and on other wounds;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 And it is that you cut the heart of the testicles, then lift up the egg, and draw out the white thread, and free the supporting structure from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 If the egg is already solidified with these wounds, then it is necessary that you draw out the egg and cut it;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 And if it is adhering to the thread or that which is inside the vessels, then you must free all of this thread and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 And if the base of the flesh is in the rear place, then you must cut it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when your work is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other remedies until he is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	 of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 This is a type of abscess enveloped in an envelope similar to a bud, with the softening of the testicles, and if the patient moves severely while walking;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 and the treatment of this disease is almost as frightening as that mentioned above, nevertheless we will tell you about its procedure according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then pass the scrotum between your legs, taking all the vessels near the penis, and hold them firmly, and stretch them greatly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 then cut with a broad spatula across the vessels until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the temporal arteries;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 Then take a needle with a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein is located, and tie it again at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 Then cut them in half straight down, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupting moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 Then treat the wound as with others where a bone is broken, so that some vessels are cut which nourish one of the bones.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 because this way there is no harm, and if it happens to all the vessels, then the bones must be pulled for all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 so that the bone does not lose its nourishment from the cutting of the vessels, and dries up and cannot help itself.
de la routure dou syfac	 of the rupture of the shoulder
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The happenings of this ramice are by the section that comes in the hypogastrium, or the extension on the belly in the area of the groin, because the intestines descend from that opening to one of the testicles.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 And this opening is in the hypogastrium or in its extension, and these two types come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 Or from a blow, or a jump, or a fall, or from lifting a heavy weight, and by similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 And the signs when it is of the extension in the hypogastrium are that it happens gradually, over a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 And the abscess is equal up to almost its full length, because the hypogastrium presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 And the sign is when it comes from the section of the hip, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess has a diverse appearance, beneath the skin near, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body lacking in the hip area.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 And sometimes the coils come out with the intestines and are retained within, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 And in these cures by iron, there is fear, so one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 And the manner of working is that you instruct the patient to pull out the intestines with his hand into the wound, if he can reach in.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 Then have him sit up on his neck. Between your hands, and lift the thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 Then press the heart downwards, and cut all the skin of the testicles along their length;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 Then insert into the flanks of the loins stitches according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the bone can come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 Then scrape off the tissue that is under the skin of the testicles, until the hard white tissue is exposed on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 Then insert your finger between that which follows the testicle, between the white tissue under the skin of the egg, and the second tissue, and separate that which is behind the egg, and into the second tissue; xspace
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 And then move to the right hand within the heart of the thighs, and stretch the white silk upward to your left hand, and lift the egg all along the silk towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 And command the assistant to stretch the egg upwards, and untie that which is tied behind the bandage;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 And ask your two assistants if there is any intestine wrapped in the white silk, and if you find anything, throw it into the stomach below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 Then take a needle with a thread made of ten threads, and thrust it into the rear part of the silk, which is after the skin of the thighs.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 After the waist, then cut the threads that appear from the silk, until there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 Then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie there the sinew that we have said is under the skin of the thighs, with a strong cord from two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 Then wrap the heads with threads and tie them strongly from two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter within, lest an abscess form there.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 And put back the cord according to the first long cord two fingers from that one, and after these two cords leave hanging the sinew that is under the skin of the thighs by a finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 And then the other according to the roundness that the egg bears.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 Then cut in the part which is under the skin of the thighs until the blood runs and flows as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 Then introduce moistened wool in oil, and put it on wounds, and there introduce the ligature that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 And sometimes the white part is cauterized as we have said, after the incision, out of fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 For this happens often, and leave the ligature in place until it spontaneously falls off;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 And if it delays falling off, then it should be washed with hot water, and put on what we have mentioned, until it falls off;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 Then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	 of flesh hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 In this ramus, I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 And the ancients said that it is done like the knot that is together with the string, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut lightly on the bottom side;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 Then cut in half and treat the abscess with what is effective until the vessel falls out;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 Sometimes there is a rupture in the veins, as we have said, and it opens the place;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 and none of the intestines come out, and if they do, it is little, and it recovers every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 however, if it stays too long in this state, the wound or fistula swells until the intestines come out;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 and this happens because of the expansion of the fistula in the veins, as we have said, for it is expanded, then the place becomes soft and swollen and open;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 and the treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 and the patient should lie on their back between your hands, then strike the swollen area of the dislocation with a width according to the size of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 then remove the fascia that is under the skin and place the bandage on the visible part of the fascia.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 and press firmly on the stomach, then stitch the two visible parts of the fascia on top of the bandage, and sew one to the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 then remove the bandage and do not strike the fascia or stretch it or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Then the treatment through the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads, so cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 The silk is tight, and has no appearance in the suture, and the cautery is more effective in this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 Often the skin of the testicles is soft in some men, because the vessels within are relaxed, and it is easy to see.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 And it is necessary that when one wants to cure [it], one makes the patient lie on their back, and cut the softened skin onto the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 Then join the two lips with a single stitch, and if you wish, first sew the excess skin in three or four tight stitches.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 Then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	 For the incision
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 Know that castration is condemned in our law, and therefore I would rather not speak of it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 And it is necessary to perform for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 the first being that the doctor knows how to respond when asked and knows the treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 and the second is that we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and deer and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 Therefore, I say that castration is performed in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In the method we perform by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 then take them with your hand as far as they can go and until you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	 About the castration of size:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 It is necessary that you dye the beast, and press its skin against your left hand, then tie the string, and strike on each hoof with one blow, when you have well skinned them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 and leave any pouch of fat or the subtle fat that is over the vessel;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 and this method of castration is better than that done by attraction, because in attraction some parts of the skin may remain, which causes the beast to desire lust;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	 of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Hermaphroditism occurs in men in two ways:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 one is that between the two testicles appears something similar to the natural figure of a woman, where there is hair, and sometimes urine flows from it.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other method is for women, and it is placed on the wrist like a rod and two cubits long.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And the treatment for both men and women is such that you cut the cartilages close together, and treat them like other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 In the second method, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the scrotum, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	 Of the fever
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 A tonsure is a cartilage close together on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to look at;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 You should dye the excess of the tonsure with your hand or scissors, and cut it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do not go too deep, lest blood comes out, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 And for another type that is born at the mouth of the womb, and it swells, and perhaps it jumps strongly, and it resembles a cow, and therefore the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary, you must cut it off, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it heals.
de erratique	 of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 It is erratic when the woman's nature is not understood, or the opening is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 and it is either a natural birth defect, or an accident caused by illness that has occurred.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 Or it is due to a nearby object, or from subtle or thick smoke, and it is formed in the womb, either on one side, or below, or wherever. )))
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 And it prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps even menstruation.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 And the knowledge of this comes from the examination by the healer.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the swelling is imminent, it will appear at your thumb or foot.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 If it is of subtle syrup, and it is near two pounds, then hasten, and let them be like this:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 Place your two thumbs together, and let the woman be on her back, with her legs spread.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 Then weigh out the two pounds firmly, so that the subtle syrup is round, and cover it well.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 Then take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman lie down every day, so that it may not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the syfac is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 If the covering is of fresh meat, then suspend it at the knee and cut into it.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 And have the medicines that staunch blood, such as agrimony, dragon's blood, frankincense, together with plenty of egg. xspace
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 then bring a broad lead plate, so that the wound cannot close.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 and let it be so for a long time, and bring him a tent of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then he should be treated with other treatments until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when in the flesh comes a boil, it must be covered in this manner, if it is not an infected abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For an infected abscess that is in the flesh, one should not touch or make with fire.
des emorroides	 of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually appear without a cause, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 and we have already said in the section the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and hardened ones, when they are deeply embedded in the flesh and do not appear to the touch, are not cured by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who are at the edge of death, which can be felt, are those whom one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold house. Then press down on it with pliers and cut off its roots, then powder medicines that restrain blood flow, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 Then he puts his feet against the wall for an hour, then places them in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 And if blood comes out, then she makes her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and galls and similar things, and then takes barley flour, and mixes it with honey and oil, and makes an emplaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it bleeds, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 If not, she has him aerate cupping glasses on his back and breasts without piercing the skin.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 Then she takes linen, moistens it with plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and aerates in place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when the abscess subsides, she treats the place with oil until it is healed;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 And that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp head, so you must cover it as I have said for the telul.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then heal until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	 of the abscesses of the uterus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many types of abscess occur in the uterus, such as canker, purulent abscess, herpes, cysts, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 It must therefore be said in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes to the breast, which is not one of the abscesses that swell well.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 And if you wish to know the ironwork, look whether the abscess is sharp at its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red, if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 Then do not hasten to pierce, but let the abscess ripen until the pain is relieved;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 And then make the patient sit on a chair, and have two small chairs where he leans back, and support his back and bring together his feet at the outer parts of the thigh;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 And let his thighs be spread wide, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good cord;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 Then give him to drink towards the right side, and bring there the instrument with which one works the opening of the wound, from which afterward comes the form;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 And it is necessary that when you see this instrument being brought there, that you first insert the ray to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not injure the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 And if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not hurt it;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 And it is necessary for him to place the horn of the instrument above, and to dip the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 And when the abscess opens, and one makes an opening with the soft hand, it must be covered at the top with spongy cloth.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 And when the abscess is emptied, it is necessary that you place in the wound tents moistened in rose oil, or in dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 And place the tent further into the wound at the bottom of the sore, and place over the sore and over the finger a clean cloth moistened in water or cooked mallows.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then the care after two days of oil application to this extent, until it is healed.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 and sometimes one lifts the scab and the wound with a clyster of water and honey, and then with water and long roots of iris and elecampane cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 then return to oil application.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.
de l’enfantement	 of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 It is necessary first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down below, and desire to smell air.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 then quickly the child is about to issue forth;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 therefore know that this birth is according to natural form, and the outlet is under its head, and the afterbirth with it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly, so that the child comes out quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 because when he descends upon his head, the afterbirth follows with him, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses by good cleansing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 and this one who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 Because sometimes he comes feet first, and sometimes the body or head comes out strongly, or the hands, or he comes out on his back, or sometimes upside down, and by chance he is turned onto his neck, and in other evil forms.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in these things, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the forms how she must help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 If a child comes out headfirst by natural birth, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool, where women hold her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 and let some oil or fenugreek be cooked, then the midwife puts between her teeth the small spoon which has this shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 and tear open the afterbirth, and cut to her nail so that the moisture inside flows out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must enema the woman with fenugreek muslin mixed with sesame oil;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 then make her inhale and sneeze condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 If one extracts the child now.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 And if the two hands come out strongly, then you must reset them gently piece by piece;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 then take away the seat from under her, and hold the woman so that she does not fall during this process.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the hand cannot enter and the child is dead, then cut off the hands with a knife that was placed before, extract the child, and reset accordingly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the child's exit onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When the child comes out on its feet, one must push it upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 and then turn him little by little until he is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 Then take hold of his feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 When he can jump up to his knees, have him grasp it and sneeze with condiments.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 if he jumps further, so be it by God's will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 And if he does not jump as high as we have said, then turn him little by little until he is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 Because then he will be light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if he does not come further as we have said, then take mace from an almond tree, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind everything together in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 apply this ointment over the woman's genital area and on the outside as well. Then make her sit in hot water up to her ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 and when she is sufficiently moistened below, give her a mustard plaster and place it below, leaving it on for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 Then make her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and press lightly on her belly, for the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 Of the delivery of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When the child comes in this form, then the midwife places her hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 and she is made to sit on his neck, and her feet hang down, and she lies on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 and folds her hands little by little, and then takes hold of the hands on top of the belly, and removes the cushions from below, so that she is ready to descend.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 And if the child does not jump, then take his feet and move them strongly, then move the belly upwards, then put your hands in.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 And feed the child little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 And instruct the woman to take [care] until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 Of the delivery of the child that comes with one hand hanging down
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 It is necessary to devise a method to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman get up and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 If she cannot walk, then have her lie down on a bed, and spread her legs widely;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 Then bring the midwife that I mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 and if she does not deliver, have her sit on a stool, then consider how to bring back the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 and feed the child according to natural figure, and make him sneeze, and instruct her to take [care] until the child comes out strongly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 of the emergence of the child from its neck, and its hands extended, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 It is necessary that the nurse wash their hands, then turn the cup little by little, and pour gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 And when it is equal, place on the natural mixture of althea and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 And when you have done this, make her sit on the seat and command that she rest.
et la fai esternuer.	 And make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 In this same manner, for all the second stage
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 When the mucus comes out in this manner to all the nostrils, then cut the nostril with your nail until the moisture is emptied.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 And if the child cannot breathe through its face and neck, then cut from below, so that it is not retained, and let the child die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 then put the child inside, as much as you need to place it, and instruct the woman to take some time:
adonques si istra legierement.	 then draw it out gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 And this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 Two is a strange thing, and they do not live, except rarely; 》
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 I know that being multiple is a defect, and they are deprived of the fluid that divides them, which is connected to the belly; 》 》
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 And sometimes they come out as naturally as any other, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 And if they come out violently, then treat it as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, and do quickly and lightly what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And make sure to do this as if you are going for safety.
de plusors enfans	 of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and all are shaped like a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one, and it is necessary that the midwife knows all these things, for by chance similar things may happen to her;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 And do so according to what is needed.
de l’enfant mort	 of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When you cure the woman of a dead child or miscarriage, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out on its own, and you are forced to work with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 Then you must know if the woman is of sound virtue, and does not have an illness or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 So it must happen that the woman is placed on her back, and her head inclined downward, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 And let the midwife apply the tincture in two places, where she is bound to the bed so that she cannot move during childbirth.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 Then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moistened oil, blended with althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then let the midwife anoint her hands with these oils and herbs.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 Then gently insert them into the pregnant woman, then seek the place where she inserts the unguents so that they may be suitable for this purpose, and take care that the child is prepared to descend onto its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 If he thrusts the dagger in his eyes or his neck or his mouth or under his palate or beneath the beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on the feet, then he should thrust in the sole or in the sides.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 and it is necessary that he holds the dagger in his right hand, and places the handle between his left thumb and forefinger, and strikes with all his might, and thrusts the dagger into any of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 and this is the shape of the dagger.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 Then thrust against another dagger, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 And then they are made equal by moving to and fro, so that the bone may issue forth, and let the claws be toothed to hold it, as in this form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 And if some part remains, then let the surgeon anoint two of his fingers with oil and push them into that part, and draw out the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if nothing remains, then place this claw in a higher location, and do the same until all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to swelling, then you must wrap it in a cloth until it all comes out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 Then cut it into the joint of the sole or at the heel, and so you must do with the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow at the exit, or if there is sharp water collected at the head, then you must insert a pointed catheter between your fingers, puncture the head, and extract the water.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 or you can use an instrument called "almidach", with which the forms come with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 and do the same if the child naturally has a large head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 and then draw the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps out strongly and sticks in the birth canal, it should be split until the moisture that is in the worst exit comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if he is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce him so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mother's mouth is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 And if he is constricted in the belly or in the breast, then you must stretch him on a cloth wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 and cut open the belly or the breast, so that the moisture within runs out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 and if the other members are removed, and only the head remains, then the surgeon should insert his hand into the wound deeply, and pull it out until it reaches the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 Then he places one or two sponges therein, and pulls them out strongly.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 And if the mouth of the wound is constricted due to a hot abscess that has formed there, then one must not work on it, but rather apply moist and greasy substances.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And let the physician prepare poultices, and boil them in softening and moistening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 And if the child is on his side, and you can place him flat, then prepare as we have said for a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if one cannot, then draw out the cord piece by piece, and leave nothing of the membrane.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 And when you have done this, let the physician prepare what we have said for abscesses that come in marriage;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And if blood discharge occurs, then place it in restraining water, and let the physician prepare other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 And I saw a woman in whose womb one child had died, and then another was conceived on top of it, and that other also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After a long time, he developed an abscess on the thigh, which swelled until it burst, and began to exude greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I was called to treat it, and thought about it for a long time, but the wound could not be healed.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I applied a strong drawing plaster, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I was greatly amazed, for the belly has no bones at all.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 So I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I sought the wound, and removed many bones, until the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 And the woman lived for a long time thus, and always exuded a little pus from the place.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 And I have not written this chapter except that, when the master finds something strange, he should know how to help it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 to bring the wound back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 Here follows the form of the pressing instrument, with which we treat the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 and at two turns, as the two heads of the two screws.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 However, let the horn be more delicate than the press, and let it be made of boxwood or ivory;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 and let the mouth of the stock be two fingers wide, and the edge of the boards one finger thick, and in length a palm and a half.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 and between the two screws there should be two supports of this same wood, which are firmly attached to one another, half a palm long or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 And these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the horseshoe to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, similar to the shape of tongs;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 and it must have two adjustments at each end, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 and when you want to open the horseshoe with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on the bed with her feet hanging and legs spread, then place the two adjustments together in the horseshoe, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 then work your hand with the entire instrument, just as you did with the tongs, according to the amount that you want to open the mouth of the horseshoe, until the hole is made as wide as you wish.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 These instruments are all surpassed, and their likenesses are multiplied.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 And when the doctor has prepared them, the work is all the more urgent, and higher in reputation among people because of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 Do not discard the instrument until you have prepared it, for their needs are not negligible.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 When the secondine is used for childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze strongly, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 And if she faints from this, that's a good sign.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 If not, take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cascara, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 all these herbs, or some of them, be cooked in water on the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 then put a reed or tube from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient, and hold it until the steam enters the patient's mouth;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 then make them sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 If the ligament is cut quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 And if it persists after this treatment and does not diminish, command the woman to wet her left hand in oil of cumin or a poultice of hollyhock, and then place it on the vulva, and seek for the discharge;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 and when she finds it, take hold of it and pull straight and little by little, so that the patient does not shrink from the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 But one must move it gently to the right and to the left, then pull.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 It will come out and dislocate again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And if the throat is narrow, we have said that the treatment is to sneeze, and with smoke from herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 and if it does not come out with all that we have said, be careful not to pull too hard.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 but it is necessary that what is at the throat, you tie to the thigh of the woman, then give her an enema with ointment quadruple.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 It will rot and be reset, and it will come out stronger.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 but still, when it rots, it causes a bad smell in the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 It is necessary therefore for suitable fumigation for this.
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 none of the ancients have proven fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flow and the afterbirth is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 And it is like vinegar, and place the subtle part at the top, and the wide parts over the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 and let the fumigation be above the coals, and continue until it is consumed, and then begin another one.
de percier lou fondement	 to pierce the anus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 Many children are born who do not have their anus pierced, but instead have a thin membrane covering it:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 so it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this membrane with her finger, and do not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and be careful that she does not touch the wound.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then put on a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat with poultice until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put a piece of lead in the hole and leave it for less days, and let it be removed when the child wants to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 And sometimes this happens suddenly from a wound or abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	 then it is necessary to cover that quickly:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 if it is treated, as we have said about the poplar bud.
de la fistule dou fondement	 about the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 Fistulas that come from under the anus are knots, and growths that come near the anus outside, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or several;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 and when that knot is old, it works, and it brings with it moisture, white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 And they are known by this: that there is an emission or flatulence when the patient has an emission, and sometimes one comes out as a fart.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 And there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and halfway down the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 and reach as far as the junction of the thigh, and even to the head of the testicle.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 And thus one recognizes a fistula penetrating the anus and not penetrating it:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 and this is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and insert a fine needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when it is not twisted.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 And if there is twisting, then insert a fine lead tent or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 And if you do not feel it, and there is no passage of feces or gas or bile, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 know that it has not perforated;
si te haste dou curer.	 then hasten to cure [it].
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 Et when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the passage of the urine, then the urine leaks out, and it cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 If it is perforated as far as the junction of the thigh, the tent will come to that place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 if there is no twist and the discovery of pain around it, then it exits soon after, and neither medicines nor stitching through poultice are effective;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 And in these Persian fistulas there is no cure except for labor, and the vanity of foolish doctors who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 In those that are not Persian and are not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 And he lifts his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 Then place an iron tent or of lead if there is convulsion, so that you know where the tent comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your index finger there, if you then feel that the tent has passed through.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 And let it be uncovered where you sense between your finger the spleen or the flesh, then know that it is perforated.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If it cannot be treated, then do not bother with it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 Nevertheless, it is said that some can be well healed, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 And aid is done by heating the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 and presses it all hot into the fistula, until it reaches near the anus;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 and do this two or three times, so that you know these fleshy tissues are burned, which are like a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 and then cure it with moist tents in butter, so that this flesh comes out, then cure with a salve of healing herbs and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If he is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 If this, otherwise cannot be cured;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 and if the tent enters, and does not reach to the finger in the anus, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula like this which follows the covering of the heart.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 If from the beginning of the fistula, and always push forward the tent, and then after the cautery, until it comes to the head of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 And the tent will be released and fall;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 Then shave off those hairs that appear like a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 And if the pus overcomes you and enters between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or strong medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 For the fire cautery brings together two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 That is to say, the burning of these hairs, and the staunching of blood and drying out of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 Then treat moist tents with butter or ground substance, until the place swells up, and the burned hairs come out of the swelling.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 then cure the wound with sudorific onions and hard flesh, and the medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 When it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 And if the fistula reaches to the bottom of the anus and is distant from the body, then press your finger into the anus and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 If you feel the tent and inside there are either the fabric or the tarpaulin or the wood which is about to rot, then let there be only air that comes from faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut to the bottom, or if you can do so place tents there and treat as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 and do not go too deep, lest you cut the support that holds the foundation, and the discharge comes out there unwillingly.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 then treat it as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 par aventure si sera sanez, or you remove that covering and clean it once it is cut near the base, either by probing or with another suitable instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 then cleanse that foul matter which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 then strive to restore the wound and to stop the fistula in the part below the base;
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 if it would be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 And sometimes fistulas are of this kind:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 and it is when you probe the fistula, and it is on the side of the base near the skin above, then take a probe pierced at the tip like this: ️
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 And insert a twisted thread into it, and insert the tent with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 If it is passing through the edge of the base within, then draw out the thread from that hole, as you push your finger into the base;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 And pull the thread end, and bring the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 And restrain it several times, so that the thread cuts through the flesh between them, and they fall off;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 Si la fistule ne perce pas, fais-la percer de toutes les manières possibles, sauf si elle est trop profonde.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it is not fitting to cover the wound too deeply with a cap, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 The shape of the sharp spine used to make a fistula is very sharp and cutting on one side;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 and not on the other side, so that it does not cut what should not be cut, as you can see here.
des emorroydes	 from hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 Embryos are according to two kinds:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 or they are within the anus, like a grain of resin, and there are small ones and large ones, and it often bleeds, and there is one or more, and they are outside the anus and at the top of the anus.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 Mais celles qui sont defuer ainsi ont peu de moiteur, et encore toujours ou un peu d'eau citrine ou un peu de sang, et elles ont la couleur du corps.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 et le cure de celles qui les ont dedans le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malade qu'il s'essuie pour aller dans les chambres, jusqu'à ce que le fondement lui issu fuer, et que les fils apparaissent;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 si tu t’empresses, et le prends avec des pinces, ou tu le tiens avec ton ongle, puis le coupes à sa racine.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 et si les pinces ne peuvent pas les tenir à cause de leur moiteur, alors les prends avec un morceau de tissu, ou du coton, ou une pièce de chiffon.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 And draw them to your teeth, then cut them off, and sprinkle some hot powders on top for the cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat with other treatments until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 And if the base cannot come out, then use an enema for the patient with a biting and harsh enema to clean what is in the base, so that it can come out clearly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 When the patient presses, and if the threads are out of the base, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 And it is that you take them with your nail or with pliers, and cut them off, then treat as we have said until they are healed, and let the patient fear the cutting with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 It is necessary for you to suture according to this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 Take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, then pull the thread through the other side and make the needle pierce from another place, and turn the two ends of the thread underneath the needle, and let it be wide;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 And pull the thread tightly, then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one to drain the excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 then place on top a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate, and place it on top, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then let them alone until they fester, and when they have fallen off, treat the wounds with ointment and other treatments, until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 Of dryness of the intestines or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 Many times there is dryness in the intestines, due to natural constraint, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 Si it is necessary that you remove with the tip of a scalpel or with your nail the scab on top, which does not let it moisten;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 then treat it until it heals as needed;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 and if it cannot heal, then begin the scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well and is scabbed over.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	 Of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 A formica is a small hairy appearance under the skin, and it goes very deep;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 and sometimes it finds the cold, and one feels it also as if dead from trembling, and it comes to the whole body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the treatment is that you take a quill of a goose feather, or a strong feather of a vulture, and place that quill on the trembling, so that the circle encloses the trembling all around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 Then turn your hand to the entire chain until you capture all around the trembling, and place it entirely, and pull out the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if you see, do this with a reed of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be subtle below and drawn above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 Do not cut, in order to hold onto two, and press harder.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you see it, then cauterize the trembling, just as it is written in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	 of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 Sometimes a silver enema or arsenic or melted bronze or iron can be made;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 and sometimes these instruments are made in small and large sizes according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 Therefore, those who are prepared for the treatment of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The form of the small and large enema is wide at the top, where the intestines are tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 And if there is an obstruction where the intestines are tied as you see, and the end is pierced;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 And on one side, let there be two holes, and on the other side, one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 And let the belly where the medicines are placed be made from a beast's bladder or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and there should be one finger's width between each hole. Then insert into these holes a strong thread of twisted linen, crossing in an X shape or around the belly, and gather the belly together like a goatskin;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread at the front, then administer an enema.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold. Anoint the tip of the enema with oil or egg yolk, or a similar substance, then insert it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 Then the servant squeezes it with both his hands until it is all clear, then he releases the enema, and the patient lifts his legs to the wall, and if the medication wants to come out, he holds it as much as he can;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And if he sleeps through the night, it is even greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you enema him for a disease of the swollen belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the rectum, let the enema be as fine as for a one-year-old child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the leather should be stretched:
des plaies	 of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 We have already said in the section on the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 or we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines according to their uses.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and what they are made of.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 The things by which wounds are made are by the throwing of a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or by spear or staff or arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 and which are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 And I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because their treatment will be discussed in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from the throwing of a stone or similar things, and the skin is also torn and the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 If you do this immediately, heal with the cephalic method even if there is a little blood from the wound, and let the healing be opposite to the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 and the patient should avoid eating too much wine and heavy food.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 And if he does not want to heal, let his food be reduced, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 and place on the wound, if abscesses come there, only cotton soaked in rose oil or in stiptic wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 and if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and not moved by air, powder that I will mention a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if fire has moved it, then apply some poultices until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by sewing, as I will say for wounds of the belly, with the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound is exposed to the bone and gaping, and only holds on by one spot, then chop it off;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 then treat the wound with medicine and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods such as heads and cooked wheat, also like beans, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if you find rotting flesh and it reaches the bone, then cut off all the rot and cast it away, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, from which blood cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then bind it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 and it is that you put this powder in before the fire has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 And the manner of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	 take one part frankincense;
sanc de dragon II parties;	 blood of dragon two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 quicklime three parts, and make it into fine powder, and fill the wound, and hold it firmly until it becomes well-attached and joins all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 and then bind it well, and leave it without unbinding, unless it swells;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 And sometimes one does this with only quicklime, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but the fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if the wound has moved due to heat,
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 but put on some poultices made of barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it casts out the pus;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then continue with other treatments until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 and I will tell you later about the fractures of the skull.
de la plaie dou col	 of a neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the sinew of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If it is a nerve, then there is no other device than to leave the wound alone and not put anything constricting on it, because this harms the nerves and causes them to withdraw;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 but let the medicine be hot, like warm water mixed with rose oil, and wash the wound also in warm water, and other stones of similar manner, and moist dressings.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the wound is large, stitch it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 And if the wounds are deep and full of pus, then puncture it in a lower place.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 And if the artery is cut and blood flows out, then restrain it, bind it, and cauterize if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 And if the esophagus or the heart is cut and the passage is blocked so that food cannot pass, then suture the heart onto the spine of the neck, and do not touch the throat but replace it according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then he holds it gently, and leaves it for some days, then treats it with dried onions until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then he searches for it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 And if there are bone fragments, then draw them all out if you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound rots, and is discharged and the exit cleared.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 And if there are bones in the wound and it has an abscess, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 of the spear or dagger wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 If it is a thrust from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then observe if wind is coming out of the wound as the patient breathes:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 Know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 And if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not apply the powder at the first hour, nor bandage it, for fear that the wound may bleed profusely, return to the heart, and kill the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 But apply an attractive ointment to it, and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 And if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 Thus, no spasm, trembling, heart strangeness, or drunkenness will come to him.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 And when you see the good arrangement, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Heal it then with bandages and other treatments until he is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 And if she cannot heal and works again, know that there is a fistula.
si la cure si com on doit.	 If the treatment is done as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 And if the wound is from the incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple, either on the back or behind, treat it as you would one in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 If it is large, with stitches;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 And if it is small, with powder. And if it is close to the bone and has chipped off pieces, clean the wound and remove the splinters if they are loose.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 And if they are not cauterized, let the wound suppurate, which will ease the extraction;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And for other wounds and other limbs, the judgment is the same as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 From the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 The ruptures of the abdomen are great, moderate, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 from the great wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, which causes their penetration.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 And the suture is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because it is harder to put the intestines back in, unless they are replaced immediately.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, and are harder to put back in, which is why the moderate wound is better, because it is easier to return the intestines to their place than with others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 And know that the ruptures of the belly are according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the sutures of other wounds of the body are two others which are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 And nevertheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 I say that when the wound is small and some part of the intestine has come out, and it is a serious thing to put back, this is by one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it is cold, warm it in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 Soak a sponge or cloth in warm water only, where you cook in hot water with hyssop and saffron and spikenard, and wash the intestines until the swelling is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 and sometimes make this restraining wine, which should be drunk alone to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 And when you see the swelling diminish, then moisten the intestines with water where mallows and marshmallows have been cooked, for through this the intestine is healed in a short time.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 and if it cannot enter, then make an incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut out hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 and the first treatment is that the intestine should be eaten, which no one should cut into unless there is great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 And this is the tool to cut it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 if you cut inside at an angle and not outside, and see here the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is widened, and the intestine jumps out, then place it back in its natural form in its proper place, if you can, because this is worth more.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, then you must make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and the feet higher than the parts below, and also if there is a turn of the belly in one of the two parts, then pay attention to this: that the injured part be higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And thus it is necessary to proceed as I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 In small wounds, apply what is prepared, then have between your hands one skillful minister who holds all the turn at his hand, and gather the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 And this is the common way of stitching, which is that you take a needle or several, according to the width of the wound, then leave two fingerbreadths from the top of the wound, and there you insert a needle with a strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 and pierce the two heads of the leather with the two heads of the thread, which is underneath the leather inside, so that you make it pierce from this side, and join the two heads of the thread together.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 then pull a double thread around the needle on two sides, then join the two heads of the wound together, and leave two fingerbreadths, and insert another needle there.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 Then take the thread of the needle just as you made the first needle, and do not stop making them according to your need for needles, until all the wound is restricted.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 And let the needles be of medium size, between fine and thick, because fine needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 Therefore, they must be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 And it is not necessary to insert the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and widen the wound before the suturing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 And then cut the heads of the needles, so that they do not wound the patient while sleeping, and put caps or bandages on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it allows a needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 The second stitch is common and consists of assembling the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the flesh together with one needle with a strong, medium-sized thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 And when you have passed these four heads all together, then bring the needle back to the place where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 And leave a space between each stitch the thickness of two small fingers.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 This stitch men know, and I sewed a wound that one man had in the belly, who was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it protruded the intestines well two palms long, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I returned the intestines to him after they had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound was closed until fifteen days, and I cared for it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 And I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 And I put old cotton on the wound twice a day, and I washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing.
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 Take the needle, and pass it from the outside to the inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 When it has pierced the skin straight on straight, leave the end of the silk or thread where you passed the needle on the outside, and make it come out on the other side from the inside to the outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as the furrier makes the furs, and that you leave one time the thread on one side, and take it up again from another, until the stitch is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 The second way of stitching, which Galen properly calls, is done like some do, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the thread to the other end, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 Insert a needle into one end of the thread close by, and make it pass through that place only, and leave the two ends of the thread;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 then turn the needle and make it pass from the outside part until inside, to the two ends of the thread;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 Then have one pierced from the outside part to the other inside, in two other places of the temple that are on either side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 And this is the method of suturing and it is the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 Galen said these words, and some attest to it, that the belly should be sewn with two needles, with thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 And one needle must be pushed from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew straps.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 And know that when the wound is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more difficult than from other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before heat has moved it, then set aside burning the interior, and the skin.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 then apply powder of stag beetle, and if heat has moved it, then apply some ointment that is present, until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 and stitch the threads, and let the silk and the thread be joined together;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 and if you do not have medicine, then apply, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 For you do not need any other medicine in many situations when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 And if you doubt that the wound will affect the main limbs, then you must soak a light linen cloth in temperate oil or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the armpits.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the belly, and this often happens, then enema him with lukewarm black wine, and likewise if the putrefaction reaches the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 And pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the thinness of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 And if the entrails come out of the wound, then push them back in just like the intestines, while they are still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 And if it is old and turned black or dark, then you must tie the black area so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 Then cut that which is between the ligaments, and place the two ends hanging from the lower part of the wound until enough to lighten the extraction when the projectile falls, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	 of the bursting of a boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 When the intestines are cut and the wound is small, it can be healed in some men, because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which came the excretions and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 I applied care according to my ability, and did not stop refining until he was healed, and the place was joined together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 And when I saw it join, I feared that the patient might have an ailment in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 and there was no illness there, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 take forceps with large jaws, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the forceps has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips, so that it closes its mouth upon them;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 and then cut off its head, and this holds so that it cannot come undone, then place another forceps in the same manner as before, until the entire wound is fully seized;
et cout la plaie.	 And cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 If the heads enter the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, one can tie off the intestines with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal, in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 Take the head of this intestinal thread that is very thin, and then tie a fine twisted linen thread to the head of this thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew up the intestines, and bring it back to its proper place;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 And this manner of suturing for wounds is nothing but according to the way of confidence and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 And if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal grooves, there is no cunning or skill, except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 of a fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 You should know that any wound or abscess, when it bursts open, is universally called a "fistula," and likewise when it is incised and discharges pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And a fistula is according to the truth a hard and white nodule, where one does not feel pain, and it is also rooted like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 and sometimes in clear fluid, and other times thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 sometimes deep, and other times shallow;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 and I have already spoken of it in the section on wounds, that any wound that does not heal, and there is no flesh there, it is only due to one of the NINE causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 that is to say, because of the weakness of the blood or body; ︎
ou por sa malice;	 or because of its evil nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 or because there is hard flesh within it, and on the edges, which does not allow new flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 where there is too much flesh;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 where the place is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 or because the corruption is a kind of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 or because in that region, digestion is slow, healing is delayed, and swelling is natural;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 or there are veins or bones there:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of a fistula caused by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 Know that a fistula can occur in any part of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the sinus, or the intestines, or the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 And so for those who come to the property of the main limb, and to similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 And all fistulas that are of this kind are of severe curing, and there is only labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 And if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have mentioned, and you are confident in the cure, and you recognize it, then take a needle of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, then prick it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 And if the fistula is crooked, then seek out a subtle needle of lead, for lead bends more easily around the crookedness.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 And if the fistula has multiple holes and you cannot easily locate it with needles, then administer an enema through one of the holes, for moisture thus cuts from one hole to another, and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 Then carefully seek with your power, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it has been severed completely, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels at the pressing of your hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the foreign body and the rotten flesh that are inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep in a straight place, then you must cut deeply, as much as you can, then put wet bandages soaked in healing water on it, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then he applies onion-like dressings to clean flesh until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize it as we have said; and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 If a vein or nerve injures a principal member, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then scrape until all the corruption is removed, then treat with flesh-like dressings until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 and if it does not heal and pus forms again as before, know that you have not yet reached the end.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 then expose and seek until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 And if it is healed this way, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 But if not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 and if there is a little bit of bone corrupted and you can remove it with tweezers, then remove it with the appropriate instrument for that purpose; and if there are many bones, then remove them all, leaving none behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 And if moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear, then cut and remove the flesh and skin, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place something that induces putrefaction on the wound and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then the bones will be easier to obtain;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then remove the flesh only up to the blackness, then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 and if there is a great part of corruption, reaching as far as the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 then it must be sawn and cut all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 There was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from something inside the body, so that the matter came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and he had no reason to open it. ething
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 but the doctors in their folly worked so much on it that they opened the abscess, and a lot of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and many perforations appeared, all of which released pus and moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 and many doctors tried to cure it for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine until I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what came out through the perforations was very foul-smelling;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 and the body of the young man became red, and he had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 Je pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one came up against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 I hurried then, and I cut into one of the perforations until I uncovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupt and decayed, and the corruption reached as far as the inside of the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I saw that the bone was rotten, and I thought there was no other corruption except for what I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, but it could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 and then I reopened [the wound], and discovered the bone as before, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, and saw it, and then removed it, and tried to close the place.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 but I could not do so until I cut around a palm's width of bone, and then drew it out completely, then treated it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 and it was quickly healed and closed, and I did not need to reopen the wound except for the weakness of the patient, who could not tolerate [it], and out of fear that I would cause his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 Car for the evacuation of blood, he often bled, but he was entirely healed, and in place of the bone, hard flesh grew, and it was of good disposition and caused no harm or opposite effect at all, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 Take a ligature, and tie it to the end of the bone that is protruding, and command someone to pull it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 and put another ligature of thicker linen on top of the first ligature, and tie it onto the flesh that is above the bone, and pull upwards so that you draw the corrupted flesh downwards, and expose the flesh in the place where you want to set the bone, so that the suture does not injure the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 and place a heated iron or board under the bone to completely cover the corrupted flesh; 
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 and it is necessary to set [the bone] as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to set [it] again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 And if the bone is rotten, and does not open, and the rot is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 Then place the ember underneath, and then let there be silk from one part to the other of the rot, and let the length of the silk be equal to the length of the rot, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 And if the rot is in the joint, then cut away the rotten joint, and silk the bone on which it adheres from the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 And if the rot is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut it out.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 And if the rot is in the wrist of the hand or in the ankle of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nevertheless you must seek out that rot and see how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 And cleanse it in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 And know that the incisors and the saws to cut these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and their fineness, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 And for this reason it is necessary to prepare for each kind of work its instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 And know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the kinds of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If you think about the instrument of which you have need according to what is necessary for it.
dou feu	 of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 The head swells either from within or from without;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 and when you have treated that corruption with the care of medicines, and they do not help, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death or the greater harm of the loss of the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 and the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and then swells after the blackening, for this corruption of the limb spreads from limb to limb, and affects the entire body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 if you are quick to cover it, and if it is due to the bite of some poisonous animals, such as a sea scorpion or viper, and similar things, if the corruption is at the base of the finger, then cut it off, and do not give it space to spread to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 And if it goes up to the hand, then cut it at the joint, so that the corruption does not spread to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 and if it comes to the arm, then cut it with a knife;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 and if it goes beyond the knife, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the quantity of his strength.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 and do likewise when the corruption comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 and if it comes to the foot, then cut off the entire foot.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 and if it goes up into the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other strategy than to leave the patient to die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 And the manner of the cut or of the silk member is such that you tie it above and below, and one assistant extends one end of the ligature downwards, and another assistant the other ligature upwards, and you sever the flesh that is between the two ligatures in a place one finger wide, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 then cut or silk, and place on each side a piece of linen, so that the silk does not touch the healthy flesh, and cause the patient to have another wound and abscess there.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 And if blood flows as you work, then quickly cauterize the place, or apply some restraining powders on it.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable ligature, and care for it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 Et je te dirai que cela arriva à un homme dans son pied.
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 Il lui advint une tache noire qui ressemblait à une brûlure de feu, et cette corrosion commença d'abord dans son gros orteil du pied, jusqu'à ce qu'elle envahisse tout le pied.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 Et quand l'homme vit la corruption, il se hâta de couvrir le pied, et fut guéri.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 Et longtemps après, la corruption revint dans le gros orteil de la main. Il vint à moi, et je lui appliquai des remèdes répulsifs après avoir nettoyé le corps, mais il ne put arrêter la corruption.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 Et il demanda que je lui coupe la main, ce que je refusai car j'espérais encore pouvoir repousser la matière.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 And I doubted also that if I cut his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 And he despaired completely, and returned to his land, and struck his hand with a sword, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And I have not told this account except for what one must do if needed elsewhere.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 Sometimes an abscess comes in a fleshy place and stays so long that it makes a large gathering of pus.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 And then they round and pierce, and the pus jumps out, and the place remains empty, like a vessel.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 And the skin above is as thin as fine cloth, and it does not run to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such an illness is called «sain», and is not called «fistula».
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 But if it is so elongated that it comes up to the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 and the skin is such that you cut around all of that skin, even when it is thin, like a sheet;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 and it does not become infected due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 And if you are confident that the skin will become infected, and the infection is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a clyster in this manner:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 look to see if the breast is large, and the discharge from it is of foul odor, then treat it with a clyster made of Egyptian medicine thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 take asafoetida, and oil, and lead oxide, equally, and put them to cook in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 And then take some according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and use it as an enema in the breast, and constrain the anus;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 And leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by pressing out.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 Do this many times until the breast is cleansed and the pus removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 And sometimes use an enema of ash water when this medicine is not present, and it should be that you take ashes from a vine stick, pour water over them, then filter, and use as an enema until you know the breast is well cleaned.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 And if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then enema with honey and water where there is a little bit of lead.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 ou you clean it with honey and mixed wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the wound dry.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 and when you have done this, and you are confident that the wound is well purified, then you cleanse it with that which produces flesh in it. It is that you take a definitive plaster and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about the properties in the section on ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 and if the hole in the wound is small and the tip of the syringe cannot enter, then widen it with an iron hook slightly, and insert a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilic ointment until it is widened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if the wound is too wide, then cut it and leave only as much in place so that the suppository can enter, and if the opening through which the bowel exits is above, then cut it or move it to a lower place.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 For when the bowel is fully out, do not let any flesh enter;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 and if you cannot cut the skin as you see fit, then prepare it in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place there is, for when the bowel is fully out, do not let any flesh enter; and if you cannot cut the skin as you see fit, then prepare it in this manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 so that the bowel runs lightly downward, and leave nothing of the bowel there;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 And take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and place them on a linen cloth that covers all the wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 Then cut a piece of cloth the size of the wound and a little larger than before, then place a soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and put it on the wound to relieve the pain, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 And the one that is on the wound, remove often to relieve the pain, and know what comes out of the pain, whether it is poison or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 And beware if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in this way and you see the nature that leaps onto the wound, know that the wound is already healing, and health approaches.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 And then unbind it in the morning of the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change the bandage, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 And if the breast throws up undigested food after many days, know that the breast does not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poisons have passed after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 For there are men in whom the flesh grows late in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 And if the undigested matter comes out of the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healing.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 And if the breast is slow to heal and is distant (from healing), then apply drying moist substances that are dry in virtue, such as refined ointment, for it contains a large part of copper, and this is the last medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 Take refined ointment, made with rose oil, and wash it with equal parts of old wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	 then mix and apply it
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 and this same mixture works better when onions are not present, or take myrrh, aloe and incense, grind them up, powder them over the honey while it is over the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 and then use it as an ointment, apply it to the chest, sometimes you can add a long arrowroot and celestial lily roots, which are like vetch flour and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 and use them either as single ingredients or in mixtures:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 grind them up, make a powder, put it on the honey that I mentioned earlier, and apply it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 and if the treatment is prolonged and it is not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption has gone deep, and made an impression on the bone or hard members or ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 Si li cures de la fistule, si com nos avoms dit ci devant.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 of the fingertip abscess
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail of the finger or toe, or sometimes in other places.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 and when it is neglected, and no care is taken of it, then this abscess comes about, and it runs and throws pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it will destroy the entire nail.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 and the corruption reaches the bone, causing a stinking pain, and the nail of the toe becomes wide, and its color turns red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut off with an iron knife all the remaining excess of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 Cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 And if the nail presses into the flesh and begins to prick it and wound it, then you must place a thin strip of wood under the nail so that it no longer touches the flesh, and push it up, and carefully and lightly cut away that part of the flesh, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it away and pull strongly, for as long as the corrupt bone remains there, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if you see that the finger is rotting, then cut it off at one of its joints as described above, then heal it until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 And if he is wounded and bruised and feels great pain, then you must heal him first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 then cut the nail of the sputum-making finger diagonally on top, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 and if it happens, then apply something soothing on top.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 The pain of the shoulder of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The two thumbs that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshly, and sometimes there is one with bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and sometimes they grow from the root of the joint, or their birthplace is in some of our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 He who is born from any knot of the two does not move, and he who is born at the junction of the two, perhaps will move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 The cutting of the one who is fleshy is light in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 cut him at his root with a broad sputum-making finger.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	 If you hold [the shoulder].
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the case of one who is born or should at the anus, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable saw, then heal it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 The swelling that comes to the two together comes from birth, or from the joining of a wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 It is necessary that you cut this seam, so that they may return according to their natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 then place between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not adhere.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Or you can place between two thin plates of lead, until the site is healed, as needed.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 If suddenly one of his fingers comes with the palm, cut that joint as needed.
des vils	 of the fingers
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 Veins are large openings filled with melancholic superfluities, which come into many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 and it happens more in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 Therefore, you should administer purging of bile to him, and then treat him with a plaster.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 The treatment with iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 one is that they are cut, and the black blood is drawn out.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 And the other way is to lift the vein and draw it out completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 The cut is made in this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 first soak the patient's leg in very hot water until the thick blood becomes thin, then press on the patient's leg from above the hip to below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 then cut the vein in one of these three places with a wide incision, and lift out and draw forth strongly the black blood into your hand from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient's strength can bear;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 and then tie it off, and instruct the patient to eat nourishing black food.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 And the evacuation and bleeding restart when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The healing of it is according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 shave the patient's leg, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and rinse the leg with hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 and if you do not have a bath, then heat it at the fire, and then cut towards the vein from the ankle to the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 then remove the skin at the corner, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 And it is seen red and black, and when it enters the leather it seems also like a bleached rope.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 Then push the thread down until it is raised from the leather, and then fold it at the corner lightly, then cut it in another place above three fingers.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 Then scrape the leather on the vein until it appears, then raise it to the lace, as you have done, and fold it at another corner, as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 Then cut another piece, or several if you need it, then lift it, and cut at the finger of the foot, then draw it and lift up to the second piece.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 Then draw it from piece to piece until it comes out completely, then cut it off.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 And if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a needle with all its strong thread doubled, tie and pull it, and insert under the skin, and turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 And be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, then it cannot be pulled or lifted, and this will cause harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 And when you have pulled it all out, then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And care for it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 And if the vessel is twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it obliquely, but do not cut it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And there you draw as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 The form of the iron with which one cuts the vessel is curved and does not cut through, so that it does not cut the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 and is of a large curve, for if it were delicate, it would cut the vein. But let it be thick as we have said, and here is the form:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 This vein is inserted in the legs, in hot places where no grass or tree grows, and in earth where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 And perhaps it can appear elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes beneath the skin, just as serpents and worms are inserted between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that it comes into the leg a very great inflammation, then the place changes, and the vein begins to emerge, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When the wound opens, it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of cloth from one and a half to two and a half (inches or centimeters unclear), including the knot, and let the cloth hang down the leg. And every time some point escapes, you wrap it again around the cloth, and the knot;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 And if it is too long, then cut off part of it, and wrap the rest, and do not cut it at its root until all of it has come out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 For if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 Therefore it is necessary that it be drawn out little by little until the end, and not leave anything in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 And sometimes this vein, when it is drawn from five palms in length, or from ten, and a man came to me, for whom it was twelve palms long, and when you cut it, then it throws out one or two drops of blood, and it pierces through to the bottom, so that all comes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 and let the matter inside be emptied, and apply medicines that prevent corruption every day, then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 And sometimes this vein has fewer drops of blood, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and there come many drops, from which it jumps drops;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 then treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This disease is called in our land "ox disease," because it happens often to oxen, and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes through the entire body ascending and descending, and one feels it well when moving from limb to limb, until it wears away the skin where it goes, and then leaps out.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 It is infected by the putrefaction of certain humors, just like come worms and snakes and leeches and roundworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 and one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it enters and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When you see it being healed and pulled out, one cannot do so except when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 thus it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong tie very tightly, then cut above and pull strongly, and if the pus has entered deeply into the flesh, and you do not find it, then burn it with fire until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 and the greatest harm that it does is that it infects the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 and if you see it coming towards the head near the eye, restrain strongly under it with a scourge, then cut above, and pull strongly;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 and the patient must use body cleansing with dissolving medicines for evil humors, and refrain from rotten foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 Of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This disease is called in our land "vakirir," and it is a pain that comes in certain members, and then moves from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 And I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I was called to a sick woman and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 And soon after, I saw it move up to the shoulder like a worm, faster than anything, just as quick silver moves from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 The pain left that place and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then a little while later it ran through her whole body until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 Then she told me that it was always turning around her body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 I greatly wondered how it moved from one member to another, for I had never seen this illness in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 Nevertheless, I had seen many who wished to move pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it as I saw in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 And I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, and for this reason the forced winds appeared.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 But it does not appear according to this reasoning in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and abundant veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels this pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then quickly cut above and below it, and then chop until that forced wind issues forth from the place.
et cauterize le leu;	 And cauterize the place.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it as you would those who suffer from flatulence, such as stinking pills, and serapinus pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	 of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 Arrows vary according to their appearances and the places on the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The differences in them is that there are some which have large points, small ones, hooked and straight.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 And some that have two prongs, and those that have tongues, and those in which there are fragments.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 And if it falls into any member, it falls according to two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 Or in a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 When it falls then into any part of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 If it is necessary for you to beware of the extraction of this arrow, because death follows in many forms.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 And when this ill sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then draw it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 And the signs of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and there is a strong odor above the brain, are when the patient experiences loss of vision in one eye, dizziness, fainting, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 And perhaps there is a strong odor from the nose or the ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 And perhaps he loses his speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 And from the wound comes white moisture like a finger's tip, and it leaps out like charcoal's ember.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And if this sign appears to you, then avoid treating it, and remove the arrow if it is there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 And perhaps the arrow moves like a finger, and black blood flows from it, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting occurs.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 Know then without doubt that death follows.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 And the sign of an arrow that never exits is when without plain foam it comes out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 And if the arrow falls into the kidney cover, it is near the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 And casts great groaning and great pain and sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested meat will come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 And if the arrow falls into the belly, and some feces come out through the intestines, then there is no hope for a cure or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes forth, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other members, such as the face and neck, throat, shoulders, arms, spine of the back, chest, hips, legs, and similar members, are safe according to several conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 It happened to a man whose arrow fell into the forehead at the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I tried it, and drew it out from another side under the skin of the ear, and he was cured without difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And drew from a youth an arrow that fell into the eye under the eyelid underneath, and the arrow was bent, and he could not grasp it except for the point towards the shaft, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, all of light iron without wings;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 The youth was healthy, and no misfortune befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 And he drew an arrow from his throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic in origin:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I shaved the beard, and was subtle enough to draw it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 And I drew an arrow from a man, which had fallen into his belly, and I thought that he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change at all.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I cut around the arrow, and hooked it, and drew it out strongly, and he had no misfortune.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 And I saw a man upon whom an arrow had fallen on the back, and the wound was closed up; etti ne le pooit traire parmi, et n’ot point de mavais accident. etti je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And the arrow remained within him, and it did not change its natural dispositions at all, nor was there any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And he saw another man, upon whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was closed;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 and it remained thus without causing great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	 and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And he shot an arrow at one of the king's nobles, which had fallen into his nose and was slightly slanted towards the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 and the arrow was completely bent.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I was called to tend to it after three days had passed since it fell. xspace Et mout d'autres semblans.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 I examined it all with great care and did not feel any (pain or resistance); xspace et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 And he felt a prickling pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was from the arrow's tip; I placed on the spot an astringent and digestive plaster, so that the place would not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 And the place of the arrow appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 I put the plaster on for fewer days, and the wound healed again, and the patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose.
et il le me dist.	 And he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I placed a corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it was open, and probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow which had lodged in place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 Then I inserted into the opening of the wound with that sharpened instrument, until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 and the deadline was exceeded by about four months, and then the wound opened where I inserted the pincers, and I pulled it from one side and another, but it could not come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 then I did not stop trying and devising ways to use instruments until one day I took it with well-made pincers, according to the shape that will be shown at the end of this chapter, so that I pulled it out and closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 Or I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you direct your care towards what I do not say, for the book cannot encompass everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 but the wise master comprehends well even a small thing, and that which is present and failing, finds nine works, and nine instruments, for the practice of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 I say that arrows should not be removed from the members into which they are thrust except according to two methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 and that which comes out through the same place it entered is an arrow entering fleshy places, and this can sometimes be done now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 And if it does not jump now, leave it until the flesh is rotten around it, and the exit is lightened.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 And also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it thus for some days, and soften it each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And then it will jump out, and if it does not, pierce around with all the delicate forceps until the place around is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 And if the arrow is stuck in the skull bone and goes into one of the brain cavities, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned happen to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 Do not pull it out, but leave it until it becomes equal after some days, for if the arrow reaches the brain, death occurs.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 Et si la flèche n'est pas fichée trop profondément dans l'os uniquement, et ne parvient pas jusqu'à la moelle, et que le patient reste quelques jours sans incident grave, alors utilise l'instrument de traction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 And if it is very deeply lodged and cannot come out by force, then administer herbs around it, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then heal the place until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 And if the arrow is embedded in the body so that one cannot see it, then seek it out along its entire length;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, then widen it until the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 and draw out the arrow if you can, and if there are barbs on the arrow that hold it in place, then remove the flesh on both sides of the barb as much as you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow so that you can draw it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And be careful not to break the arrow when you pull it out, so that you do not wound more severely.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 And if you cannot do it in one go, leave it until the place around is rotten, then pull it out, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 And if the flow of blood troubles you, then use what we have said about treating it in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 And take care of the incision of the nerve and vein, and contrive how you can most safely pull out the arrow, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And place the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help that can be done, and if you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs indicate to you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 The arrow that comes out from another part, where it protrudes somewhat, or the skin is swollen in that place so that it is clearly visible or felt:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 Cut then upward, so that the pincers can grab it, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	 if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 And if it is lodged in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone and widens the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 And if it cannot come out, then leave it still, and then continue the extraction until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 and if there is the shaft of an arrow in it, push all of the shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 and if the shaft falls out and you see that a pushing instrument is needed, then administer an instrument with a groove in it so that the tip of the arrow enters into the groove of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 and then push strongly, and if the arrow is grooved, then push an instrument with an entering point into it to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 And if an arrow falls into the chest or the belly or the bladder or the side, and it is near, and you can strike above it, then strike.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 And be careful not to strike the vein or the nerve, and then extract [the arrow], and then suture the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And continue the care until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 The shape of the pincers used to extract arrows is like a bird's beak, and see here the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 And there are many ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the tip for pushing [the arrowhead] is like the feather of a bird, to push at the point of the arrow, as here is the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 Li forme des tenailles pour pousser et pour tirer, elle est ainsi :
des voinnes dou cors communes	 de vignes du corps communs
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 There are 31 ways to heal wounds, with 16 being in the head, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 Two temples after the ears, which are called "herbish".
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 et les deux artères qui sont dans les deux temples apparentes;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 And the two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "aspirants";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 et la voine qui est au milieu du front;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 et la veine qui est au sommet du nez;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 and the two jugulars that are in the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 and two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 The veins that are commonly healed are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 the first is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side, and common people call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 And the way is called "fasting," and it is composed of cephalic and basilic, and common people call it "vein of the heart.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 And the basilic is in the right side, and common people call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the scapula, and it is that from which one bleeds, which clearly opens on the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 And the salvatella is the vein between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 One is under the bend of the wrist on the left side, and the second is called saphena, which is at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 And the vein called "nesse," which is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 and there are three veins beneath them in the other leg.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 and the quality of the bleeder, as I tell you, is that you lift the patient's head and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 then have the patient squeeze his neck with one hand, so that the two veins behind the ears appear in two places dependent on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 pinch them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, prick it there;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 Then take the lance, and pass it under the vein to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein, and cut well through the skin and the vein in two places, and make the blood flow out as much as you wish.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then constrict it and bind, until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 And I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples serves for ancient migraine, and headache, and customary ophthalmia, and the body of acute tears in the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 And the qualities of the bleeder are as I say.
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 And it is that the patient should draw his neck, until the two veins appear clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 and feel your thumb under your toe, then sign of the rest.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 then lift the heart up onto the vein at the top of your toe, and push the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up, and cut it, as you have done with two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 then unbind the patient, and put your toe on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 and then bandage it firmly, and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 And we have spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 The bleeding from the forehead vein is worth as much as the bleeding from the cephalic for ancient face diseases, and for migraines, and for redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 And its nature is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 Then take the instrument called "fosseur," which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 And place the point on the vein, and strike with your hand or another object, and allow the blood to flow in the quantity that you desire;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Then release the patient's neck and tie off the vein until it is healed, and sometimes use a wide flame to complete the task.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 However, it should not be that the flame is too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 and cut at an angle, for the bone is nearby, and perhaps the flame will break when it is fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The bleeding of the two veins that are in two lids helps with the eyes, and with tinea, and with redness, and with the little corner of the eye, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 And the quality of their bleeding is such that the patient should twist his neck with some rope as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Then bleed, and let the bleeding be deep, a little long and a little wide, for there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 And if the flame is delicate, perhaps it will break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 Then make the blood flow until you have enough, and then tie it off with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The bleeding of the vein of the nose is good for fever, and sudden madness, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes on the face, and especially when it is chronic;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 and the nature of the vein is such that the patient tightens his neck, then press your left hand against his nose, take a long, thin flame, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, because it heals very quickly;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 The vein of the two temples helps in the constriction of the head, and at the beginning of paralysis, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosions, and in shingles, and in inflammations;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 And the quality of the wound is such that the patient should move his neck from one side to the other, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 And let the master stand on the patient's head, and the patient sit on a seat, then open the vein from the length of a span widely, then draw out the blood temperately, as much as is needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 Then repeat with another vein, then untie the bandage, and press gently on all the veins, so that the patient does not strangle.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 And leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	 Of the bleeding of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 The bleeding of the wounds of the lips above helps to swell in the mouth, and to corrupt the gums, and to split the lips, and of the nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 And the quality of the bloodletting is to make the patient sit before you and draw out his neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is in the right lip and the other in the left, and they are recognized by being black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 Then cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the largest one from each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 of the bloodletting under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue follows the bleeding of the cephalic [vein], and this is for narrowing the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 and the nature of the physician is such that the patient lies in your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 heal one and not the other, and do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The veins of the knife with which one commonly bleeds are bled according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 either by pricking with the whole flame of a large myrtle or an olive tree, as sharp as cutting knives, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 The form of the martin flame is very famous, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 And it is necessary for opening the full veins filled with thick visible blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 et c’est la forme du fléau malaire:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 And it is more subtle and pointed, and it is for healing subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The saphenous vein of the leg, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases under the throat, and in the neck, and in the foot, and in the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 And it is necessary for the healer to cauterize wisely, and to beware of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow, then he must cauterize it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And the flame should not be pointed, but rather shaped like a needle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 And if the leg vein does not open clearly, then you must squeeze it and change another [vein].
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 Where you wish to take some of his blood, or you heal the vein in its place within the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	 it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 and apply the flame cautiously, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 And if you wish to locate the vein, it is necessary first that you stretch out the arm so that you can touch the spot until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 then mark the spot with a knife and then tie off the arm and cauterize the vein with the flame carefully.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 and be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the spot swell, for it is from the artery.
eschui la donques.	 avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 And if you see it spurt upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is from an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 Hasten then, and place your finger on it for a while, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 if his arm falls, let him remain still and not move it, the patient;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and hold it steady, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 And if the blood does not clot and it overcomes you, and the physician is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, because the head of the vein will recede.
et estainche li sans.	 and stop the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And take a strip of linen, and tear it, and take one half and tie it firmly until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 if the blood clots, that is good. ‌
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 If not, treat it as we have said with powders that staunch blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And the stanching is not difficult in many cases due to the small area of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The bleeding from the middle of the wound helps in that it draws blood from the top and bottom because it is composed of the basilic vein and the cephalic vein as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 And the bleeder should be cautious because of the nerve that is underneath, and if it goes too deep and finds the nerve, and swells up, then stanching will be difficult, and possibly it cannot be staunched.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 And this nerve often opens, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must stanch it with the cautery instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 And let the nerve slip as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 The sinus of the cephalic vein helps, for it draws blood from the head and aids in sight;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 And it is necessary to incise in the pomegranate flame or in the myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because under it there are neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 However, one must seek the lightest place, and do not worry if one misses the first time, and start again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 And sometimes the spot swells in some men when they miss the first time, but it does not matter.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you should know about incising is that an incision is only done to preserve health and to avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 And let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are in the body:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 which are known as: cephalic, fastus, and basilica;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 And one should bleed at the beginning of spring to autumn, and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 And one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 The bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no set time, but should be done by day or night, at any hour and in all circumstances;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 And it is not appropriate to bleed children under fourteen years of age, nor pregnant women until the seventh month. xspace
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 Nor should the elderly over sixty years old be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 And when someone wishes to be healed in any way, it is necessary for them to cleanse the intestines with a light enema if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not attract the harmful superfluities from the intestines into the main members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 nor will someone be healed if they are too full of food, or drunk, as long as they remain so, or if they are suffering from dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 and if one wishes to be healed after suffering from colic, vomiting, diarrhea, increased frequency of intercourse for women, and labor, vigil, fasting, or any other loss of strength due to a weapon or bodily illness.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 Then refine the humors, if the blood is thick, by food and drink and medicine, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 Then enter the bath, if nothing prevents you, to refine the blood, and heal the wound of the worst part by the third time, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 And guard yourself that day against work, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 And be happy and joyful, and let the healer's hand be higher than that of the person being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then pull on the ligament moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and are felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 then moisten the cauterizer with a little old oil, then place his left-hand thumb on that vein below the spot where he wants to cauterize, so that the vein does not burst or leak during the operation.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 For there are veins that flow like cords to the cauterizer, and some are full of windiness, so that when one applies the flame, it draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is among them.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 And if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow; therefore, it is necessary for the cauterizer to be knowledgeable in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 And if the vein opens on the first try, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 if not, then start again a little below or above that place, quickly, if the place is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 And if the place is inflamed and the patient is frightened, let him wait for a day or two and do not tie up the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 perhaps an abscess will form there
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 and do not enter into a bath, then start the bleeding again if he wishes to.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 and if the opening is small or the blood flows gently and you doubt that enough blood will come out as you wish, then pierce that same opening with all the flame straight on.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 and do the work quickly, before the place becomes inflamed;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 If you see the place inflamed, do not restart the bleeding, and apply a poultice of linseed oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place lies the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 And so administer linseed oil to each bleeding you bleed the veins to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 and the same thing acts as a poultice and heals from them, when it is placed on the place.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 if it thins the blood and separates when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 And if an abscess forms, which happens often, especially when it is not severely bled except for that time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and place on the spot a sponge moistened in water and salt, a little hot, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 And it is necessary that you do this after the bleeding from the vein, and if some blackness or greenness remains in the place after several days, it will not harm him.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if you see, put on some aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 And often an abscess and swelling occur at the base of the vein:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 Then place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the touch, then this swelling is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 Avoid putting anything on it that we have mentioned, because by chance some of the blood may be coming from an artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 But make a dry plaster to harden the area, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 And draw from each one of the blood according to the quantity of its power and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 Because if the blood is black, let it out until it becomes red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 And if you see it thick, let it out until it is refined.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 And the one who is strong and healthy, if he needs to have blood let out, make him a larger wound, and the fire should be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 And for the weak one, do the opposite, and he should be bled frequently and often, and one must bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And this method of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage, and it is worth more than the long or wide incision for bleeding.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 Et à celui dont le corps manque de force, il faut donner du pain imbibé dans du jus de pommes.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 If he is hot, then draw blood three or four times; and if he is of a cold temperament, then before the bleeding, let him eat bread soaked in muscadine syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if he bleeds from the wound after much blood loss, he must drink broth of meat and subtle scented syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 And if he wishes to bleed from the arm and bleed again later, it is necessary that when he has been weakened by much bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time, according to his strength, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 And if someone wishes to bleed from the arm after the first bleeding and he has a strong body, then let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after nine hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 And if someone wishes to bleed from another part of the body, he should bleed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 Because there is much blood within the body which has already heated up, causing fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 therefore it is necessary to draw a large quantity of it, and widen the opening so that it can drain fully.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 Then, after you have considered all the conditions of bleeding and placed your hand on his pulse when he is bleeding, so that death does not come in place of blood, and this often happens when the bleeder is negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 And it is not necessary that when you see the arm dislocated, and blood comes out a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press very hard;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 nor if it is bent, to extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 but let it remain until it heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 or you point it with the tip of the flame, so that the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein flows out, and place a poultice made in water on top, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is healed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And if there is a need to bleed a second time, then heal it in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The veins in the arms are healed in the vein of the head because they are closer.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 And the manner of healing is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the fingers turn red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 then it should be tied moderately, so that the veins appear well, then heal across now, not widely nor lengthwise;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 And let the opening be wide, and let it be cauterized well near the joint of the hand, and if pus cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 And if it is in summer, then do not put the hand in hot water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the cautery of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no major artery or nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 The cautery of the little finger of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 Hold the hand tightly and put it in hot water until the vein swells, if you see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 And if you slash it across, and if you cut it all around, then it will not hurt.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 And do not go too deep, for the nerves are bare under all the flesh, and then put your hand in hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 And when you have drawn as much blood as needed, then put oil and seal on the vein to heal quickly, and do this for each time.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 The bleeding from his left hand is as valuable as the disease of the mouse, and does everything just as I have told you concerning the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The bleeding from the spleen is as valuable for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the thighs and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 And the quality of its bleeding is such that the patient should put his foot in hot water, and rub on the wound until it breaks, and bind over the ankle.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 And the wound is at the ankle, and above the foot go many rains;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 cut it then in the widest part of the vein, or at the ankle, which is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 And if you treat it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and cut through them as in slicing.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And let the flame be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 And if the blood cannot flow out, then put the foot back in water, and let the wound drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 And if the cutter fails the first time, then begin again a little higher, for the place is salted;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 Nor doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the ankle of the other foot likewise.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 The place of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its bleeding is good for hip pain, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 And the quality of this cutting is such that the patient enters into a bath, and pulls four fingers above the ankle by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 And if it opens, then cut in all the ways that you can, and by slicing through;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And it is better that you cut it, for the place is safe, and she is very responsive in many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 And if you cannot find it, then cut some of its skin that is open on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 and make the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then unbind the bandage, and apply cotton and bind it on;
ele est maintenant sanee.	 she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 of cupping therapy
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 Cupping glasses are made of horn, or iron, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 and cupping is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 And this cupping which is done without pricking is in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 where it is all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 and venesection which is done by bleeding and bloodletting, is performed in fourteen places on the body, one of which is entirely at the top of the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	 and another is in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 and two others on each side of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 and a cupping glass under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 and a cupping glass on both shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 and a cupping glass on the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 and cupping glasses on both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 and cupping glasses on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 and cupping glasses on both ankles; etime
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 and venesection does not draw blood, except from the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken at all, as one would do with a venesection of a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And it is not necessary that she be administered, neither by any fire nor without fire, in any disease caused by excess, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 And if by necessity of illness it is necessary to ventose, or for custom, administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, in the middle, and at any time.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 For there are some who, when they need to be ventosed, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 And there are those who find swelling and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness of vision.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 And there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and vomit blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 and there are some who dream of seeing blood and wounded and dead things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order them to be bled after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 The draining of the nose also helps with the headache ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 and this draining is in place of the draining of the head, and it should not be used by those who are of cold complexion or have catarrh, because it does great harm to them.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 And he who often bleeds from it becomes forgetful, and because of this one should place the cupping glass a little lower out of fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 The draining in the neck is in place of the draining of the head and the nose, and for this reason it is useful for constriction of the bladder, and for cleaving the passage of the spleen, and for constipation, and for fullness.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 And there it is necessary to apply little by little, for if it holds too firmly, then it injures the stomach and the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 The ventosations at the second rib of the neck are good for headaches, and migraines, and for strangulation, and for toothache, and it is in the place of the basilica's sinus.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 And it is necessary that you instruct the patient to press his hand firmly, so that he does not cut the artery and does not cause a flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 The ventosations under the chin are good for mouth diseases, and for rotting of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 And it is in the place of the sinuses of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 The ventosations of the shoulders are effective against diseases caused by heat and inflammation.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 The cauterizations of the ribs are worth as much as three veins of the arm, because they draw blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 And instruct the surgeon not to strike too deeply, for the place is bare of flesh, and beneath are nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 The cupping glass that is on the buttock is worth as much for hemorrhoids and diseases below, and it should be large, and made of copper, so that it can draw well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 And perhaps, if it were too delicate, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	 And it makes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 The cupping glasses on the legs are effective, for they draw blood from the whole body, and they are worth as much against old pains of the kidneys, and the spleen, and the bladder, and they remove phlegm.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 And they are in the place of two spleens and two ankles, yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause paralysis in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 The manner of placing the cupping glass is to place it first empty, and suck immediately, and place quickly, and move equally, and do not stop doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and apparent is the redness of the blood;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 then burn, and replace the cupping glasses, and pay attention to the constitution of the body, for there are some who have dark flesh, and clear pores:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 then it is necessary to burn only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and one deep puncture;
et suce legierement.	 and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 And if the blood is thick, one must strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 the first time to make a subtle incision for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 And if the blood is very thick, one must strike a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, we only need to do it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if we want a lot of blood, we must repeat often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 and if the blood is thick, strike deeply, and the outcome is that the heart should be pierced suddenly. And for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose pores are narrow, it is necessary to anoint the places of the cupping glasses with aperitive and dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 if it is in summer, with violet oil, or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 and if it is in winter, with cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 And if the excess is thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balsam oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if one treats a person with thin skin and large pores, there should be no oil applied to it, but it must be washed after being fumigated with rose water, or cold water, or mallow water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or another similar liquid.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 And one who has much moisture should use aloes, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 And those who have excessive waste should rise with old wine, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar ones;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 and it is not appropriate to cup before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 and he should not sleep after cupping, and he must be clean when he is to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 And watch out if he who is healing is irascible, and if his blood is too acrid and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 then he should take cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, lettuce in vinegar, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 and minced partridge, and roasted meat, and moist food.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 And he who has a cold constitution should take syrup of honey, and medium-aged aromatic wine, which is between old and new, and minced pullet, and minced partridge and small birds and thrushes.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 and on the day he purges himself, he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 and it is necessary to give some men sometimes theriac or mastic before purging, or after, to strengthen the main members.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And let the blood be thinned, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 The blisters that are placed without cutting are those placed on the liver, and on the bladder, and for gout, and on the belly and the groin and the hip, because these members cannot be cut on the eyes, and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, just as we place them on the breasts when the child nurses;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 to remove the swelling that is in the member, just as we place blisters on the belly and groin to reduce the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 and removes the pain, when there is an ulcer or stone, and by its attractive power it draws out the ulcer, or moves the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 And so it does when placed on the liver and on the bladder when there is retained flatulence, and these cupping glasses are administered empty for sucking only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and other times filled with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such a manner that the cupping glass is filled solely with hot water or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have on its side around the middle a small hole, just large enough to insert a needle, and let it be of brass or soft metal so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 And have in the middle a rod of copper or iron crosswise, to place a cloth bandage, and let them be both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who use them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 And thus must one place this cupping glass upon the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 take the cloth of wax or linen, and place it inside the cupping glass across the rod that is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass that it may not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 and then place it upon the member, and your two fingers should be upon the opening that we have mentioned, so that when one wishes, out go the vapors, and remove the cupping glass.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And one applies the binding again as before, and often restarts it if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 In the cupping used for pleurisy, there is no rod or hole in it, and it is only applied when full of water, and is placed on the member alone;
et c’est li forme:	 and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 Leeches are only applied in members where one cannot place cupping due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 and in bare flesh places, such as the nostrils or the nose, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 and the quality of the user is that when you find leeches that are in clean, soft waters without impurities, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 And he places them in a pot of soft water, until they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their stomachs.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 And then let them be bled from a vein and by cupping, then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply leeches.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 And when they are full and drop off, if it is a place where a cupping glass can be applied, then apply it, for this is very valuable afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 If not, then raise the area with egg whites, and then with water, very well, and then compress it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 And if the area bleeds too much after the leeches, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the bleeding stops.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 And if the blood is plentiful, apply powdered vitriol, or gallnuts, and similar things, until it is stanched.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 or place on the wound half of peeled broad beans, and leave them until they dry up in place, it will now staunch.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 And if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 And if the leeches do not want to take [blood], then rub the wound with fresh blood, or insert a needle until blood comes out, and then apply them, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will dry up.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And when you see that they fall off, then sprinkle on a little powder of aloe and boiled linen, or ash, and they will now fall off.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the setting of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 Know, dear son, that foolish physicians reject this chapter, for they have never seen any ancient books or letters concerning it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 and for this reason the knowledge has become strange in our land, for I have never found any good one here.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 and I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have acquired the knowledge from them, and by experience, and by the practice of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 and I have now described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 It is necessary therefore that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of the words and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 I say that when a break or dislocation or twist or fracture comes to someone, you must hurry to heal the patient on one side and then the other, unless something prevents it entirely, such as physical weakness, or infancy, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 Or if the season is too hot or too cold.
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 And chew on cold foods, that is, cold jellies, and birds and game, and drink no wine, nor chew any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are certain of no hot abscess or spread of matter in the limb.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 If the patient returns to his usual diet first.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods that promote thickening, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and heads (of animals), and feet, and cow's pancreas, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 For such nourishment, the bone splinters and fractures heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres,
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 but do not care, set on the broken bone a strong pin that holds and joins the member together, so that it strengthens as before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 and do not completely take it from its work, and therefore one must feed it with rich foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 And know that fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 For there is a fracture that goes across (transverse), and another in oblique direction, like the cut of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 And there is a fracture with wound, and a fracture with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 And for each type there should be its own device and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what comes back into place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 and it is known that the bone break occurs because the place is twisted, and opens well from the outside, and sounds when pressed with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 And when there is no dislocation or swelling, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 But it can still have dislocation, a split, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 If you do not need to move it with your hand, but rather apply the medicines that follow, and then gently hold it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And know that the breaks that go in an arc, and are the two parts dislocated, you must now set them equally, before abscesses form there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 And if abscesses develop there, leave it for some days until the abscesses subside;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 Then set it equally with as little and wise effort as you can, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of one where there are fragments.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 then grasp it, as is required hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 And if there are broken pieces in the bone, then stretch it from two parts, whether it be the hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small member, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset all the additions in their places as best you can, and be careful not to cause injury or pain to the patient through your work.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 and adjust the two ends of the bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 If you straighten it beautifully, and do not press too much, nor squeeze like those who cause a hot abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 And when the limb is set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither in wakefulness nor in sleep, nor in turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 and take good care that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 For when he feels no pain, it is not set properly, and one must put him in such a position that he feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 and take care that he is placed straightly, so that there will be no twist when he is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 And the quality of the broken limb is as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness, largeness, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 For there are small members, such as arms and fingers and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 and those which are large, such as the thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bandage embraces all of the large limb, and holds it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 then place around it light stuffing, three or four turns depending on the limb, and tighten your hand a little to all the bandage, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break is moved away slightly.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a great part of the healthy place, then take the other ligament and turn it again around the broken place.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 then return to the part below the break and hold it moderately, not too hard nor too soft, as we have said in the first place above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 then place between the ligaments linen or cloth strips, so that they are all even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 And if there is swelling or an abscess, place on top something that soothes the abscess and removes the swelling, and leave it thus for some days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 then restrain on your shoulders, and let them be of half the width of a strong rope, or of wood from which they make wedges, or of palm fibers, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 but it is necessary that the shoulder support placed on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 and let it also be as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 then restrain on the supports in the same way as you did at the first time, then bind over it with a bandage, just as at the first time on the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 tighter is above, always less so below;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 and it is necessary that the bandages be of medium size, not too thick nor too thin, and they should be soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 Because if the threads are thick, just as I have seen the work of fools who make their ligatures from twisted flax cords, and this is a great error, because the ligature cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two fingers' width between each knot.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the stars after the contraction in their healthy places, then place under them linen wicks or shredded wool, so that it does not wound.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 When the wound is with the fracture, and the heart is broken, I will speak of its treatment later.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 And know that it is not necessary to set all the fractured limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 Because when the limb is large, it is not necessary to put in ligatures stronger than after five or seven days, or more according to your surety of heat occurring from an abscess;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 and see here the method of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and twisting:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 And it is that you take the flour that stays against the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and put this preparation, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring fractures in many situations, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 Other manner of plaster for restoring breakage, dislocation, and twisting:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 Take abreis, ladanum, henbane, asafetida, Arabic gum, and mugwort, amounting to twelve denarii;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 myrrh and aloe, amounting to five denarii;
alechil VIIII З.;	 garlic, nine denarii;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 and make it into powder, and mix it with the white of an egg.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 If the man's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and it is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another manner of plaster for twisting:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 Take mugwort and marshmallow, amounting to ten denarii;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 Mirror and aloe, seven nine.
acaice VI З.;	 Alum, six.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Bole armoricain ten, and grind well, and infuse with plenty of egg water, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another way to make a plaster for displaced joints and dislocated bones, which relieves the resulting pain and uses the bone shards:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Take new wool, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the spot.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This poultice does not restore [the joint or bone], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and properly relieves pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 Another way to make a plaster that mends broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Take dried fig leaves and common dandelion leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way of making a poultice for the restoration of bone fractures and to draw out the remaining pus from an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take root of marsh mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, chickpea flour, one part each;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 and grind, and cook with wine, and if the limb is heated, cook with moist coriander water or with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of poultice stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take roots of marsh mallow, and flax seed, mallow, melilot, and comfrey, and violet flowers and chamomile, one part each;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 and grind, and cook with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 Ypocras says in his book that nothing should be put on a broken limb to restore its strength except for a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and it should be between two [things], not too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 And it seems to Galen that dry and slightly warm things should be put on a broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Another plaster recipe that is good for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Take mullein and chopped onions, or bird feathers, and marshmallow, and celery equally, and crush them, and make a poultice with it and bind it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 Then unbind it after a while, and see if the patient feels any pain, or if the bone has moved from its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 then do not unbind for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 And if pain comes to the place, or itching without rest or swelling, then hurry and unbind it, and remove the poultice immediately;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 and take a light cloth, and a wet sponge of sea water, and dip it in water, and lift the place until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it with a knot, until you are sure of a hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 and the inflammation of the limb will subside, and the pain will be gone, then begin with a subtle binding, and a little plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and continue with this until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, I have removed everything from it, and you need plaster and linen, then start again, just as you did first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 And if nothing happens to the limb as we have said, do not unbind it until after three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the break heals, and the skin approaches.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 Then restrain him more than before, and it increases his flesh.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 And if you see the place drying more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 Therefore, apply hot water dressing each time you loosen him, every three days, and slightly loosen the bandage.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 Through this work, nourishment is brought to the limb and quickly improves what foolish physicians do, who wrongly return the twisted limb.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 This is bad, and it is a dangerous practice, and I see nothing else to do but to let it alone and work on it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	 Of the various methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 Many kinds of fractures are there, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 for there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, and the neck removes all the bone up to the marrow which is beneath the bone, like an axe or a stake;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 and for this reason this manner of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 When the sword strikes the bone from above without penetrating it, this manner of fracture is called "absolue";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 and the wound from these two fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 And if there is a blunt force trauma, or a splinter or a kick from a stone, or from falling onto stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 And if there is a deep cut that reaches the tissue beneath the bone or on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 And there is a wound that is filled in the bone as thin as a hair, and the fracture is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 and there is the wound that is made by striking with a stone or falling or something similar, which causes a piece of bone to enter lower, and the place is indented like when blacksmiths strike on the anvils;
si entre li piere dedens.	 if between the stones within
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their head, such as children's heads;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 and it occurs with all these types of fracture where small fragments are separated like stars.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 and I will speak about this in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 Et reconnaître toutes les manières de fractures par la traction sur elles, et l'interrogatoire avec des sondes, et par la chair corrompue qui est dessus.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 The similarity to hair is known by this: when the bone is exposed and rubbed upon, black fracture appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 In the care of the fracture, beware of the patient's accidents, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of senses, stretching, paleness, fever, and others in many dispositions, then he cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 And if you do not see a frightening accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 And when the wounded person comes to you first, and this is in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the new moon that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the flesh under the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, you must split the split part as follows:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as gently as possible. And if blood flows when uncovering the bone or an abscess like this, let him be helped with what is necessary. And it is that you fill the place with cloths moistened in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 And let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be assured of no further bleeding;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 Then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of working:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 one way is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 And then he puts in another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 And the second way is that you have various cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of steel;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 And work lightly, so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must bore through it before you administer cuts with trepans, not so deep that they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; xspace
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 and you must have several of them, so that each comes in its place on the bone's width, so that you have splints for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 and it is in the form of three kinds of splints:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one splint on the bone and turn it with your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 then place the splint elsewhere a little while after, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone in your hand or any of the instruments you have such as pincers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 And make sure you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, it is necessary that you then use the instrument that remains attached to the bone for all other similar instruments resembling a chisel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other chisels;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 And if there remains anything of the small bones or any scales, then gently remove them with an instrument.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 Then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 And the other method of work is that which Galen says is safer;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 and he praises it greatly, and these are his words.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place under the head of this lancet-like instrument, which has this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 And do not cut on one side, and the part is bent in two sides, so that the cutting tool is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly tap around the entire bone, and be careful of the cloth underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 if it is rough against the bone, then lightly smooth it out, for one can remove it well without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 Et si la fracture de l'os ne perce pas jusqu'à la peau, et que l'os est coupé seulement par le dessus, avec des petits morceaux, alors il faut gratter cette aspérité et retirer les écailles à l'aide d'un rasoir subtil, dont tu dois avoir différentes quantités pour administrer dans chaque endroit ce qui est le plus approprié, selon la nature du travail et la forme de la fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 Et si l'os présente des fissures profondes, utilise d'abord un grand rasoir, puis un rasoir plus fin, et continue ainsi jusqu'à ce qu'il soit bien poli.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 In each of the other subtle cuts and breaks, you must bring the cause according to its direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 and this is something that has not been answered by one who has studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 And if the wound is exposed, then you must take a piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 then take another doublet, folded in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first doublet;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the surface, then place another ligature on top, and do not tighten it any stronger than necessary to touch the wound only;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 and leave it thus for a day or two, until the abscess is appeased, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 and of these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer medicines modestly without harshness.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 And see to it that the wound is always clean, that you do not leave any ointment in it, and do not let pus gather, because when pus gathers on the caul of the brain, it will run and putrefy, and great evil befalls the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 for when one applies to the wound a biting thing, it necrotizes on top.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 Take care therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 And if blackness comes to it except for the medicine that one has applied, which has such power, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and make a plaster with them, and apply it to the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then continue the care in various ways as needed until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 You should know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, either one alone or both together, for these are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 And that below is made of gristle and does not break, but only causes a swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger or a probe into the nose, and equalize that fracture within your middle finger, and hold it in place by force until the nose returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 Do this gently, and be careful not to cause the patient pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you must place it evenly at the end of a thick reed.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 And if the fracture is of both parts, then do the same, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 se ce non, after the seventh or tenth day, when this abscess is healed, then apply to the head of the nose bandages of linen cloths, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 Or you place another [bandage] on the other side, if the fracture is there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 And let the bandages be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And some say that one must grease the threads in butter and change them daily.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 It does not seem to me that this is good, but they must be moistened in the making of a mixture of egg and flour.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 Then leave the bandage until the bones are healed and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And sometimes one places goose feathers in the nose instead of bandages, and then wraps a soft cloth around it, and if the fracture holds, and the patient breathes through it.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 And do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 And if such an abscess comes to the nose while you work there, place a poultice of cotton soaked in rose oil or a little bit of aquiline.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 And if such abscesses do not form, then apply an external plaster made of sesame flour and powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then place light dressings on top, and do not bind the neck.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 And if the neck fracture is small and broken into many pieces, then reset it with suitable instruments, then sew up the gap, and treat similar flesh wounds, and let them heal, such as suitable plasters and bandages for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there is no wound inside the neck, then treat it with tents, and place lead weights in it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	 Of the jawbone dislocation
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the jawbone is dislocated beneath, and there is no wound outside of it, and the fracture is only outside, and it is not broken in two, except for being indented inside, then one recognizes it easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert your right index finger, and gently push the fracture inside, and fix it with the other hand from outside, and align it.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 And if the jawbone fracture is divided into two, then you must administer traction on both parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 And if there is movement or dislocation of the teeth, then fasten them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place wax on the broken jaw, and put on a double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 and place on the cloth a large, well-made splint, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above the teeth as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat only light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 And if you see that the appearance changes, then dislocate it on the third day, and then reset at the place where it changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 And apply a plaster on top, of powder from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the wax;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 And put on a light cloth over the plaster, and if the plaster dries out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is cured.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 often he is cured in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 And if an abscess like this occurs, bring it about as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 And if there is a fracture and wound together, inspect whether any piece of bone has been removed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 then remove it with the appropriate instruments for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, close the wound if it is wide, and place on it suitable plasters to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	 of the splint
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The ligament breaks several times in front of, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three types:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 where it is broken and separated into two parts, and there are fragments, and this is the easiest to restore.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 or there is fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 And the work of this is when the fracture is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the ligament is broken.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 and the other extends the neck towards the side.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 then place the fracture evenly between your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no deviation or swelling. xspace
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 And if you need to extend more, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth or wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity. xspace
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And stretch and raise the bandage, and press the sphere to your hand, so that you set the break evenly as needed.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 And if you cannot pull the head of the bone out due to its depth, it is necessary that the patient lie on their back, and place under the shoulder a pillow of medium size, and the assistant presses the shoulder down until the bones of the broken limb are raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 And then adjust the break with your fingers, and if you find it splintered, it is necessary to split open.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 And draw out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut it with one of the incisors that you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 But place this instrument under the bandage to protect the flesh.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 And it looks like a spoon, and is not curved, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work. ething look
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 And it should have two points, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound you made when you drew out the bone.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And when you are certain of a hot abscess, stitch the wound, and if the rupture is small or you doubt a hot abscess, fill the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 And if such abscesses occur, soak the cloth in rose oil and basil and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds or cuts, is to place on the bone a plaster made from mill powder and egg white, then put light wadding on top, and place a splint underneath if needed.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 Then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then put a double cloth on top of the wadding and the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 Then take a thin strip of three fingers' width and length, and wrap it around the bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 And place the star above the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy shoulder, and beneath the sick shoulder.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 And reset each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the break well, and you see clearly that the star does not move above the broken bone, then bandage it every day, and when the ligature loosens, then bind it again.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 And make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the healthy shoulder while they sleep, to raise the sick shoulder.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 Thus the fracture will be relieved of its heaviness by the elevation of the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless an accident occurs, for up to twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 Then renew the poultice, if you see that it is necessary, and hold it and leave it thus, until it is healed;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 And it is healed in as many as 28 days, or less in some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	 of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks in a large place or in the middle, and it is not known except by touching;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 If you prepare it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 Then put on the place powder of mill with plenty of egg, and light stuffing, and put on a double cloth;  ()
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 Then put on a wide and fine bandage, somewhat wider than the shoulder, and if there is an indentation in any part of the shoulder under the bandage, fill that hollow with flax stuffing so that the bandage lies evenly;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 And then he binds it firmly with a large bandage so that the joint does not move from its place, and checks the ligature every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 And every time it loosens, he binds it again and sets the joint straight if it is out of place, and the patient lies on his side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 And the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 And when this number is completed, he unbinds it, and be assured, for it is not an easy thing to displace the bone.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 And if a fragment of the bone protrudes forward and pierces beneath the heart, it rises up and removes the bone, and does as we have said in the breaking of the rib to heal an abscess, hot.
de la brisure dou pis	 of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 But it often breaks at the toe.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken in half, it inclines downward and the patient feels great pain, and fainting, and dizziness, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the wound in the broken bone, which can be felt well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on his back, and he places a pillow between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and joins the ribs from the second rib with both hands, and does his best to straighten it in all ways possible until the bone's shape is as it should be; abei
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 then place plasters and wool over the thin layer of salt, or another light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and secure it over the broken bone, so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 and turn the bandage around the back, and fasten it firmly, and check every hour the binding, and if it becomes loose, then tighten it.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 and if it is necessary to loosen it, due to inflammation or itching that occurs in the area, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and apply whatever has come of the various treatments.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then replace the plaster, and fasten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	 Of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 Saiches that the breaking of ribs occurs only in large bones behind the back, and inside the head, and they break only because they are slippery.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 And the patient feels it well during questioning, just as they should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the treatment is that you set the fracture evenly, as is necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply a plaster and bind it with a bandage, if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 And if the breaking of the ribs is slanting inwards, then the patient feels very great pain and sharpness, as if from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the flesh.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 And breathes with difficulty and coughs up great plants of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients had great ingenuity in it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And so there are those who say that he should be given food that bloats the stomach to push out the break.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 We do not do this, for hot abscesses may come if they are not already present.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 And if they have come, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 And some say that one should place cupping glasses on the spot to draw out greatly, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 If fear arises that the cupping might draw the excesses to the place due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 And some say that the site should be covered with wool soaked in hot oil, and tents should be placed between the ribs to make the lung even all around, then let it be treated with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure because of the bone that pierces the flesh, and there is fear in the patient, then one must cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to protect the hypochondrium.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then one should cut the bone and gently pull it out, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 And if these abscesses come, then place wet cloths in rose oil on the spot;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat it as you would an abscess, and let it lie on its back on the side where it should be, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	 of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 Sometimes there is a fracture of the neck bones, and it may bend;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 And so too with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take note whether you see his hands becoming soft and swollen and numb, and he cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that he is mortal in many cases, and if he moves them and feels well when they are pulled and pricked, know that the bone's joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if he is treated.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 And if something similar happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it is healed or not, take care whether the feet are weakened, and if there are accidents that are in the hands, and on the back is a swelling and evacuation without control;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And when it has been placed on its belly, there is an evacuation without control.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is healed on its back and it wants to rise, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 Know that it is fatal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 If he does not work hard at his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 And if this does not happen to him, then the condition is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And the treatment is such that if there is a hot abscess, you should place hot rose oil or egg yolk oil on it until it is soothed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 Then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 And if any bone is dislocated, you must cover it with the curette.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And remove the bone, then close the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large, and treat it with incisional healing ointment until healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 And if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow," insert your thumb from your left hand and align it with the other hand to your power, then place the poultice and bandage on top, if you need to.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Then hold it firmly in place, and if there are any bone fragments, bring them out, remove them, and heal the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 Of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 It happens sometimes that the hip bone is broken, and if it does, it has no more strength than a little weakening at the top;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 And the leg becomes long, and leans to one side, and the patient feels pain in that place, and sharpness, and swells like it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 And the reduction is such that you extend your hand upwards until you are above the break.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 and know what the fracture and its shape are;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 and if the fracture is only at the end, set it straight until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 And if the break is lengthwise, or tilts inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach, until you are prepared to restore this break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 And when you have set it straight, apply a poultice, then place a splint of wood or bone on top, and secure the fracture so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 and bind the area below the ribs until the limb is straight.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 Command the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 And if an abscess forms there, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and then apply what we have said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 And then return to the resetting, and hold it as needed if there is no bad incident.
et c’est li maniere.	 And that is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 The shoulder is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be reset according to one of the two methods.
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 one method is that you take a stick full of medium thickness, like this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 And tie it to the two heads with two ties, and pull upwards, and have the patient sit on a chair.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 then have the patient throw his broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the armpit, and have in the middle of the stick an arch of wood, then pull up with some heavy object or the assistant extends downward.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 Then let the physician place the splint equal to his hands together, so that the splint returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 And the other method is that one places the patient on his back, and ties the hand to his neck; then commands two assistants: one to hold what is above the fracture in his hands, and the other to hold below all the joint, and each stretches at his part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then tighten each ligament below the break and above the break, and extend each of the members to its side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 And if the splint is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you place one strap in the middle under the arm, and another towards the elbow, under the splint;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 and also if the splint is towards the elbow, it is necessary to place a strap lightly, without effort, so that the splint is equal on the place, and on the elbow;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 then make the splint even, as it should be, and bind it, if there are no abscesses there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 And if abscesses come there, do not bind until the seventh day, and place moist linen on it in ease and rose oil, so that these abscesses may be appeased;
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 then it is restrained, and the manner of restraining it is that you place the compress on the break, then bring the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 and place the bandage, and restrain on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in the position of a star, if nothing hinders it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 And if you doubt that the bone will move, use of stars is required. Place on the break a star wider and stronger than the others, and there should be two fingers' width between each star, and each star should be so large that it passes beyond the break by three fingers on each side;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 Then pull up on the shoulders as I said at the beginning of the chapter on breaking bones, more strongly and less in stretching.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if you see the setting of the shoulders and the pulling as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it to be bound for seven days, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 Then check every three days the bandage, that no itching or swelling comes to the place, where the care cannot reach the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If you receive it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 And if no such incident happens, then do not unbind it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 And place under the shoulder a pillow filled with wool equally, and observe every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken member does not move, or be softened the ligament;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 if he receives it by the power of medicine, and give him the food that we have previously described, in such a way that the food is first subtle;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be taken for forty days in total;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 and then one must free him and administer a bath and remedies of ointments to heal the place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the constriction is ugly and clogged, it will take days or two months to loosen.
de la brisure du bras	 of the arm's fracture
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "two scapulae", one of which is small and follows the shoulder blade;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 And the other is large, and it is the one below, towards the little finger;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 perhaps the large phalanx breaks alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 When the small phalanx is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more serious than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then you should extend it slightly and set it straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 And if it is the large phalanx, then it must be held more tightly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 and extend it on a cushion, and hold the patient's hand higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient suffers no discomfort; ︎
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 Then let the minister extend his arm to the lower part under his hand, or at one ligament, and another minister to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 Then let the physician set it straight, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the fracture is in pieces, then put each one in its place; and if there is any that sticks out which you cannot restore to its place, then cut it off and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And if there is a fracture with a wound, I have spoken about it in a separate chapter.
si pren la cure.	 If he takes the care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 And if in the beginning of the treatment there are such abscesses, then attach a piece of plaster made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And delicately place the cloth on top, until these abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 And then remove the plaster, and apply a poultice of flour from the mill with plenty of egg, then apply the bandages, and let the bandage of the fracture be always stronger, and a little wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 And know that there must be six stars on the arm in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 whether the break is in one of the bones, or in two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 and apply more pressure on the break than elsewhere, and always less while stretching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 and let the bandages that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 and let the thread, with which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And return the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 And if some evil accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must wash the limb with hot water until that itch is appeased.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And let the limb not rest too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then begin the splinting again, and if the ligament is softened and the bone dislocated, or similar things, set it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 And if you take care that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too narrow, then you should soften it in a poultice and leave it like this for some days until the nourishment reaches there, and then splint it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 Et si aucune de ces choses que nous avons dites ne vient au malade, alors ne le délier pas avant vingt jours.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 or, in which case, let him place his hands on his neck, and his shoulders should be even, and he should guard against movement and shifting, and sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes in twenty days, according to the composition and complexion of the humors.
de la brisure de la main	 De la fracture de la main
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 Sachez que dans le dos de la main et aux jointures des doigts il arrive peu de fractures, et qu'il ne s'y produit que des entorses à plusieurs reprises.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then it is necessary that the patient sits cross-legged, and sits upright in front of him equally;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 then let him place his hand on the stretched cloth, and let the attendant straighten the broken bones, and let the physician set them evenly until they are well joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 And place the plaster and bandages, if no abscess occurs, then place a needle according to the size of the place.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 And if the break is on the side around the waist of the leg, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to tie it to his broken leg.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 And then bind it with a long cloth, and let the needle be as soft as a human hair, and as large as the palm of the hand, and tie it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 And if the fracture is at the tip, it is necessary that you place a splint on top and another below at the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie all around the hand, and secure the bandage between the two fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 And if the break is in any of our fingers, if it is protruding, set it straight as needed.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 And hold it with the sole, and if you see thus place a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 And if the fracture is in one of the other fingers, such as the index or any other, set it straight, and tie it with the sound finger that follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 Or you bind them all together in one bandage, as needed, or you place a splint on top, like a pouch.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And take care in the restoration and placement of a hot abscess, and support whoever comes to help, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	 of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 The thigh bone is often broken, and it is well seen when it twists forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 And the restoration is such that one ligament is tied above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 And the patient lies on his back, then each minister extends his line equally to his part.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 and this is when the fracture is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ties should be towards the knee, and the other tie below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 And so if it is near the knee, then let the line be below the knee, and the extension downwards.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 then let the surgeon put the bone equal with his two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then put the dressing, and bind it, if no abscess comes there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 And if there is a hot abscess, leave it to settle, then return to your work and care.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 the bandage is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 You must wrap over the fracture one bandage double-layered in two or three places, leaving excess material. Then turn the leg until the heel comes to the base of the nail, and thread a long string between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, making the ends meet above.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the break splints, and place a splint on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to make the splint even, then begin to tie tightly three or four times on the break;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 and when you go higher up the break, tie it less tightly.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 then attach at two ends of the thread that you have passed between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are on top, then go back down to the end of the thread, until you reach near the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 and secure it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, for if there is no abscess or swelling or anything similar.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address whatever comes of it, as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 And if there are bone fragments that prick, they must be removed, if possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 And if it is not possible, then the place should be split open and pulled out strongly.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 And sometimes the thigh bone breaks like splinters, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 nonetheless, in such a restoration the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 And know that the thigh is restored in 40 days, or a little less or more, depending on the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	 of the tendon of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the tendon of the knee there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is only a fissure or a hole, and this happens in every wound, both in open and closed wounds, and everyone feels it well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 And the restoration is such that one should place equal what is broken on each side, so that it is assembled as well as possible.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 Then apply the poultice, and if you need it, place a round spindle in it, and bind it as required. Then follow all the instructions we have mentioned for other fractures, such as abscesses or similar ones;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If he applies to each injury what is necessary until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	 Of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is rightly called "tibia," and the other is called "fibula.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 And all other fractures happen as they do in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the workings are the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg twists in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 And if the smaller bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 Et s'il y a une fracture d'un grand os, on ressent une grande douleur, et cela est visible.
et torne desoz.	 et cela se retourne en dessous.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 Alors, appliquez une traction pour l'aligner, et fixez les éclisses de manière égale;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 Cependant, si la fracture est complexe avec plusieurs fragments, il faut appliquer une traction plus douce et légère;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Et alignez-le selon vos compétences.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 Et lorsque vous avez terminé votre travail, prenez deux bandes de bois tournées qui enveloppent la jambe de chaque côté, et qu'elles soient aussi longues que la jambe du genou jusqu'en bas;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 then wrap in two places with one bandage on top and one below, and tie it in the middle as well. In this manner, the leg will not be able to bend to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 and some place a stick along the length of the leg, which is made of wood, and they put the leg in to prevent movement. Properly, this is done in a fracture where there is an injury;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 and each day they move the leg to see if there is an abscess or any other incident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 if the treatment continues until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	 Of the fracture of the foot bones
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 At the ankle, there is no fracture, but sometimes the foot bones break and the two bones, and in this case, it happens more often as a shattering in various ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones surpassing one another, then place the sick person's foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and now put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 Then put the poultice and wool on top, and place under the foot a small table with two full feet, then bind the foot tightly, after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 And when three days or four have passed, then dislocate the ligament, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 And if there are any of the two broken, then restore them, as we have said for the hands;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider, then place under the foot that small table I mentioned, and bind it tightly;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each finger a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the table under the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 And let it stand on top of the head of the table away from the stomach of the foot, so that it grasps well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have spoken of before;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 and treat each case as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 of the bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 When the bone of a woman's natural birth is broken, let her sit widened, then incline it towards the back, and hold it from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 then fill the woman's natural birth cavity with cotton, and put as much in as is necessary.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 then make the woman stand up and raise her back little by little, and thus the cotton will come out until it reaches the entrance of the birth, and the bone will return with the cotton. 
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton; when she has finished, replace it, and do this for seven days or so.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 then the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and tie a cord to its opening, and insert it entirely into the vulva.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 then blow strongly into the cord until the bladder is inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 thus the fracture will return to its natural position.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then fill it with cotton, and leave it so for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 And when the bone of a man's or woman's wrist is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said for the hip bone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And these fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and practice into it, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 For the fracture indicates in many cases the right way for restoration
enten le donques.	 Therefore, understand this.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose neck and put the penis in it;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or until it heals quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	 of breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 It is necessary for someone who has a breaking with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be cauterized immediately, so that the cauteries that we have mentioned prove it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the wound heals, then seal it with vitriol, if you have nothing else; then begin again to restore the break in that same hour, or that day, if no abscess forms there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 And if an abscess forms there, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed; and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause evil to come.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 And if the broken bone is protruding from the surface of the skin, then you must handle it lightly with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 And if the extension is not ready to be put equally in your hands, then use this iron instrument which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to prepare three or four, according to how many he will need for each fracture treatment;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 And let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and let it be pointed at the front, and thick from the middle forward, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 And it is called "palanche," for which reason the curved head should be placed on top of the visible bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 and strike it once, so that it returns, and let them be equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well take the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the head of the bone, so that the instrument has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then strike it with a suitable instrument for this purpose, either an incision tool or a saw, to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 then remove that which remains in the bone by scraping and fine shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 If it is so that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth in black stringent wine, and carefully if it is in summer.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 And do not put any greasy ointment or other oil on the wound, lest it brings about putrefaction and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 Then administer steel when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the dressing all around it, according to the size of the wound, and be sure that the wound is not constricted with the splint.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And many times have foolish doctors done this, causing either death or corruption in the patient.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 And let the splint be softer and gentler than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 Et si la plaie est grande ou mauvaise, et tu crains qu'un accident ne survienne, comme nous l'avons dit, et tu trouves de la douleur à cet endroit, alors il ne faut pas appliquer d'étoupes;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 mais envoloupe autour de la plaie, au lieu d'étoupes, des linges durs, et les attache.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one day or two that the swelling begins to grow on the wound, then remove everything you have put on in all haste, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetracycline ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 And it is necessary that you unbind the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and cured.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bone descends lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 And if many days pass and it cannot be joined together but the bone returns again, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must explore the wound with a probe, and remove all these loose pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if an ulcer comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 Et quant l'os est cassé et perce à travers le membre, comme l'os de la cuisse ou de l'épaule, ainsi que d'autres grands membres similaires, ne le retire pas, car souvent cela entraîne la mort. Mais laisse-le en place jusqu'à ce qu'il pourrisse;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 par aventure il tombera de lui-même après vingt jours ou trente, puis soigne la plaie, si tu le peux;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 over bruises that come onto the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 We often find ourselves after the health of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and the appearance of the limb is bad to see;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 and by chance the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 Take care then if the bone is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 if you administer astringent medicines to him, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take some of these things, or all together, and cook them with stiptic wine or plenty of egg or honey; 》
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 and place them on the wound in bandages, and bind it well, and do not unbind for many days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 And then it dislocates again, and starts another, until the dislocation is gone;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 Or you stretch it over a well-made piece of wood;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 Because the property of wood is that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 And if the dislocation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then scrape over it, and make the excess visible;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Or you shave it with a scraper until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 of the limb which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 When the fracture of the bone is set, but afterwards the limb remains weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 One reason is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 Or because there were too many ligaments, and nourishment could not reach the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 or due to excessive bleeding;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 or due to excessive movement, not at its proper time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 or because he has little blood in his body, he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and soften the body until the blood increases in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 and administer baths to him, and give him joy and happiness;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts great nourishment to it, and frequently wash it with warm water until the nourishment reaches the limb; ние
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 About the twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is visible, and the shape of the limb is unsightly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb again entirely, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 and these actions are blamed, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps death.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 nevertheless, if the swelling and the pain are recent, it is necessary that they be bathed in hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of plantain, roots, and marshmallow, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 and make a softening plaster, as well-made Diasculon, and you take the mucilage of plantain, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 When you take fat figs, grind them with colon seed, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes the dislocation is removed by continuously and vigorously rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And let there be gentle movement applied to the member each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 And if the hardness and rigidity are like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with an iron instrument, then you must cut it down to the bone gently with a fine incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 and put poultices and plasters on the wound.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 Dislocation is the displacement of a joint from its proper place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 When dislocation occurs in someone, they must be brought back to sense immediately. ‌
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 For if one delays, then the place swells, and perhaps it is hardly put back in place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 therefore it should not be moved at the time when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 many times it brings on spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 however, when this happens, make the patient sweat, then leave him until the abscess subsides;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Then bathe the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as it comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 And I have arranged the chapters of the dislocations from the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	 of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 It often happens that the jaws are dislocated together, and the dislocation of both is according to two methods.
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 either they are slightly removed from their places, and softened a little
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the chest, and the patient drools from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and the tongue is wrapped with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in many ways.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 And if it is complete and full, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 and in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head, and the doctor puts a little finger of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 And let the other two fingers of the hands be lacking, to make it equal.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 And instruct the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 And the doctor should set it equally, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 And if the jaw is swollen, even if it is both jaws together, then rinse them with hot water and oil until they are lightly reset.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 Do not delay in treating the swelling, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 And when they are equally reset, and the patient's mouth closes well without slackening, then place moistened cloths on top, made with rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bands.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head resting between two pillows, so that they do not move it to the right or left, nor should they try to chew, but take only light food until the pain is relieved and the jaws are healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And then he chews what he wants lightly, and does not labor to open his mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is well knitted and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 And if the two jaws cannot be set right within an hour and are not restored to their proper places, fever and abscesses follow, and perhaps a ruptured bowel, and possibly vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 And when you see this, then know that it is a disaster;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 and many times he who experiences it dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	 from the armpit
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 The armpit cannot dislocate from the inside of the body or from the hip, and sometimes it is dislocated by force, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on his back, and extends his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 then apply the plaster and bindings, and tighten them;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 and the head which is towards the knife cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 if it does not, and if it ever dislocates again, reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then apply the plaster and bind it, and hold it steady, and instruct the patient to rest until healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And in the same way is reduced the head of the shoulder when it has been dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 Know that the shoulder is only dislocated according to three methods:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 one of which is when it dislocates down towards the lower part of the armpit;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 and the second is towards the side of the chest;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 and sometimes it dislocates upwards, which happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 and it does not dislocate backwards due to the shoulder, nor inwards due to the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 and many times it dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for with them it jumps up quickly;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 at those who have enough flesh, though it is barely so, and enters with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 And sometimes it happens to some men due to injury or breakage, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 Therefore, you must test it until you are certain about it.
et adonques encomence la cure.	 And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 The dislocation is known when it descends towards the shoulder blade and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear diversity between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 And you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and under the shoulder blade, at the back, the head of the shoulder as if it were an egg.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 And the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor can he make any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 Similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the back.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And this manner of dislocation is not easy to reset when it is new, or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 And the manner is that the caregiver lifts the hand of the patient up, then places their fingers underneath the arm, and lifts the joint with force up to its place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 And the caregiver lifts the hand, and extends it upward, then places it underneath;
si venra hastanment.	 so that it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 And if it does not come as we have said in a few days afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 and the caregiver should gently soften and soothe it, as with a decoction of hops and fenugreek and melilot in water, and apply it.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 Then let the patient lie on his back, and place under the buttocks a pad of cloth, neither too soft nor too hard. Then the physician places his heel on the pad, lifts the head of the shoulder skillfully, and pulls the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 and another assistant holds the patient's head so that it does not move downward;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 that shoulder will return immediately, and if you see this, you should reset it in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 and it is necessary for there to be a man present who is larger than the patient.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 and he should stand next to the patient's side, and push his shoulder under the patient's buttocks, and lift the buttocks up high, so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And another minister draws the patient's hand down towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too weak, then some heavy object should be placed with him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 And one resets it in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 and it is as if one drives a long log into the ground, so that the head is as round as a fist, neither too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 then it should be placed under the patient, but with soft cloths on top, and the patient should be standing alongside the log;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 then his hand should be stretched down strongly from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 take a log of two feet in length and four inches in width, which has the head round to easily enter deeply under the saddle, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 Then lay it on the patient's head under a cloth so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then place it under the patient's pillow.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 And extend one arm along the length of the stick, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the top of the hand, then place the arm on the rung of a ladder, and let the hand hang down, and let the body hang from the other side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 The joint will return to its proper place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 And when it is in place, whichever way it may be, you must put underneath the seat an equal sphere of wool, then apply the plaster prepared with mill powder, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it. Then fasten it securely under the seat, and turn the ligature over the plaster, and encircle the hand around its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 And he should move it little by little, until the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 and then move it more after five or seven days, and move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 And if it is immobile and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the juncture is out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply cauteries to three places, as is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm above, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 The dislocations that are towards the foot and ankles, or behind, are done by pushing and stretching with the hands, and another ligament is administered there.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and care for it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 And if after the healing comes stiffness in the limb, and slowness in movement, then let the patient take many baths until that stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its original condition.
de la dislocation dou coute	 of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 Know that the shoulder joint is easily dislocated and easily returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 and it can be dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not hidden, because one can see it well and feel it well.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 And it dislocates according to each joint.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the sick member with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 Because the joint is dislocated, and he cannot bend his arm, nor can he touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 And you must reset it before any abscesses form there, because if abscesses were to form, it would be difficult to restore.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is in the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 it is worse than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and perhaps death will occur.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 And the restoration is such that when it is in a position where it can be reset, you should extend its hand with both of your hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 and the arm should be spread out, and place your hands according to the length around, above and below, and press the joint together, at its base or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 And if the dislocation is forward, then it returns when he folds his hand to his hand, and strikes the root of the palm with the knife that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer a strong extension.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it two ministers, so that it does not move during the extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 then turn the arm in each direction, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 and when the master joins the joint with his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 and when it is in place, then apply a dry plaster with some egg white, and press firmly, and bandage the arm around the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then unbandage it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is firmly in place, unbind the ligament, and let it go;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 and if you see that the joint does not stretch well, then restart the bandage and the ligament, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	 then unbind it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 And if after the joint is reset he feels tightness and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 or you put a greasy sheepskin over the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the sheepskin back on, and then enter the bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this two or three times, until it is healed;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 and if you see (this), then place moist, warm cow dung with butter on top, and bind it up;
si revenra a sa disposition.	 it will return to its proper place.
li dislocation de la main	 The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The joint of the hand is dislocated, and the relocation is light, more than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 However, it must be returned to its place immediately, in the same hour that it is dislocated, before the place becomes swollen, or a hot abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 And the relocation is done by placing the diseased hand on a table, and the assistant extends his hand, and the doctor places his hand in line with it, so that he puts his palm over the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 Nevertheless, you must check if it is in place.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 Then have the patient lay their back on a table for extension and flexion.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then let the patient place the back of their hand on a table, and let the physician place his hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If not, then apply soothing plasters for abscesses like these, and leave it alone without repeating.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains misaligned.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 And this does not harm the patient any more than while the hand is wet, and cannot grasp anything at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 Then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 If there is no other means than to restrain by fire cautery near the case, and perhaps it does not matter otherwise.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 And when the hand is in place, put on the poultice that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for 5 days, then unbind and let it be thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then moisten it with hot water and rub until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the wrist.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 then extend the finger, and push the dislocation towards your pockets until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 and leave it for two days, and then put it back in place on the third day.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 and bind it tightly as we have said, and unbind it each day, and make it move, and rebind it tight.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do this often, until it is healed, and do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and proceed as you have done before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 And do likewise when it is dislocated on another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 of the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 And the signs are that the excretion jumps out without wanting to, and cannot be held, and often some members are softened, whether both thighs or both arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 And often the spine moves in four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 that which moves to the back is called "scoliosis":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 the remedy for this is to reduce it if the scoliosis has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 then there is no remedy or healing for it all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancients speak of remedies in grand words, where there is not always great benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 But I have shortened it according to my intention, and have made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that in the jaundice that affects the breast first, there is no sense or health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 and so it is with jaundice that comes directly to the two sides, and one cannot cure it except for that which comes specifically to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 and let the patient be laid on his side in an equal place, and have support beneath him, so that he does not injure himself;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 then drive a stake into the ground at the head and another at the feet, and tie one cord beneath the patient's saddle, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 And two assistants know the bonds, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two torches.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 And let them be well fastened, the torches as we have said, and the physician shall place his palms on the spine strongly, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a board three arms long, and place it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and thrust the head of the board under the patient, then put the middle of the board upon the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 And let the physician place his feet on the other end of the board, and press strongly, until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if you see (it), do the same for the vertebra that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 And it is that you place two faggots at the head of the patient with one arm outstretched, and towards the feet another two, and let there be between each faggot, above and below, a palm's length of distance.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 and let there be in each faggot one hole, where the spindle runs through, and let the faggots be firmly in the ground, so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 and between each two faggots let there be one turning faggot, on which the rope turns, and in the two turnings let there be two small faggots of a palm's length, to turn the spindle.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 and then tie the rope that is among the axles to the spindle towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other spindle, and each of the helpers turns his spindle all the way to the end of the rope, and the master places the spine equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when it is healed, place a desiccating plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the wool, and then a strip from a tablet three fingers long, which covers the area of jaundice and the healthy part of the spleen, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and let the patient use nourishment subtly, until he is healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 and if anything happens at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications, along with the strip that we have mentioned before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 and sometimes a piece of lead is administered, and sometimes it appears in the lower part of the back, and one might think that this is a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 And this is the bone that is exposed, which is why one should not have any presumption.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 by chance it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	 Dislocation of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 Know that in the joints of the hip and shoulder, only dislocation occurs, not like other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 inside and outside, front and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 and more inside than outside, and it dislocates little in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the sign of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee is more open than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double his knee.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And it is the place that is inflamed with an abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 And the signs of those to whom it happens accidentally, are that these incidents are contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that he straightens his leg according to its full length;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 nevertheless, the knee does not bend without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot move forward, and he retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when he goes, he walks on his heels.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 And the signs of those to whom it happens behind, are that they cannot stretch their knee, or double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hipbone is in the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 The treatment for this type of dislocation is that you wait if the dislocation is old, and it stays in its place, then there is no need for any treatment;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 and he should not have excessive confidence.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 And in the case of fresh dislocation, and this is one of the four types of dislocation, you should hurry to turn the joint, and it goes inside and outside, and moves to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 And if it does not return this way, then you must have a strong assistant, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with one rope that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 and another assistant should extend his hand in such a way that he places his hands under the patient's heels, then pull with a soft rope on the hip;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 and another holds the end of the rope.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 This manner of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If not, then one must take care of its likeness.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 When the dislocation is in the hip, you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the ligament at the root of the thigh, and the place that is under the groin, then stretch the ligament upwards towards the groin, and towards the pelvis.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 Then take another assistant to hold his arms, and embrace the thick part of the dislocated thigh, and stretch it with great force.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 And it will return to its place now.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 And this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligament at the two ankles and at the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fingers' width more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 then they should be hung over the top of a pole, and let it be suspended from the ground by two arm lengths;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 then instruct one assistant to embrace the patient's thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who should firmly embrace the thigh, for now the joint is returning rapidly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 And when the dislocation is reduced, let the patient lie down as we have said for one who has gout, and tighten the ligament on the injured leg properly, and also on the foot;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 Then place two torches, one at the head and another at the feet. Then insert a torch between the thighs of the patient in the same manner.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And have cloths soaked in water placed around it, to prevent the patient from being burned. Then let each assistant approach him, and let the doctor place his hand on the dislocation evenly with it.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 S’elle revient, c’est boin.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place the patient on a table and press as we have said in the case of dislocation, and let the patient lie on their sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 And when the dislocation is in front, then the sick leg must be extended quickly, as I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 and let the doctor place his weight on the sick shoulder, then press with the other hand, and extend downward toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 And if the dislocation is in the back, then the sick one should not be extended downward or lifted from the ground, but rather he should lie as if his hip were dislocated to the back, as we have said about lying on two hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 And let it be on his face, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and someone should press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 And it will be ready when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 Then bring the thighs together and apply a poultice, and hold it with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 And rest for three days or four, then dislocate it again, and apply another poultice on top.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 And if you see that they are even, then hold them as before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Then dislocate it again, and let the patient walk gently until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	 of the knee dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The knee is dislocated according to three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 this means, from within and without, and from behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	 and does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your two [hands], then strongly bend the two sides of the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 and another assistant extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he easily reaches his thigh lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 And place the poultice on it, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then unbind.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And let the patient not try to walk until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not at all, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	 of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 The ankles are sometimes swollen and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 And the sign is that the ankle is swollen and protrudes towards the dislocated part:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 The reduction is light, and it should be gently extended with his hands when it is only moved slightly.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 And when it is completely dislocated, you must have the patient sit upright, and hold him with one hand by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with the left two times, then extend it upwards, and nicely push the foot up.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 And do this twice, as we have said, by pressing and pulling the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 If it returns, that is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 if not, then start the work again, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 And if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly drive a stake into the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around so that they do not harm the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 Then let one minister take the thigh, and another minister extend the foot in their hands or with a strap tied above the ankle.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 Then let each minister extend equally, and let the stake remain between the patient's thighs to hold the patient while they are stretched.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 Then let the physician make the dislocation equal with his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when it is perfectly in place, put the plaster and bandages on top, and bind it strongly, and tie the foot to the leg, and protect the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligature is not too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature softens, bind it again;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 Then unbind it on the third or fourth day, and allow the patient to walk for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if such abscesses occur, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	 of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 When the fingers are dislocated, they must be carefully extended without effort, and this is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 And if the dislocation is in any knot of the foot's back, then you must make the patient sit on the plain place or on a table straight, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 And when it is equal and nothing opens, place under the sole of the foot a two-legged table, then strongly press it down, and leave it for three days, then dislocate it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And make him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, it often happens that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 Do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and patient, but rather bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 and use at the beginning of soothing things a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope for health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 and when you see hope, then immediately reset the limb in place before the hot abscess arrives.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 and when the limb is in place, then administer soothing things for the hot abscess, and treat the wound with dried onions as needed.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are exposed, then remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 and beware of entering a path of fear, as I have said, for this will move you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapon and body.
