I have completed this book for you, my sons. This book is a part of the science of medicine, and I have reached its goals through its clarity and simplicity. I saw that it was necessary to complete it for you with these chapters which are a part of the work with the hand.
Because the manual skill is neglected in our country and in our time, it has become rare to find one who can teach its art and continue its impact. And there remained from it (manual skill) only a few scattered references in the books of the ancients, which the passage of time had worn out and whose usefulness had diminished.
I saw that it was necessary to revive it and compile this chapter in the method of clarification, explanation, and concision, and to include pictures of the instruments and other tools of the work, as it is an addition to the clarity and a fulfillment of what is needed.
And the reason why there is no skilled craftsman with a good hand in our time, is that the craft of medicine is lengthy and it is necessary for its owner to be well-versed beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galenous has described. Until he (the craftsman) is familiar with the functions of the organs, their positions, connections, and disconnections, and has knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, their numbers, and their exits, as well as the ligaments and their positions.
Therefore, Hippocrates said that many are called physicians in name, but few in deed, and none excel in the craft of manual skill. We have mentioned this aspect at the beginning of this book.
For one who is not knowledgeable in what we mentioned of anatomy, it is inevitable that he will fall into errors that kill people, as I have seen many who claim to be knowledgeable in this science but are ignorant and lack understanding.
And I have seen a ignorant physician who made an incision on a woman's neck, cutting some of the vessels of her neck, so that the woman's blood gushed out until she died between his hands.
A doctor had previously attempted to extract a large piece of bone from a man who was stabbed in the nose, and it was difficult, so he extracted it with a piece of the nasal bone. The man died after about three days, and I was asked to extract it, so I examined the bone of the nose and the condition of the patient, and that is what I found.
I saw another doctor who was skilled in treating some of our patients in the city with medicine.
A black slave had a fracture in his leg near the ankle with a wound, so the doctor hastened to treat it by applying tight bandages and compresses, and did not leave any space for the wound to breathe.
Then he wrapped it with bandages, and left it for several days, and ordered him not to move the splint until his leg and foot were swollen, and he watched out for any signs of gangrene.
I was asked to treat him, so I hastened to remove the splint, but he did not get relief and his pains only increased, for the corruption had taken hold in the limb and I could not stop it.
The corruption then spread in the limb until he died.
I saw another doctor who had a patient with a cancerous swelling, and he treated it after several days until the ulcer of his owner became great, and that is because if the cancer was mixed with black bile, then it would not be suitable to treat it with iron instruments.
Unless it is in a limb that can be completely amputated.
Therefore, my sons, it is necessary for you to learn that surgical operations are divided into two types: an operation that brings safety and an operation that accompanies corruption in most cases.
And I have pointed out in every place that comes from this book the operation that involves risk and fear, it is necessary for you to beware of them and avoid them.
When the ignorant person does not find a way to the doctor and the wound, take it upon yourselves with bandaging and cauterization, and do not entrust it to the quack and the charlatan.
And use the best method leading to health and praised recovery, and avoid the dangerous and grievous diseases.
And beware of what you fear will bring shame to your religion and your world, for it is a blemish on your reputation in this life and the hereafter, and a diminution of your good deeds.
For Galen has said in some of his maxims: 'Do not fall into a bad illness, so beware of bad physicians.'
And I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The First Chapter.
It is with the scissors and the scalpel, sharp and well-polished, arranged from the top of the head to the soles of the feet, and pictures of the instruments and what is needed for their use in manual operation.
The Second Chapter.
It is on incision, and cupping, and phlebotomy, and surgery, and extracting arrowheads, and all of that, arranged in order, with pictures of the instruments.
The Third Chapter.
It is on fracture, and ulcers, and treatment of gangrene, and all that, arranged in order from the top of the head to the soles of the feet, with pictures of the instruments.
The First Chapter.
It is on the scissors.
And before we mention its operation, it is fitting that we mention its advantages and disadvantages, and in which condition it is used.
I say that speaking about the advantages and disadvantages of the scissors is a lengthy discourse, requiring precise knowledge and subtle insight, and many of the wise have spoken about it.
They have disagreed about it, and I have summarized their statements briefly, fearing prolixity.
I say that the doctor benefits from experience for every bad mixture that is with a material and without a material, including two mixtures: the sharp mixture that is not with a material, and the soft mixture that is not with a material.
As for the soft mixture with a material, they have disagreed about it. Some of them said that the doctor benefits from it, while others contradicted that, saying that the doctor does not benefit from it in a disease that is caused by heat and softness, because the nature of fire is heat and softness.
And it is improbable that he who suffers from a sharp and soft disease can be treated with a sharp and soft medicine, and whoever contradicts that says that the doctor can benefit from fire in treating a sharp and soft disease that occurs in people's bodies. Because when you apply heat to the human body, it mixes with the fire mixture, and thus the human body becomes cold.
And I say that, because experience has repeatedly shown me that, unless one has fully grasped and mastered the art of medicine in its entirety. And he should be aware of the differences in people's mixtures, and the conditions of their diseases, and their causes, and their symptoms, and the duration of their times.
As for the other mixtures, there is no fear of them, nor of the cold and moist diseases, for all doctors have agreed on their treatment with fire.
And know, my son, that the secret of treating with fire is to use it moderately and to apply it gently with the burning medicine, because fire is a single essence that does not exceed its effect on the member that is being treated, nor does it harm another connected member except for a slight harm.
And the doctor with the burning medicine may exceed its effect to what is beyond the members, and perhaps it causes a severe disease in the member, or perhaps it kills, and fire, despite its nobility and generosity of essence, does not do that except when it is excessive.
We have verified it for you through experience and long observation and attention to the truth of the matter, and diligence in craftsmanship.
And so I have avoided lengthy discourse, for if it were not that it would not be fitting for this book, I would have described to you in detail the hidden and obscure matters and how they affect the bodies and their diseases with philosophical speech that demonstrates the evidence of what I am saying.
And know, O sons, that they have disagreed about the time in which it is suitable to perform it, and made the best time for it the spring season.
And I say that it is suitable to perform it at any time, because the harm that occurs beforehand is included in the benefit that is gained by the performance. And it is not suitable if the performance is one of the necessary and strong precautions that do not tolerate delay, for fear of what may happen afterwards, which is greater than the internal harm that occurs beforehand.
And do not think, O sons, that the physicians have overlooked what is commonly thought by the medical profession, that the performance which cures an illness that will never return is one that makes it a triumph.
And it is not hidden from them, because the performance is in the position of a medicine that changes the temperament and removes the obstructions that are the cause of the diseases.
Rather, the performance is preferred over the medicine in its speed of success and strength of action and firmness of its dominion.
And it is possible that the illness may return at a certain time, according to the temperament of the patient and his constitution, and the strength of his disease, and what is accumulated in his body from the gathering of superfluities in him, and his neglect of himself in acquiring them through nutrition and so on from the causes.
Rather, the illness for which the performance is used should be a mild one, and in an organ with little superfluity and obstructions. Like the excision of the ulcer and its surrounding area, it is possible that the ulcer may not return in this case, and this will be in the lower part.
And the general saying is also that the last resort of a doctor is excision, which is a correct saying, not that they go to it because they believe that there is no treatment that can benefit with medicine or without it after the occurrence of the ulcer and the pain, contrary to that.
And the meaning of "the last resort of a doctor is excision" is that when we have tried various treatments for a painful disease and they did not benefit, then we resort to excision, which is the final thing, and it is from here that the saying "excision is the last resort" originated. Not according to the meaning that the general populace has gone to, and many of the ignorant doctors.
And the ancients mentioned that excision with gold is better than excision with iron, and they said that because of the gentleness of gold and the nobility of its nature, and they said that it does not irritate the site of the excision, but that is not according to reality.
Because I have tried it and found that it does not do that in some bodies, unlike others, and excision with it is better and more excellent than iron, as they said, except that if you heat the scalpel in the fire from gold, it will not be apparent to you when you apply it to the extent you want for cauterizing the gold.
And because it (the gold scalpel) quickly loses its sharpness and if you add to it in the heat, it melts in the fire and your effort is wasted due to that, so for that reason, excision with iron has become more convenient and closer to correctness for the work, God willing.
And I have divided this chapter on excision into sections, which I have organized from the head to the foot, so as to make it easy for the student to find what he wants from it, God willing.
The First Section.
A fracture of the skull is one kind.
This fracture results from the strong impact and cold on the brain, which are causes of headaches, numbness of the sensations from the head to the areas around the eyes and ears, numbness of sleep, aching of the teeth, and pain in the throat. And with each fracture that appears from cold, such as the fracture of the cranium, the fracture of the suture, and the like, among the afflictions.
The treatment of this fracture is to bind the bandage with a strict compression and anointing with a beneficial ointment, pure and clean for the head, for three or four days, according to the strength of the bandage and its firmness.
Then treat him by making him sit with his back straight, then make him lean between your hands, having placed his hands on his chest.
Then put the base of your palm on the base of his forehead between his eyes, so that your middle finger reaches that spot with the compress.
Then apply the Zytonian cerate whose shape is this.
Uncover as much of the bone as the size of a dirham or a carat, and remove your hand, then return your hand to its same position or another, if you are experienced. Until you see from the bone what I mentioned to you, then take some of borax and dissolve it in water and soak a compress in it and put it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then apply to it a compress soaked in sweet oil and leave it on until the inflammation subsides, then treat it with the medicinal plaster of rose water until he recovers, God willing.
And they said that if the wound remains open, it will fill with pus, and that is better and more beneficial.
And some of them mentioned that the wound should be cauterized to the bone, and the cerate should be held until some of the density of the bone is burned, then what has been burned from the bone is scraped off afterwards, and then treated.
The surgeon should not touch the bone with excessive force until it has a strong effect, so that it breaks off a piece of the bone the size of a olive kernel or a small flake, and he feels that it is dislodged from that position, and he leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then he treats until it becomes inflamed, and I have not seen this type of bone fracture except in some people, and on the route of the vertebrae, and it is better to leave it with a bandage and safety if it is, for the head will become constricted when its natural connection is disrupted, as we have observed in other limbs.
And it is not suitable when the head of the fracture is weak by nature, and the first type of bone is brittle and better to leave it and use it, for it will work with God's permission.
The Second Chapter.
Also, the fracture of the head.
If a fracture occurs in the skull and it is confirmed and prolonged with bandages, and using compresses, and cups, and splints, and bandages, but it does not benefit if the single fractured bone that we described was broken, so consider. For if the head of the fracture is strong by nature and not weak, and it finds a very hard callus, then it needs another bone above that one a little. Then it needs on every crown of its head a bone until the thickness of the skin and the flesh is formed, and it is revealed from the bone the amount that we described. And it needs a bone in the back of its head in the position that is known by the vertebra, and reduce your hand in this, and do not reveal the bone, for the fracture finds it has very severe pain unlike the pain of other skull fractures, all of them, and I will mention this bone in its position.
It is desirable that the incision be made with a curved scalpel which cuts at the back of the head, and its edge is sharper than the scalpel which cuts at the middle of the head, and this is its shape.
The Third Chapter
A Suture for a Non-Punctured Wound
If a fracture occurs in the head and it is accompanied by a swelling and the pain extends to the eye, then use the topical medication suitable for the head and employ other treatments mentioned in the chapter on wounds; if that does not work, then suture it from two sides. Either suture with a sharp pointed instrument or with an iron.
Then if you suture with a sharp pointed instrument, it is that you take one thread of Thum and scrape it and cut its edges from both sides, then make an incision at the place of the pain in the scalp with a narrow scalpel until it forms a space under the skin where the thread can be inserted.
Then insert it under the skin until it takes hold, then tighten it with a strong tightening and leave it for fifteen hours, then loosen it and remove the thread and leave the wound two or three days, then apply a bandage.
Apply to it a dressing of wax in the naptha until the place is secured, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing. If you wish, do that with some of the sharp medications I mentioned in chapter eighteen on sharp medications.
And if you suture with an iron, it is like this form: the scalpel that has this shape:
And it is called a Mason's Scalpel because its head is like a Mason's chisel, with some notches on it and a small hole in the middle.
Then place it on the wound and hold your hand, and you direct the edge slightly, slightly, and it will be as if the part that pierces from the thickness of the skin is about half. Make an incision on the vein that is in the lower part, then sprinkle powdered salt on the wound and place it on the affected area, and leave it for three days. Then apply the dressing with butter, and bind it firmly with a bandage until he recovers, if God wills.
And if you wish to amputate this limb at the ankle joint, which is formed from the two bones protruding from the ankle, and preserve it from cutting the vein in this non-gangrenous limb.
The Fourth Chapter.
On Gangrenous Limbs.
If you treated the limb with the advanced treatment we mentioned and what we mentioned in the classification of diseases, but the treatment did not benefit and you saw from the condition what does not conform to what we mentioned as the first sign of the disease, whether it is a defect or a burning. It is necessary to dissect the ankle joint until it whitens after you have made an incision at the site of the pain, with a longitudinal line about half a finger's length or similar, and leave your hand one time and hold it until you cut the vein and reach near the bone.
It is necessary for you to be cautious not to touch the joint that moves when biting, so as not to cut the tendon or the nerve that moves it, lest it causes spasm.
And be on guard and beware of the flow of blood from the vein that you cut, for there is danger in its flow. And do not entrust to one who does not know what he is doing and has not been trained, lest he ruins the first operation.
And it is fitting to mention the management of the bleeding vein on its surface in its place in the book, if God wills, for I saw from the condition what does not conform to this method.
And I saw the body of the patient improved, and his condition was in the middle of the head as we described, and treated the wound until he recovered, if God wills.
If you have used the method we mentioned in the chapter on suturing of the wounded blood vessels with double-threaded stitches, it is a better and more beneficial method than this one.
The Fifth Chapter.
On the Sutures of the Ears.
If a wound occurs on the ear and becomes inflamed with pus, and one treats it with poultices and other treatments that we mentioned in the section, but the pain does not subside, then make an incision at the point where it is situated.
Then drain it after enveloping it around the ear, all of it, as it surrounds them or around both of them if the pain is in both of them. And then suture from the base of the ear, a little after applying the medicament to the site, and make the sutures about ten points on each ear or thereabouts, then treat the sites until healing occurs, God willing.
The Sixth Chapter.
On the Sutures of the Lips.
The lip that is treated with sutures, indeed it may be of the type that occurs due to phlegm, as I mentioned in the sections on diseases.
And avoid suturing the type that occurs due to fractures and nerve tension.
When I treated this type of lip with poultices and compresses and gargles, it did not respond to my treatment, so it is necessary to use three sutures. One at the base of the ear, and the second a little below its edge, and the third at the meeting point of the lips.
And make your suture from the opposite side of the affected area, because relaxation only occurs on the side that appears healthy.
And the method of suturing is to make a suture with a thread at the upper edge of the ear, below the crown of the head, a little, and another in the edge, and its length should be according to the length of the fingers.
Descend with the scalpel until you reach halfway through the thickness of the skin, and this is an image of a scalpel which is a type of surgical instrument that has been shortened slightly as you can see. It is desirable that the scalpel be slightly thick, then treat the area with what has been mentioned previously until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
Chronic Ulcers of the Lips.
If you have treated the ulcers as we mentioned and the treatment did not benefit, and it was not in the early stages, then cauterize them with four cauteries. On each horn of his head a cautery and a cautery in the middle of the head as we mentioned, and a cautery at the back of the head according to what has been presented.
The description of the scalpel is as previously mentioned, and it can also be used to make a cautery on the mouth of the stomach in order to cure, then treat with what has been presented.
Chapter Eight.
Hemorrhoids.
What is generated from phlegm, it is desirable to evacuate the early stages or to extract the large and small blood vessels of the brain.
Then, he should shave his whole head and apply the powder of the dried and crushed Khurdal (a type of herb) to the back of his head, repeating it several times, so that he is hit with the cupping.
And do that on the same level as mentioned there, if he recovers with it; otherwise, cauterize him with three cauteries at the back of his head, being in a straight line from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
And leave a space of a finger's thickness between each cautery and another, then treat the cautery as previously mentioned; if you want to increase it and the early stages are hinting at that, then cauterize the middle cautery.
If you want to reduce it, place it on the bridges of the nose and adjust it until it becomes straight, and the nasal bridge will be in the shape you desire.
The Ninth Chapter.
Relax the patient and release all tension from his body.
It is necessary to proceed with cleansing the head using the instruments we mentioned, then shave the patient's head, and place a pad in the middle of the head and a pad on each side of the head and a pad at its back.
And three on the nape of the neck, but if you need to relax the body more than that and the patient is likely to be in a position for it, and the disease is strong and confirmed, then place four pads on the vertebrae of his back. And inform the patient to hold the pad until the bleeding stops, and lift your hand, then adjust it according to what we have mentioned previously until it heals, God willing, and the nasal bridge will be in the desired shape.
The Tenth Chapter.
Relax the patient.
The patient who has a damaged nose due to rhinorrhea, which occurs before the climax of the disease, needs to have his brain cleansed first with the large instruments and other treatments we mentioned in the chapter, if the disease is severe and he is likely to take medications.
But if the patient is a young child who cannot tolerate medications, then the treatment with the evacuating cup and the cleansing of the brain should be delayed for several days along with improving his nutrition.
Then shave his head, then place a single pad in the middle of the head as previously mentioned in the description, and another at its back. And a pad on each side of his head, if the patient is strong and likely to be in a position for it, then place the pads as mentioned in the case of the falaj, and relax the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back, and the nasal bridge will be in the desired shape as previously described.
If the patient is a young boy, make the bandage light on this pattern.
Chapter 12.
On the surgical treatment of alopecia.
If the cause of alopecia is harsh and stubborn dandruff, and the patient's skin is rough, then apply the remedies we mentioned for the person with Elephantiasis.
If the cause of alopecia is a melancholic humor inclined to blackness, and the patient's body is melancholic and rough, then do not purify his blood according to what we have mentioned in the chapter on bloodletting.
Then shave the patient's head, then make a circular cupping-glass from a horn like a circle, and place it in the middle of his head, and let the patient sit bent forward, holding from each side, then take one candle of old Greek oil.
Then heat it on the fire, a moderate heat that the finger can bear when inserted, then pour it onto his head within the circle and let it remain until it cools down, do that to the patient every week once, along with other good treatments, until he recovers, God willing.
And if you want to remove the small veins, many small ones without touching the bandage with your hand, but rather through suction, for this type of cupping revives the brain by moderation.
Then apply to him a cataplasm of rose oil or chicken fat.
Chapter 12.
On the surgical treatment of cataracts in the eye.
If you are certain about the beginning of the cataract in the eye from the signs we mentioned in the chapter, then hasten to treat the patient, and purify his head and neck from all roughness, and take him to the bath on a Friday.
Then shave his head, and apply a cupping-glass in the middle of the head, then apply two cups on the temples if the beginning of the cataract is in both eyes or one side if it is in one eye.
Cut with the scalpel all the vessels and nerves that are under the skin, and take care to lengthen them in the direction of the sutures, and avoid causing excessive bleeding.
If you see any of it, cut it out at the site of the injury with a suitable treatment, and use a scalpel to dissect the nerves and vessels, and avoid excessive bleeding.
There are two tendons beneath the bone that require delicate handling.
Chapter Thirteen.
On Treating Chronic Hemorrhages.
If the hemorrhage of the eye is chronic and permanent, and it comes from the vessels and nerves that are on the surface of the head, outside the brain, and you think that it is due to a cold, humid, and melancholic temperament, then use the treatment that I described at the beginning of the descending vein. There is a vessel in the middle of the head, and two on the sutures, and two beneath the bone, and if you need to add more, then use a vessel on each side of the eye's corner at the edge of the eyebrow with a small scalpel.
Chapter Fourteen.
On Treating Nose Fractures.
If you treated it with what we mentioned in the previous section and the treatment did not work, then try to make an incision on the nasal bone three fingers above, then shave his head and ligate the middle vessel with a Zoatoni scalpel. Then ligate with the Masmaria scalpel, two vessels above the eyebrows, beneath the hair, slightly, and avoid cutting the nerve, and this is a picture of the Masmaria.
Chapter Fifteen.
On Treating Relaxation of the Eye's Nerve.
If the eye's nerve has relaxed due to a disease or weakness, then ligate the nerve with one vessel using this Hulali scalpel.
If you dislike it, place it above the eyebrows slightly, two fingers' width in each direction, and separate it from the suture, and make the length of each thread along the length of the eyebrow.
Do not over-tighten your hand with the threads, but rather according to what is sufficient to constrict one-third of the gland, and make the shape of the knot on this condition.
Chapter Sixteen.
On the threads of the eyelid.
If you invert them towards the inside of the orbit, then the threads are in two types. Either the threads with the fire or the threads with the medicinal cautery, and of these, the threads with the fire are to be avoided before that, so that the patient does not feel them if he was one who removes them until they fall out and settle.
If you leave them at the time of their growth, they will constrict his eye with a bandage, lest it moves until it grows. And if it has grown and settled, then put the head of the patient in your lap, and then teach on the eyelid with a marker, making a mark like the shape of a leaf.
And the beginning of the mark is near the eyelashes, then you put under the eyelid a twisted thread in the white of the egg or in the slime of the bzarqatuna, then you tie a knot with this shape.
Then you tighten on the shape that you marked, a little at a time, in many instances, until it constricts the surface of the gland that is like the shape of a leaf, all of which is clear and distinct, and the sign of the correctness of your work is that you see the eyelid has become constricted and the hair has risen from the edge of the eye.
Then remove your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then apply a thread with grease until the crust falls off, and treat it with ointment until he recovers, if God wills. If some of the hair returns after a while and the eyelid relaxes.
Place the scalp in its original position as you did at first, for if the hair is on the lower jawbone, it will return to its natural place and not dislodge the hair of the eye, and similarly the scalp with the separated flap, it is necessary that the surgeon commands him to leave the sutures until they cohere and settle.
Then make a mold from the wax in the shape of a paper, and take from the melted Sabun a amount weighing one dirham or a bit more, and from the fat that is not congealed, an amount from each, and mix them all together well and do it with speed lest it congeal. Then spread it on the wax mold that you made in the shape of a paper, and place it on one or both eyelids, and put under the eye a twisted thread in the white of an egg and the head of the scalpel in your hand.
And put your finger on the medication and press it slightly, and move it whenever you feel the surgeon feeling the sweetness of the medication, for it is as if he finds a sweet taste like honey; as long as he feels the sweetness, leave the medication and move it with your finger; and when the sweetness subsides, remove the medication and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid has risen as it rises when anointed with honey or with a collyrium, and otherwise, put on it some of the medication in the place where the medication did not affect it and did not become congealed until you complete your work and anoint the eye, then put on it a thread soaked in oil until the inflammation subsides.
Then treat it with the ointment of narcissus or something else until it heals, and it is necessary for you when working to be extremely cautious that nothing from the medication falls into the eye, for if the eyelid relaxes after a few days and some hair grows in the eye.
Apply the medicine to that place which has been freed from the special bandage, just as you did at first, and then leave it until it heals, and this is a picture of the wrap of the splint.
And know that the eyes of people may differ in smallness and largeness, so according to that let your surgery be, and do not deviate from the correct path for one who has experience in this craft.
Chapter Seventeen.
With a scalpel that is presented at the angle of vision.
If you treated the scalpel as we mentioned in the sections on surgical instruments, it would not harm your treatment, and it is necessary to maintain it in this manner.
The patient should put his head on a stone and hold it firmly between your hands, so that he does not move or shake his head.
Then you put a cotton pad soaked in the whites of eggs or in the unguent of Brzqtuna on his eyes, and then you apply the cupping glass that is of this shape.
It is better that it be a tube like the pipe of an eagle's beak, from one end which has the scalpel, and if you wish it to be from the other end, and if you wish it to be bent like the pipe of a reed, but this tube is better for your work, God willing.
Then you handle the scalpel, if it was open and the blood comes out of it, and you wipe it clean; or if it was not open, you open it and extract its contents, then you put on it the cupping glass, which is very hot, so you hold it with your hand until you reach the bone.
And withdraw your hand a little from the scalpel towards the direction of the nostril, lest your hand trembles or the patient moves, so that the cupping glass falls onto the eyelid and damages it; if you reach in the first attempt to the bone, otherwise, return the cupping glass for a second time, if you need to do so.
Here is the translation:
Another method from the masters, which some of them have mentioned, is to make an incision towards the position of the nasal bone, then insert a thin instrument into the same incision, this being its shape.
And pour into it a weight of a dirham of molten lead, and hold your hand firmly on the instrument, grasping it tightly, so that the molten lead does not move around on the surface of the eyelid. It is necessary to place on the surface of the eyelid a piece of cotton wool moistened with egg white or water.
For the molten lead will burn the position of the nasal bone and create a bad ulceration. If the nasal bone is burnt as we have mentioned, with the masters' methods and treatments, then there is no alternative but to use the antrum of the nose and redirect the nasal bone to its original passage, according to what is suitable for its condition.
The 18th Chapter.
On the surgical treatment of the lip.
Many times, a fissure occurs in the lip, which is called a cleft, and it often occurs in children's lips. If you treated this fissure with what we mentioned in the section, but the treatment did not succeed, then take a small, thin, triangular scalpel of this shape.
Its edge is on the flat surface of the scalpel, then you insert it obliquely with the scissors in the same fissure until the instrument reaches the depth of the fissure, and then you treat it with the cautery until it heals, God willing.
The 19th Chapter.
On the surgical treatment of nasal polyps in the nostrils.
If a growth appears in the roots of the teeth or in the gum or in the bases of the roots and it becomes inflamed, then it bursts and produces a nasal polyp. Then you treat it, but if the treatment does not succeed, it is necessary to take a scalpel according to the size that fits into the nasal passage.
Then, insert it (the instrument) gently into the nasal passage and hold your hand until you reach the turbinate bone, feeling its roughness and end, and do that one or two times. Then, treat it afterwards with the treatment we mentioned, until he recovers, God willing.
If the corrupted matter is cut off and he recovers, otherwise it is necessary to explore the site and remove the decayed bone according to what will be found in its mouth, God willing.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
The treatment of wounds and ulcers that have become putrid.
If the ulcers have become putrid beforehand and you have moved them and treated them with medications but did not benefit, then put the head of the scalpel in your hand, and then hold the scalpel that has this shape after placing the tube on the tooth.
And insert the scalpel gently into the socket, holding your hand slightly until you feel the scalpel reaching the root of the tooth through the heat of the fire, then lift your hand, and then repeat the insertion of the scalpel several times according to what you want, and then the tooth will be filled with salt water.
And leave it for an hour, and then sprinkle it, so the loose tooth will be fixed, the putrid ulcer will dry up, and the foul decay will be cleansed.
The twenty-seventh chapter.
The treatment of gum ulcers.
If the gum ulcers were caused by cold or had worms and did not benefit from treatment with medications, then there are two ways to treat them: either treating with alum or treating with fire.
As for treating with alum, it is that you take the bovine alum and grind it in an iron mortar or a copper vessel, then take a cotton swab and wrap it on the tip of the instrument, and dip it into the ground alum and apply it to the affected gum gently, holding it until it cools down.
You should hold the cautery at a distance until the power of the fire reaches the bottom of the abscess, and if you fear that the flesh will sear or that a blister will form on the cold skin, you should place the protective dressing above it until the fire reaches the bottom of the wound.
And if you cauterize it with fire, it is better to direct the nozzle of copper or iron tube so that some of its thickness prevents the heat of the fire from reaching the mouth of the abscess. Then, hold the cautery in place, shaping it to fit on the same wound, and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do that repeatedly.
For the abscess will burst open on that very day or another day, and it is necessary afterwards for the doctor to fill the mouth of the abscess with good cold water and to keep it still for an hour, then to drain it; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Make it on whichever side you fear, according to what is possible, and this is the shape of the tube.
The 22nd Chapter.
On Removing the Adamantina (or Hard Skin Growths).
If the Adamantina is due to phlegm and cold humors, and has not been dissolved by medications and you want to dissolve it quickly, then hold the hollow cautery, whose shape is conical, on both sides.
Let the smoke come out at the doctor's hand from the other side, and place it protected on the same tumor, once and twice, if you need to do so until you reach the depth of the tumor; and if the tumor is small, then make the cautery according to the size of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and apply a blistering plaster in the cold skin until what has been cauterized with fire dissipates, then treat it with ointments and bandages until it heals, God willing.
The Twenty-Third Section.
On the treatment of wounds in the neck and constricted breathing.
If the humors overpowered the trachea and it was not possible, even with a phlegmatic temperament, to expel the mucus or purge it with gentle medicines, then cauterization should be applied at the base of the larynx in the lowest part.
Be careful not to cauterize too close to the larynx, and do not burn more than half of the skin. Then apply another cauterization at the joint of the neck at the end of its vertebrae, gently, and make the branding conform to the shape you have predetermined.
Then treat it with what has been mentioned until it heals, God willing.
The Twenty-Fourth Section.
On the treatment of diseases of the lung and cough.
If the cough and lung disease were due to cold humors and did not have hot or salty matter, and the disease was chronic, then apply two cauterizations above the ribs in the lowest empty places, and another cauterization in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And make the branding conform to the shape you have predetermined. If you wish, let the cauterization be in the form of points, and it has been mentioned that its shape is in the form of a point, and it starts from thirty points or nearly so.
Then treat it with what has been mentioned until it heals. A branding iron with three claws can be made according to this shape, and it is useful for the treatment because you can apply three cauterizations at once with it, and this is the shape of the branding iron.
The Twenty-Fifth Section.
On the treatment of abscesses.
If the head of the abscess was due to wandering humors or did not settle in its place, so that it became a habit for it to move until it formed an ulcer, then it would be necessary to return the mouth of the abscess or purify it. The patient is laid on his back or on his sound side, then the skin flap that is inside the wound is lifted up with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint has moved inward.
Then you place the suture instrument with the two smooth surfaces, which is its form.
Then you suture with it the skin until it reaches the other side, and it takes the shape of four sutures. It can be sutured with an instrument having three smooth surfaces, so that it takes the shape of six sutures, and the smooth surfaces are on the edge of the wound.
And this is the picture of the suture instrument with the three smooth surfaces.
And one can be added to this number, so the sutures become eight. Then you apply the compressing bandages with salt and apply a tight dressing, without moving the limb at all until it heals, and if the fracture is upwards, it will be easier that way.
Put a single, well-padded splint above the ankle, or several thin ones, so that the joint is stabilized and the swelling goes down, and the patient recovers.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On Suturing of the Abdomen.
If a wound occurs in the abdomen, with many abscesses and collections of pus, until they are evacuated from their places and the openings are closed, and treatment is administered to strengthen it, but it does not improve, then the patient should be laid on his back, and his thighs and hands should be extended, and three sutures should be applied. A suture is placed under the rib cage, to the width of a finger, with a well-padded instrument, and two sutures below, at the edge of the single suture, until they take the shape of three sutures, and are far enough apart so as not to gather if they become inflamed, and the depth of the suture is one third of the thickness of the skin, and it takes the shape of the suture.
On this figure and to this extent, no more.
And if you find a single large abscess in the middle of the abdomen, on this figure.
And the incision that is made to drain this single abscess will be circular in shape, as shown in this figure.
And you should make a small incision on the abdomen, at the point where the abscess is most prominent, to the extent that you want to drain it, then make the incision with a pointed instrument, and treat it with the remedy that you have prepared, until it heals.
Chapter 27.
On cold abscesses of the liver.
If the liver becomes diseased and turns cold and hard, or if it is affected by a cold and dry humour, until it departs from its natural temperament and becomes excessively cold and hard, and if you treat it with the remedies we mentioned in the previous section, it will not be beneficial. It is necessary to make the patient lie on his back and make three incisions with the instrument, in this shape and to this extent, specifically on the liver below the ribs where the arm pit of the person ends.
And after each incision, there will be a flow of thick pus, and the abscess will be along the length of the body, straight, and do not hesitate with the instrument, indeed.
And as much as you can remove from the thickness of the skin, to half of it, no more, and the patient will be standing on his feet, if he is not standing, he will be sitting with his legs extended and his arms raised, and this is a picture of the incision.
And you can make these incisions with the Sikkini instrument, if you have a skilled and precise hand in its manufacture, and you take care to avoid damaging the abscess, so you remove the entire skin, then you remove the peritoneum and reach the intestines, for the skin there is thin, so be careful.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
On incising and draining the liver with a tube.
If you find a swelling in the liver and want to know whether it is an abscess in the substance of the liver or in its membranes, then if it is in the substance of the liver, it will be found to have a thick pus and severe pain without limit.
And if it is in the membranes of the liver, there will be severe pain with a limit, and you will find that the physicians have despaired of its treatment; therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the pus on the affected area with a scalpel.
Then cauterize the mouth of the abscess with a heated instrument, and it is an instrument that resembles a spoon, and this is its shape. And cauterize it with a single stroke until you burn the entire gland and drain it through the tube to the membranes until all the pus is discharged, then treat it with abscess treatments until he recovers.
And this type of tube should not be used except by one who has mastered its craft in the art of medicine and has experienced these diseases through repeated experiments, so that he can present a work like this and leave it to the best.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
On the tube for bronchotomy.
I mentioned that the ancients used to make a tube for bronchotomy from the roots of the Zenjūr plant, in this fashion: it is that you take one long, straight root of the Zenjūr plant, and make its thickness like that of a finger, then dip it in oil and heat it in the fire. Then cauterize it with a single stroke, while it is between the connection of the trachea and the throat, and two small tubes below the larynx, slightly inclined towards the side beneath the lip, and two large tubes above the breasts, between the third and fourth ribs.
Here is the translation:
It is not proper to insert your hand in the wound, but rather it should be on the surface of the skin with a small pointed instrument, and some surgeons have mentioned that some people use an iron rod similar to a scalpel, inserting it between the sides until it reaches the tumor itself.
And it extracts the humor, as we mentioned in the case of liver tumor, and in this way by inserting the instrument into the tumor, either the patient dies from the severity or he is exposed to a bad ulcer that will not heal.
Chapter Thirty.
Surgery of the spleen.
If you treated the spleen disease with what we mentioned of treatment in the section, and your treatment did not benefit, then surgery is necessary, which has three correct approaches, one of which is to make an incision three fingers or four fingers long along the length of the spleen.
Like the incisions of the liver, which we previously described in shape and size, with a distance between each incision and the next of about the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the edge of the scalpel is as we mentioned in the incision of the liver, and do not insert your hand into the incision, and the image of the patient appears on his back.
And the other approach is at the rib, and you lift the skin that is in front of the spleen, where the rib of the patient ends on the left side, and you lift the skin on the width of the body so that the incisions fall along the length of the body.
Then you insert the curved forceps very carefully until they reach the skin from the other side, then you withdraw the scalpel, and the incisions will be four, and if you wish, you can make an incision with another scalpel having three hooks.
Then you treat the site of the incision after you have made it, by applying a bandage, or many compresses, for it is better than what we previously mentioned of treatments.
The 31st Chapter.
On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids.
It is observed that the treatment that benefits hemorrhoids, if you treat the patient with the types of treatment we mentioned in the previous section, and it did not benefit from your treatment, it may be necessary to cauterize four veins around the anus and one vein on the thigh.
And another vein on the liver and one on the spleen, and two behind the ribs, one opposite his chest and another opposite his stomach, and it is possible to make the incision close to the thickness of the skin, then you leave the incision open, allowing the pus to drain for a long time.
And do not stop the treatment after the incision, but rather what is necessary to gather the scattered benefits for him quickly, and the shape of the cautery brand that is on his back will be circular in accordance with its pre-formed shape, and what is on his back will be linear.
The 32nd Chapter.
On the Treatment of Ulcers of the Feet and Legs.
If you find suppuration in the patient and a yellowish fluid has collected, it may be necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot at the point between the Achilles tendon and the peroneal tendon.
And hold your hand with the cautery and do not move it, then lift your hand and do not incline it at all, for it will drain the yellowish fluid and the cautery brand will be on this shape.
Then you cauterize on the legs, two veins on each leg, and the incision is at the sides of the shin from the cautery brand, and the incision is along the length of one leg, one below the knee and another below it, near the middle of the leg, and on each thigh, two veins, two veins.
And leave the incision open without treatment for a long time, allowing the fluid to drain from it, then treat it with the other treatments we mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-three.
On Hemorrhoids.
If the hemorrhoids are due to cold and moist temperament, which weaken the retentive and attractive faculties in the stomach and intestines, and if they were treated with various remedies but did not recover, and you notice that the patient's natural strength has decreased, then apply a strong cauterization on his stomach. As mentioned earlier, cauterize the stomach with a circular branding iron and four branding irons around the navel, gentle with the Samarian branding iron, and a strong branding iron on the outer abdomen above the umbilicus or two branding irons.
If you notice that the moistness and weakness have increased, then apply a branding iron on the thigh and a branding iron on each hip, and perhaps add two small branding irons on the stomach near the large one; it is an effective treatment that will not harm him, God willing.
Chapter Thirty-four.
On Ulcers of the Anus.
If there are chronic ulcers in the anus, many or one, and they were due to cold and moist temperaments or corrupt humors, and you treated them with what we mentioned in the previous section, but the treatment did not benefit, then apply three branding irons on the lower back under the buttocks, slightly triangular.
And apply a branding iron under the navel, like two fingers, and if you suspect that his stomach is cold and his digestion is not good, and you notice his face is pale, then apply a strong branding iron on his stomach as mentioned earlier, and a branding iron on his liver. And another on his spleen with a Samarian branding iron, and leave the branding irons open for a period of time, then treat him until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter Thirty-five.
On Fistulas.
If you cut the artery, then grasp the needle that resembles a probe and insert it into the same artery that was cut, and move your hand until the needle reaches the mouth of the blood vessel from which the bleeding occurs; do this once or twice.
If there were many sutures, then place each one on what we have described, and treat it with the remedies that suit it until it heals. And if the swelling was also large on the wound, it would be more effective in the treatment.
Chapter 36.
On the incision that is in the perineum and its surrounding areas.
If the wound did not respond to the treatment and the operation that we described in its place, and you were forced to abandon it, perhaps it would heal by itself. If one of the incisions occurred and the foul pus came out, first what is necessary for you is to clean it with a fine syringe.
Then recognize the amount of pus with the syringe, then grasp the needle that resembles a probe and insert it into the same incision, on the straightness of the incision's mouth and the amount that was sucked in by the syringe, and repeat this on the wound until those foul bodies are completely evacuated, once or twice or thrice, according to your need.
And beware of damaging a nerve if it was there, or a large artery, and if the incision reaches the body of the bladder or the body of the spleen.
So beware of these places all, and do not do that unless the incision is in a fleshy area and you are certain it will not affect anything, then treat the place until it heals. If you close the place and cut off the supplies, and it remains like that for some time, then know that it has healed perfectly.
And if the supplies are not cut off, then know that it is affecting something or there is a rotten bone in its vicinity, or something similar that causes its putridity in that place.
Chapter 37.
On the removal of the kidney.
If there is a disease in the kidney and it becomes inflamed due to cold or rheumatism, and for that reason the function of urination is impaired, it is necessary to treat it with medications on the basis of the principles I mentioned earlier. Perhaps it may require a third type of medication in the same mixture, resulting in three potent medications that would be more effective in treatment.
Chapter 38.
On the removal of the spleen.
If there is a weakness and relaxation in the spleen due to cold and rheumatism, until it cannot hold the urine, it is necessary to treat it with medications at the bottom of the ribs on the spleen, where the hair of the navel grows, and one medication on the right side of the ribs and another on its left.
And it should be after the removal of the spleen from each side, according to the size of the elbow, and treat it with medications at the bottom of the spine or two medications if needed, and the mixture should be according to what I mentioned earlier.
Chapter 39.
On the removal of the womb.
If there is a disease in the womb due to cold and rheumatism, it becomes inflamed thereby affecting the ligament and causing its tendons to become dislocated, or it happens during menses, and it becomes inflamed; it is necessary to treat it with three medications around the ribs, as we mentioned in the removal of the spleen. And treat it with a medication on the pubic area below the spine or two medications, and the mixture should be according to what I mentioned earlier.
Chapter 40.
On the removal of the testicles.
Rheumatism may ascend to the testicles, causing them to deviate from their position, and its sign is that one thigh becomes longer than the other when some of it inclines towards the other, and you find an empty space in the place of the deviation; it is necessary to treat the disease on the testicle itself with a medication in the shape of a circle.
After you have learned about the cannula around the wound, as it revolves to place the cannula itself in the center of the circle and forms the shape that appears in the diagram of the instrument, if you do not prepare this cannula, it will be three canulas in the large surgical cannula.
You should tighten the cannula firmly to the extent of the thickness of the skin, then leave it until it heals, God willing.
The Surgical Instruments and the Forty-One.
In the canal of the nose.
If a wound occurs in the groin area and its cause is cold and moistures, and you treated it with what we mentioned in the previous section, but the treatment did not work, and it became chronic, it is likely that the wound will be difficult to treat due to the abundance of glutinous humors from the menses or the abundance of spermatic or similar matters.
Then there are three canulas: one is with the burning medications, and another is with the fire, and the one with the fire is on many ways, one of which is that it should be placed on the wound itself, three canulas in a triangular shape like this form.
And make for it a suitable cannula, and it will be after what is between each cannula and cannula, to the extent of the thickness of the finger, and the surgical cannula should be, and there will be four canulas, and if you wish, place them in the circle that we mentioned earlier in the chapter on surgical cannulas for the groin area, one cannula.
So that the circle surrounds all of the groin area and reaches the thickness of the entire skin, this is the shape of the cannula in the canal of the nose if the wound was limited to the groin area itself and did not extend to the thigh and leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, then place two cannulas on the thigh at the spot that indicates to you the direction of the wound, and one above the pubic area, four fingers towards the lateral side, a little, and make the surgical cannula Sakkiniyah, and make the thickness of the cannula according to the thickness of the skin only.
If the wound points to the direction of the man's fingers, treat it there with three or four stitches, or more if needed. And if the wound points below the knee towards the leg, treat it there with a single suture.
Be cautious in all your sutures not to pierce the skin to the extent of cutting an artery or a nerve, lest you cause a severe hemorrhage or a bad consequence.
I have seen a person who cut above the malleolus and pierced the skin, and then the leg was affected until it reached the ankle joint, and it caused all of the leg to become gangrenous, and eventually led to putridity and death. If the wound is in both places altogether, they will be affected in this manner, each with its own characteristics.
Some of the wise men among the physicians have mentioned that for the wound of the varicose vein, a cautery iron is made in the shape of a ring, its diameter being half a finger, and it should be applied at the mouth of the varicose vein, or slightly less, and inside that ring there are two or three more rings.
And it should be after what is between each of the two rings, at a distance of about a finger's joint, and the rings are open from both sides, and their height is about a finger or fingers, and an iron holder is taken for them, which is fitted into the rings, and this is its form.
Then it is heated in the fire until it becomes red hot, and then it is applied to the affected vein and the patient is lying on their sound side, so that three rounded sutures are made at one time, then it is left for three days, and it is dressed with rose oil and the wound is kept open.
Many times, then it is treated with the ointment until it heals. He said: I have written this book on this type of wound because it is rarely used for its severity and its bad appearance, and few are those who can endure it unless it is one of the good wounds that one can endure and be affected by it in its place.
When the eyelid is inflamed and it becomes like a ring that descends into it, gathering the eyelashes either from navel or from iron.
It will be at the edge of both, an elevation like a knob or their likeness, and it will be after what is between them, a thickness of the finger, and it will be open below and above, and some of it will have been touched by some on this shape.
Then, you will bring it down to the side of the hip and the curved instrument will rest on the healthy side, and you will hold your hand firmly, then you will pour between the two circles from the sharp water, which is cooled with the nail, and you will hold it for a quarter of an hour, and the curved instrument will be stable on its edge and its tip, and if it finds the edge as the nail.
When the edge becomes numb, then you will lift your hand with the instrument and wipe off the sharp water from the hip completely with gentle water, then you will leave it for three days and apply grease until the soreness disappears, and you will leave it for a few days until the pus comes out, for it is most effective in healing.
Then, you will treat it with ointments until it heals. If the pain reaches the thigh or the leg, you will make a poultice for it, holding the water as you did on the hip, and this is the description of the sharp water, which I have established in the chapter on repairing the inflamed eyelid.
You take from the salt of the glass and from the unburned tar, each one part, then you mix them together and put them in a new container that has been pierced with a small hole at its bottom, as much as the medication enters it, and you put under the container another perforated container.
And you pour on the glass and tar from the gentle water what covers them with a finger after you have held them firmly with your hand, and you leave the container until the sharp water collects at the bottom of the perforated container. Then, you gather all that water and pour it on another tar and another glass, also purified.
Here is the translation:
Galenos narrates about a man from among the ancients who treated the injury of the hip and the fracture of the thigh, and he was very precise in his treatment, and he claimed that he did not need anything else from the treatment, and that he would be cured with only one application.
It is possible that he might have entered the bath, and come out of it having been cured, and that he would take from the green vitriol; if the green was not found, he would take the new yttria, and mix it with a bit of fat, and apply it to the hip where the injury is, or on the thigh or on the leg.
And he would bind and leave it for three hours or as long as the patient feels the warmth of the application, then he would enter him into the bath; if his body was relaxed, he would put him in the basin; for the injury would disappear and he would be cured with the permission of God. If he did not cure, he would apply the dressing again after ten days, another time.
For he would be cured, God willing, and I knew that it is not proper to use one of these medicines unless after purging the body, and Dioscorides mentioned that if the hip joint was affected, it would benefit from it.
And the application would be on this manner: he would take a suffumigation and drink it in old oil, and apply it to the painful place that is between the thumb of the hand and the wrist, which is closer to the wrist, then he would take a handful of rough linseed.
He would heat it with fire until it becomes a paste, then he would put it on the suffumigation and leave it until it cools down, then he would take another one; do not cease to do that until the sensation reaches the middle of the joint to the hip, and the injury is eliminated with the permission of God. This type of application is called the poultice of the hip.
The Forty-Second Chapter.
On the wound of the back.
The wound of the back may occur due to various reasons, either from a fall or a blow or a severe contusion and the like, and it happens when a cold moist substance is poured on it, and the wound occurs in this category alone.
That which occurs from pouring a cold moist substance, it is necessary after the contusion to clean the affected area with a gentle touch and to anoint the place three times along the width of the bed itself, after anointing each spot with five or more wounds according to the severity of the contusion.
And the wound is treated with a small probe, and if necessary, three or four wounds are made with a small, moderately sharp instrument on this pattern.
The Fifty-Third Chapter.
On the wound at the beginning of the hump.
Many times this ailment afflicts small children, and the sign of its beginning in the child is that he feels shortness of breath when standing or moving, and you find on his back a lump that has appeared and surpassed other lumps.
If you see this and want to treat it, then treat it with an instrument in the shape of a circle on this pattern. Take the wound on each side of the lump with a gentle touch, and if necessary, make three or two wounds around the lump with a small probe, making the punctures close to one another, then treat the place until it heals as we mentioned.
And beware of using the wound on the hump that occurs from irritation of the nerve.
The Forty-Fourth Chapter.
On the wounds of gout and joint pains.
If the joint pains are due to cold moist substances poured onto any member of the body, then if the pains occur in the feet, it is the habit of the physicians to call that gout specifically.
If you treat the numbness of the cold tumor by the method we mentioned in the section and it does not respond to the treatment, then the doctor will move on to another approach, which is to cauterize after purifying around the joints of the two legs, multiple times, and the cauterization is a moderate one, as illustrated.
And if you need to cauterize on the face of the leg, then do it with a small cautery point, for the pain often ascends to the knees or to other joints, and many times this appears, so apply three or four cauteries on each side with this moderate cautery, at the same spot.
If you need to apply more than this number of cauteries, then do so, but do not penetrate deeply with the cautery, rather it should be close to the surface of the skin only. If the pain ascends to the loins or to the back, then use what we mentioned earlier about the cautery in its beginning.
If the pain is in the hands only, then cauterize around the wrists as you make a circle, if the pain remains in the fingers, then cauterize at each joint, one point on each finger, and on the palm of the hand. If the pain ascends after some days to the elbows or to the shoulders.
Apply the cauteries to them from each side, and do not neglect the regimen of good management and taking medications, for it is the best nourishment and purging the phlegm. Then, with this cautery, he will recover, God willing.
Chapter 45.
On Cauterization of the Fracture.
If a fracture appears in the hip and some of the veins and nerves have deviated to the thigh, and that has been recently initiated, it is necessary to order the patient to avoid eating on that day and to use from the purgatives what will help to evacuate the pus from its cavity.
Place your fingers on his back and instruct him to hold himself until he feels the rib or the spleen, then press with your fingers, and you will feel the pulsation below the armpit, on the bone of the shoulder blade, marked by a semicircular sign, its edges sloping upwards towards the upper arm.
Then make an incision according to this shape.
Until you reach the white Cartilage, then press on the spleen or rib to its concavity, and a servant places his hand on the spot so that he feels the spleen; and I have placed between the legs of the patient and positioned beneath it a pillow, and another servant holds onto his leg.
And another one on his chest holds his hand, then you make the incision on the same mark, and you hold the scalpel straight and steady until you reach the bone with it, or you may need to make another attempt if you didn't reach the bone at first.
And be cautious in your effort not to injure the spleen when you operate, lest you cause harm to the patient, either death or great damage. And know that if you didn't reach the bone with the scalpel, your operation will not succeed, and it is necessary for the incision of the young and the old to be gentle according to their strength.
Then treat the site of the incision after three days with rose oil until it forms a scab, then treat it with other medications until he recovers, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound heals.
And it is necessary to make his diet light during the treatment period, so that he doesn't strain his belly, lest the spleen be injured by excessive movement and exertion. Then, if he wants to get up after 40 days, use a tight bandage and apply it for another 40 days, and reduce the hardship and fatigue from food, drink, and severe sexual activity.
If he uses this method thus, it will be sufficient, God willing, and I shall mention the treatment of the rupture in the groin, God willing. As for the rupture that occurs in other parts of the abdomen and was previously treated, I intended not to add to it a circular scar corresponding to its size. And let him not remove any of the skin like a triangle, then suture it as we have mentioned, for it will not increase, God willing. Some of the ancients have mentioned that they used to treat the rupture with a triangular suture in this manner.
After you have applied the dressing to the rupture with compression, and made a line that is across from the top of the rupture, and another line downwards, and you bring your hand down in the middle with one single suture, and the first suture is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter 46.
On the Suturing of the Womb.
If a wound occurs in some of the organs due to a fall or a blow, and it becomes inflamed and remains so for a long time, and treatment with medicines does not benefit it, it may be necessary to treat it with a suture at the site of the wound, and each organ should be sutured according to its size, smallness, weakness, and strength.
And if the wound and the womb are freed from the first suture, it is sufficient, otherwise you return to suture it because it is customary for these wounds to transfer from one organ to another that is near it, so it is necessary to follow them with sutures until the patient recovers.
Chapter 47.
On the Suturing of the Wounds.
As for those who are wounded, they can benefit greatly from suturing, and it is not just a type of wound that occurs due to the collection of phlegm and bilious matter.
If you want to cut, look carefully, for the incision was begun as we described in the section on incisions, and it did not stray nor deviate, and it depended on the patient's condition that the damage would be restored to all its parts, so five stitches were applied to the head. One stitch was in the middle of the head, bent, and the second below it near the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the temples, and one from behind on the nape of the neck, and direct your hand with the needle slightly so that it affects the bone with a slight effect.
And you remove from it the roughnesses so that the thick vapors are not retained in it, and you sew a stitch also on the same vein, as mentioned earlier. And if the incision has extended onto the patient's condition and appeared obviously, it is necessary to sew these stitches that we mentioned in the head. A stitch on the tip of the nose, and two on the cheeks, and two on the neck vertebrae, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the coccyx at the junction of the tailbone, and another above it in the same row, and two on the loins, one on each side. And two on the kneecaps, one on each knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the ribs of the chest, and you sew a stitch on every joint of his fingers and toes, and on each ankle of his feet and wrists.
And beware of the nerve that is on the back of the ankles, lest you harm them. You may sew a stitch on the bone of the pelvis, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver. Know that every time you add a stitch, it is beneficial and effective.
And know that the patient does not feel the pain of the stitches as the healthy person feels it, because his body has become numb. And it is necessary for the sutures to be from the largest to the smallest according to the organs and joints, as mentioned earlier in the descriptions of the wounds.
Treat the patient gently with kindness and compassion, along with medication and other treatments, until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter 38.
When a patient's limb is injured and one of its members is injured, and it has been treated with medications and bandages, but did not recover, then return to the injured member according to what it deserves, whether the bone of the member is large or small, and be gentle in piercing the skin slightly.
Treat it with the proper treatment until he recovers, and be aware of some injuries that occur in the hands and feet at the points where the nerves exit from the back, which control movement in that member.
And no one can accomplish that except one who has been experienced in dissecting the members and knowing the exits of the nerves that control the body.
Chapter 49.
On Ulcers.
If you find that an ulcer has become chronic and no remedy from medical remedies has been effective, then perform a gentle operation on it, piercing the skin slightly to remove the whiteness and change its color.
Then treat it gently with a poultice of rose water and oak powder, or the powder of the flowers of the pomegranate, or the powder of the 'khataf', each part separately, and mix them all together and apply it to the ulcer, and bind the affected area until it recovers.
Chapter 50.
On Cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you want to stop it, treat it with a circular incision around it as it grows, and some wise men have mentioned that a severe treatment should be applied at its center, but I do not see that, because I believe that it will get worse, and I have seen that many times.
It is better to treat it around its perimeter with a circle as we mentioned, or with multiple small incisions.
The Section on Hernia and Hydrocele.
On the Treatment of Ulcers.
If a patient has an ulcer and it has become stagnant in its healing, either because of the excellence of the treating physician or because of the weakness of the natural heat, if he is old and has little blood, or because of the cold season, and you want to accelerate the healing of the ulcer, apply to it many small cups that are close together.
Then leave them (the cups) until they accelerate the healing; if you want to apply a dressing with them, take a clean cloth in the shape of this figure.
And apply it to the middle of the ulcer until the suppuration is completed, and the dressing will be separated from what is below, making it easy to remove the pus, then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
The Second Section on Hernia.
On the Treatment of Abscesses.
Abscesses, they are a putrid matter that collects in the member, and it is like the burning of the firewood. If you find an abscess in a place that can be treated with fire, apply many small and large cauterizing instruments according to what is suitable for that place where the abscess is.
Then cauterize it from every direction until the putrid matter is completely removed, and nothing of it remains. Then leave it for three days, and apply the burnt Kbrt (a type of ash) mixed with oil to the cauterized places, until the entire abscess and all its contents are evacuated.
Then treat it with soothing ointments for the wound, and if you see after three days that the flesh is growing soundly without any putridity, then return to cauterizing what remains of the abscessed places. You have treated the abscess with a sharp medicine.
It stands in the place of a abscess and I have mentioned its treatment with the sharp medicine in the incision, so take it from there whenever you need it.
Chapter Three and Fifty.
On the straight and curved incisions.
It often happens in the soles of these two feet, and it is a rough thing that hurts the man, and the incision in them is of two kinds, either an incision with a sharp instrument or an incision with a sharp medicine.
As for the incision with a sharp instrument, it is that you hold the curved scissors-like instrument, made of iron, to the extent that it surrounds the incision from every side, and its edge is thin, then you lower it gently onto the incision, then you move your hand with the scissors around the incision until the scissors reach the depth of the incision.
And leave it for three days, applying a dressing of rose-water and powdered borax, and leaving the dressing on overnight. Then it will separate from its roots, and you treat the place of the wound with the ointment of the meum, until it heals. If the incisions are not curved.
And it often happens on the surface of the body, not just in the hands and feet. It is necessary to take a tube made of copper or iron or scissors-like instrument and lower it onto the incision or the abscess, then you pour into the tube some of the sharp medicine.
And hold your hand and move it gently with the tip of your hand, so that you press the edge of the tube into the base of the incision, and the sharp medicine flows through to the bottom of the incision, and the instrument stays still for a little while on the surface of the sharp medicine for an hour.
Then leave it, for the incision will separate from its roots. Thus you do with each one individually until you reach all of them in the body, then you treat their places after they have separated with what grows new flesh from the meum.
The 54th Chapter.
On the fractured nose.
If a fracture occurs in one of the noses due to a blow on the nerve or from tetanus or something else, it is advisable to make four or five incisions on the back of the nose, with each incision being a finger's width apart, and one incision on its ridge. And if an incision is made on its ridge with the Zitonean scalpel, then the fracture will be relieved and the cold disease will be cured by soothing the inflamed skin.
The 55th Chapter.
On the incision for the abscess that occurs in the body.
It may happen that an abscess forms in the body as a result of cold, thick, and viscous materials, and it is advisable to make a small incision at the head of each abscess with a sharp instrument, either with the edge of a razor or with the long scalpel or with an Adasi scalpel.
And it may be that the abscesses are incised at their first onset in this manner, but they do not increase and the beneficial effect of the treatment is not obtained from them, unless it happens after the patient has been purged with a laxative.
The 56th Chapter.
On the incision for hemorrhage occurring due to cutting of an artery.
It often happens that bleeding of blood occurs from an artery that has been cut during a wound that is exposed externally or when an abscess is lanced or when a limb is amputated, and the like.
If something like that happens, hasten to put your finger on the mouth of the artery and press it with your middle finger, constricting until the blood is constricted under your finger and nothing comes out of it. Then place a Zitonean scalpel, small and large, and several others, on top of it until it becomes firmly stuck.
Then take one of them, either small or large, depending on the wound and the location where the artery is severed, and let the bleeding stop after you have pressed your finger on the artery with the forceps, and hold it until the blood flow stops.
If the bleeding recurs when you lift your finger from the mouth of the artery and the forceps slips, take another forceps with the forceps that are in the prepared narrows, and do not cease to do so one after another until the blood flow stops.
And be cautious not to tear the vessel, for there is a risk of another hemorrhage, and know that if blood flows from the artery, it cannot be stopped at all, unless it is one of the four approaches, either by compression, as we mentioned, or by cauterization, if it has not been ligated. For if it is ligated, its sides will be compressed and the blood flow will stop, or it may be bound with sutures, a tight and strong binding, or medications that are meant to cut off the blood and constrict with a strict constriction.
And whoever tries to stop it with a bandage or by constricting with a ligature or applying caustic substances and the like, it will not be stopped by that means at all, except in the case of a minor wound. If one of them appears and no doctor is present, then let him hasten to apply his finger on the mouth of the wound itself, as we described.
And press it firmly until the blood is constricted and stopped above the wound, and on the artery, and do not cease to apply cold water, intensely cold, continually, so that the blood is congealed and thickened, and stops. During that, consider what is needed from compression or medication.
The Second Chapter.
On incisions, cupping, and surgical operations, and the like.
Behind the ankle, we have mentioned in the previous section, a disease that is treated with cauterization and medication, and its symptoms and instruments, and pictures of the mallet, and we made it a separate chapter from the knee to the foot.
And we have reserved in this section that special treatment which is not easy for the student to achieve what he wants.
Before I start with that, it is necessary for you to learn, my sons, that this section has something superior to what is in the previous section about the disease.
And for that reason, it is necessary to be more cautious because the work in this section is very delicate and there may occur a severe hemorrhage from the blood that gives life when an artery is opened or a vein is cut, or a tumor is removed, or a surgical operation is performed, or a limb is amputated, or a similar thing, all of which are fraught with great danger and fear, and many of them lead to death.
And I advise you about the occurrence of resemblance in it, for it may happen to you in this profession that some people are deceived by various types of diseases, and among them is one who has been worn out by his illness and death has become inevitable for him.
The severity of what he finds from his disease and the length of his illness, and the signs that indicate death, and among them is one who conceals from you his wealth and deceives you with the hope of health and the termination of his disease, so it is not fitting for you to be deceived by those who have this deceitful character.
And I warn you more severely than I exhort you, and be cautious, and do not proceed with anything of that except after certain knowledge that confirms for you what leads to the desired outcome, and employ in all your disease treatments the presentation of knowledge and warning with what leads to safety.
For you will have in that a means of acquiring praise, glory, remembrance, and gratitude. May God guide you, my sons, to the right path and not mislead you, for He is the One Who guides, there is no god but He.
I have dedicated this chapter to what I have presented in the previous chapter on the knee, from the ankle to the foot, so that you may find what you want from it, God willing.
The First Chapter
On the treatment of the fluid that gathers in the heads of children.
For this swelling often occurs in children at birth if the womb presses on the child's head without gentleness, and it may also occur due to a hidden cause that is not recognized.
I have not seen this condition in anyone other than children, and all whom I have seen among them quickly succumb to death. Therefore, I have seen the abandonment of work on it, and I have seen a child whose head is filled with fluid, and the head increases in size every day. Until the child is no longer able to support himself due to the greatness of his head and the swelling increases until he dies.
And this swelling is either between the skin and bone, or beneath the bone on the periosteum. The operation for it is that if the swelling was between the skin and bone and the tumor was small, it would be sufficient to make a single incision in the middle of the head, about a finger's length, until the swelling subsides, and this is the description of the operation.
For if the swelling was greater and the tumor was larger, then make two intersecting incisions in this manner:
And if the swelling was beneath the bone, and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head open from every side, and the fluid flows down when you press on it with your hand, and do not hide that from yourself. Then it is sufficient to make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this manner:
And after the incision, all of the swelling is evacuated. Then you stitch the incisions with sutures and bandages, and apply a compress above them with rose water and oil until the fifth day. Then you remove the dressing and treat the wound with ointments and medications, and do not bind the head too tightly, and nourish the patient with light, easy-to-digest foods that reduce the swelling.
Before the member is strong and healthy, and another aspect of the fracture that you should examine is where the bone of the tumor appears, and the gathering of the water, because it may be in the back of the head more or in its front or on the right side or on the left.
You should examine the fracture where the tumor appears to you, and the gathering of the water, so you should cut it according to what is possible for you, and be cautious not to cut a vein, lest you cause bleeding in the patient's death from that bleeding with the pouring out of the blood vessel.
The Second Chapter.
Cut the two arteries that are behind the two known veins, called the sensual ones.
When a severe hemorrhage occurs to the eyes or to the chest, and you try that but do not find in it a cure with medicinal treatment, then inform that the cure in that case is cutting these two arteries.
Then, if you want to cut them, you should shave the patient's head with a razor, then scrape the area with a rough cloth until the artery appears, and then tighten the patient's neck with a band, and then look where the pulse is, and its two hidden positions behind the ears, and reduce what you hide except in some people.
Then, you should mark them with a marker, and then cut them with a scalpel, cutting to the bone, and that would be at the width of the head, and if you wish, you insert the scalpel from underneath the artery and lift it up above by cutting, and the length of the cut would be around two fingers.
For if the artery is cut, the blood would gush out in a pulsating manner, flowing to the front and the back, repeatedly. If the artery does not appear to the sense, it is necessary that you feel from the ears after a distance of three fingers, then mark with the marker, and cut to the bone, which is what is necessary.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
The patient should be placed in a seated position, and the surgical incision should be made with a catan knife, then pressed upon with a compress until the bleeding stops.
Chapter Three.
The two arteries in the temples.
If a person suffers from chronic or acute vertigo due to intense heat or cold in the temple muscles, or severe and persistent headache, and was treated with various medical treatments but did not respond, we have tried in these cases to ligate the arteries of the temples or cauterize them as we have described.
The goal of the operation is to ligate the vascular branch that supplies the hair in the temples, and to target the visible artery in the temple, so that it becomes apparent to you from its pulsation and the decrease in what is hidden, except for some people.
Or when the cold is severe, it becomes hidden from you, so you should stretch the vascular branch with your finger by feeling its pulsation, then you should touch the spot with a cold instrument or compress the spot with hot water until the artery appears clearly and visibly. Then take the surgical instrument that is designed for this purpose. Then insert it through the skin gently until you reach the artery, then ligate it with a thread and pull it upwards until you extract it from the skin and free it from the fasciae that are underneath it from every direction; if the artery is fine, you should wrap it with the tip of the ligature. Then cut a part of it according to the extent of its two ends and constrict it, but do not cause bleeding; if it does not separate and is not cut, the blood will not flow normally; then evacuate the blood from six or seven outlets.
If the artery is large, it should be ligated in two places with a strong thread, whether from a silken cord or from the tendons of the bow, so that the putrefaction does not spread to it before the wound heals, and bleeding occurs.
You should cut the excess flesh between the sutures at that time or later, and if you need to shave off the bone with a scalpel until its edges are prominent, then take your stand to perform this task alone or better, as we have said.
If the patient has a fever or a bad temperament, because the doctor's attention is distracted from treating the patient's condition, and he should hurry to apply the appropriate treatment to the affected area with a gentle touch, and after the inflammation has subsided, he should treat it with topical medications that promote healing of the flesh, and through massage until recovery, if God wills.
If a hemorrhage occurs during your operation, hurry to compress the artery either with your finger or by applying a pledget and tighten your hand until the bleeding stops; if you are not prepared for that, place your finger until the blood is stanched.
Apply cold water to the affected area until the bleeding stops and tighten it as needed, and what is easier and more convenient than compressing the artery is to shave off the vein with this scalpel having a serrated edge after you have cleaned the area with a dressing.
And shave it off thoroughly until you reach the bone, and the vein is cut in two places, so that what is between them becomes detached, for it will not hold together with this scalpel, and this is a picture of the scalpel.
The edges of the serrated scalpel are like small scissors, except that they are much sharper than the usual scalpel, because if they were not as sharp as the scalpel, they would not cut quickly and the flesh would not be severed swiftly; thus, if there is some coagulation, they hold it with the heat of the cautery.
The flesh is cut quickly, and this task is better than every task, easier and more convenient; let the amount of coagulation between the sutures be according to the thickness of the finger.
The Fourth Section.
On the treatment of chronic conjunctivitis and its permanent damage to the eyes.
If the conjunctivitis is chronic and its origin is from the veins that are on the surface of the brain from outside, and it does not benefit from any treatment with medications, and you see the patient's condition has worsened. And he feels a heavy numbness in his forehead like the numbness of a limb, and his eyes are cloudy, their brightness has been obscured, and their sparkle has been extinguished due to the severity of the conjunctivitis. The physicians have despaired of treating it up to this point, and they call it the treatment by cauterization, which is to burn the hair follicles on the forehead of the patient.
Then, make three parallel incisions on the forehead, each about a finger's length, with one incision aligned with the middle of the nose, the second slightly away from the movement of the muscle in the temple, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to cut the two arteries that are in the sides, and keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws, and after each incision, make a compression with three fingers together, and have with you a cutting instrument or a sharp scalpel that cuts off the blood vessels.
Then, insert the sharp-pointed instrument whose picture is this. From the incision that is near the temple to the middle incision, and scrape with it all the flesh that is between the two incisions, along with the periosteum that is on the bone. Then, do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, then withdraw this instrument. And insert into the first incision another instrument, a sharp scalpel with one edge and a blunt edge on the other side, and this is its picture.
Here is the translation:
Then you should do that in the middle vein to the other vein, and after the blood flow has stopped, the congealed blood is removed from the cut ends of the blood vessels. Then, a piece of cloth is placed on each vein, and a bandage is applied with vinegar or rose water.
Perhaps a fever will occur and it will be hot on the third day, the bandage is removed and much of the poultice is used with rose water. Then, the surgeon treats it gently with basilic ointment and other things until it heals, God willing.
The Fifth Chapter.
On treating hemorrhages and fluxions to the eyes from the inner part of the head.
When many severe, painful, and constant fluxions occur to someone, and he sees two small ulcers in his eyes, and his vision is weakened, and the eyelids are inflamed, and the eyelashes fall out. And it is in the depth of the head and there is a severe, painful, and chronic suppuration, and you know from these symptoms that those materials and fluxions are coming from many deep-seated roots. And the best treatment for them is this treatment: you order the patient to be laid down on his back, then make an incision in the middle of the forehead.
And it is in the depth of the head and there is a severe, painful, and chronic suppuration, and you know from these symptoms that those materials and fluxions are coming from many deep-seated roots. And the best treatment for them is this treatment: you order the patient to be laid down on his back, then make an incision in the middle of the forehead. Or you elevate it a little to the side and make an incision from the left temple to the right temple, and the incision reaches the bone, and you keep your hand away from the moving muscles of the temples when biting, until the bone is exposed and all the blood is stopped with the sponges.
You separate the edges of the incision with cotton or a piece of cloth, then you press from above with bandages and sprinkle the bandages with vinegar and rose water, lest a fever occur, and when it is loosened and you see that the fever has subsided, it is necessary to touch the bone until the flesh begins to grow.
Retracting the skin with the curved instrument that is used to scrape the flesh, such as taking from the thinness of the cannula, four parts, and it is made into a handle and used in scraping the flesh in these surgeries.
The Sixth Chapter
For the treatment of what falls in the ears.
All that falls in the ears is of four types: either a mineral stone like iron and glass, or plant material like chamomile and olive, and their like, or a fluid substance like water and vinegar and their like.
And if it is an animal, when it falls in the ears, a type of insect or genus of insects that do not dwell in the ears, then direct the ear towards the sun and if you see the insect, try to get it out by shaking the head or wiggling the ear with the index finger. And stop the nostrils when the treatment is over, after you have put a ring around the ear with a strip of cloth or a lock, and extend the ear to above the jawbone; if it does not come out with this treatment, then try to get it out with a delicate hook, whose shape is like this.
If it does not come out with the hook, then try to get it out with a very fine and curved forceps, little bent; if it does not come out with that, then make a tube from a copper wire and insert one end of the tube into the ear hole, exactly.
And stop what is around the tube with a grease made from deer's fat, so that the air has a path other than the tube; then pull it out with a strong and repeated pull, for many things come out by this. If it does not come out with what we have described, then take one of the sharp pointed instruments or the curved instrument that is used to take out a small thing from the canal.
After wrapping it with a thick compress, then insert it into the nostril gently after drying the nose of its moisture, if it does not come out with all that we have described, hasten to make an incision before the abscess forms or becomes inflamed.
The method of making an incision is to stop the flow of blood in the veins, first, and then to release it from the vein according to its strength, and then to hold the vein between your fingers and bend the nose upwards and make a small incision at the base of the nostril where it meets the depressed area.
And the incision should be semilunar in shape until you reach the mucosa, then remove it with whatever instruments are available to you, and then quickly sew up the incision from the inside, and treat it until it heals.
And if the broken bone in the nose is from one of the gristle that are collected and swollen, try to extract it as we have mentioned, and if it does not come out for you, then take a thin, fine rasp on this pattern.
And try to cut that type of broken gristle in the nose, and only do that if you are certain that the gristle has been hardened by the vapor of the nose until it becomes many small pieces, then remove them with a fine forceps or a thin file or a rasp.
As we have mentioned, it will be easy to remove them, and regarding the fluid inside the nose, it is fitting that a thick vein should be used with a cotton pad, and has filled his nose with some of the soft cotton, which is pressed onto that nostril in which there is fluid, so that it comes out.
And then you take many small pieces along the length of the fingers, smooth and thin, and heat them a little with fire, and insert one of them into the nostril, and move it around on that side, and strike another stone against the stone that is in the nose.
He should not do that until all the fluid has come out, and it may come out by taking it from the vein or from one of the ribs, and inserting one end into the ear and bending the other end towards the fire until it becomes very hot, then another rib is inserted.
He should do that repeatedly until all the fluid comes out or is sucked in by the tube, as mentioned earlier in the section on surgical instruments. As for extracting the internal organs, look and see if it is a small creature like a lizard and its ilk, and treat it according to what I mentioned in the chapter on dissection.
If its body is large and visible to the sense, then try to extract it with the forceps and scissors, and order him to make it easier than all that is stuck in the ear, and as for extracting the worms that are born in the ear, if you treat them according to what we mentioned in the chapter on surgical instruments in the article on extracting worms, your treatment will not fail.
Then look into the ear in the sunlight, and if you see something of the worms, extract it with the forceps or the gentle scissors; if you do not see any of them, take a tube of this shape.
Narrow below and wide above, and insert the thin end into the ear to the extent that the patient can tolerate it, then pour strongly; do that repeatedly until all the worms come out. If they do not come out for you, plug around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you in the section on surgical instruments.
If they do not come out by what I mentioned, then use the instruments that I mentioned, and the ancients have tried them in killing worms, and you will find that in the article on extracting worms, and it will be the pouring of medicines into the ear with this device and its shape.
As you see, it is made from silver or copper, narrow below and wide above, with a small hole in it. And if you want the rod that is inside the tube to be of copper, strongly fixed, and if you want, take a rod and wrap a thread around its end, firmly fastened.
Then you should touch the tonsils or the uvula or whatever of these medicines you want to use in the tube, and it is in the ear; then you should insert the cotton swab from above and twist it with your finger, twisting it gently until the medicine reaches the bottom of the ear canal and you feel it.
Into the ear canal, and let what you pour into the ear be warm or lukewarm, and beware lest it be very cold or very hot, for the ear cannot tolerate that.
The Seventh Chapter.
On Treating Painful Ears.
Some children may be born with their ears not fully formed and their hearing incomplete.
And it may also happen to some people that they experience pain in the ear canal due to a wound or a hidden abscess, and this pain may be deep inside the ear canal and not visible to the eye.
And it may protrude slightly outside the canal and be visible to the eye; what occurs deep inside the ear and is not visible to the eye is usually more difficult to treat, and what is visible to the eye can benefit from placing the affected ear in the sun. And look into it, if you see the pain manifest, then open it with a gentle medicine that has this form:.
It should have a gentle medicine on one side, limited and enclosed, with the other part smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear; if the pain was due to an abscess that had formed in the ear canal, then massage it gently with a moderate pressure until all the pus is extracted.
If the pain is deep in the ear, take a gentle cotton swab, smooth and soft, and dip it in warm water, then insert it into the ear canal; if you feel the pain with what the cotton swab finds of the heaviness of the hearing, remove it with gentle pressure.
Be cautious not to injure the artery, then make a perforation in the artery, making an incision commensurate with the size of the orifice that has been injured in the Egyptian method. Do it in this way until you are certain of the security of the incision or take out the incision and soak it in water and apply a dressing with ointment.
And use it, if you see the artery has become swollen and inflamed, it is necessary to extract the incision and replace it with another one that has been treated in a cooling way, made with rose-water, until the inflammation subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If a hemorrhage occurs, apply a cold sponge or a piece of cloth soaked in cold water to the artery and use other treatments that stop the aforementioned hemorrhage, as described in the chapter on bleedings.
Chapter Eight
On the treatment of ulcers that appear on the lips.
These ulcers that appear on the eyelids may be humid and putrid, it is necessary to dry them with a powder or a collyrium and to remove their roots, then apply a dressing with ointment to the affected area.
If a hemorrhage occurs from them, stop it with a gentle, soft, and fine adhesive, and treat it better after the incision, for often something remains of its roots, and if you burn them with cauterization, those roots are destroyed and do not return.
Chapter Nine
On the treatment of ringworm on the eyelids.
Often something appears on the eyelids that resembles ringworm in its intensity and whiteness.
And therefore, it was named ringworm, which is a gathering of thick, humid matter in the upper and lower eyelids. The operation for it is to examine it, and if the ringworm appears prominent on the surface of the eyelid, move it gently towards every direction, then make an incision transversely.
Then extract it from every direction, gently until it is freed, then tie it with the suture and cut it. If you are not able to cut it except after the scalpel has been applied to the incision, do not worry about the damage it causes, for if the wound is large, apply a compress and bandage until it heals.
And if it is small, do not worry about it, for the abscess will burst and open it. If the abscess is inclined inward towards the inner surface of the wound, turn the scalpel and tie the abscess with a suture without needing to make an incision or extract it from every direction.
For if you apply the scalpel to the incision, it will not harm that at all. Then wash the eye with salty water after cutting the abscess and treat the site with what will heal the wound until it recovers.
The Tenth Chapter.
On the treatment of the cataract that appears in the eye's pupil.
The cataract is a cloudiness that occurs in the upper layers of the eye's pupil, and it often affects the young, weighing down their eyes and causing them to be unable to look at the sunlight. Because the vision hurries away from them.
And therefore you see them always casting their eyes down and upon it they sleep, and their eyelids are relaxed under the eyebrows, soft and having a gentle touch, and the cataract is apparent to the observers. And when you place your fingers on the site, you feel the cataract between them, and the direction of the work is to make the patient rest their head in your lap.
Then take a delicate thread and spin from it a fine filament, and make from that filament a circle of the size that surrounds the cataract from every direction. Then place it on top and press with your fingers from every direction to gather the cataract in the center of the circle.
Make a incision in the middle of that abscess, at the site of the nodules, an incision across, and do not make the incision larger than the one that is made in the fascia. And it is necessary to incise the whole skin until you reach the carapace.
In most cases, the carapace appears from the incision like a white fatty piece, so you grasp it with a hook that you have wrapped between your fingers and extract it outward while moving your hand to the right and left until you feel it settle, and beware of increasing the incision lest the nodules should retract into the eye.
If the carapace does not appear to you at first incision, it is necessary to increase the incision slightly with gentleness until the carapace appears, then grasp it as we have said, and then insert a dressing in the wound and water, and apply it to the site, and bandage it with a compress; some people use a salty application.
And put it in the hollow of the incision to dissolve what remains of that abscess, then treat it until it heals; if there is a relapse at the site and a hot painful swelling occurs, treat it with the constricting bandage until it heals.
The Twelfth Operation.
On the treatment of cataract of the eye.
If a growth appears on the eyelid, an additional layer on top of the natural layers beneath, and it grows, then it harms the eye and causes many diseases such as constant tearing and relaxation of the eyelids, and whitishness and opaqueness, until it becomes a reason for the blindness of the eye.
And the treatment of the eye has four aspects: either by couching, or by applying a sharp medicine, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on couching, or that the treatment is by cutting and stitching, or by application of a blister, as I have mentioned.
Place the patient's head on a stone, then bend your left knee and insert a thread from below the eyelid, and pass the needle with the thread from above, making it close to the hair itself, and pull the thread upwards by the eyelid.
And bend it with the file, then make an incision in the inner canthus of the eyelid, avoiding the excess hair at the nasal angle from the larger to the smaller, then release the thread and place a small roll under the eyelid of cotton or lint, then fix it on the eyelid with the adhesive.
Like the shape of a page of paper, except that it is necessary for the shape to be according to how much you want to lift the eyelid, because people may differ in this, and some may need to cut from the eyelid a suitable amount according to how much the eyelid relaxes.
And some may need to cut less, all according to the relaxation of the eyelid. Then, make an incision at the nasal angle along the two lines you marked, starting from the larger canthus to the smaller one, and let the single incision be close to the natural hairline, like the thickness of a file.
Then, insert the forceps in one of the angles of the eyelid, and extract it all, then gather the edges with a suture using a fine silk thread and needle, and clean the blood, and remove what remains of the threads from the eyebrows with some suitable instruments.
You should do that, and if not, then it's of no consequence. Then, leave the suture and threads for about three or four days, and then remove them. And if you left the wound without suturing and removing the threads, which causes it to dry up and contract, then the eyelid will elevate when the wound is closed and gathered, and the suture is better.
This method of operation, mentioned by the ancients, is that it has a disadvantage on the eyelid, and it is one of the good works with no danger in it. And another method in operation is to mark on the eyelid a shape like a page of paper, as we described. The flaps of the forehead are dissected into three branches which are separated or gathered in this manner:
Then you cut what remains of the forehead with small scissors on this pattern, cutting with moderation:
If you cannot hold the branches and did not get a good grip, take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the shape, and insert another thread near the larger wound, and a third thread near the smaller wound, and gather the threads between your fingers with moderation, then lift them with your hand, lifting with moderation.
And raise the flap that is marked on it all as we have described, then gather the edges of the wound with sutures and adjust them until it heals. If you encounter a inflamed or painful tumor during your incision or cutting, then evacuate that tumor with the evacuators and remove it from the suppurating tumors.
It may happen that the lower forehead also needs to be treated, so you should use what we mentioned earlier about incision, suturing, and cauterization with fire or medication, and be more gentle on the patient than the incision, suturing, and cauterization. Make it a habit to be gentler in using these methods.
Cauterization with a scalpel is done in this manner: you turn the flap and make an incision from the inside according to what we described, then create two thin, fine, and long scalpels that extend along the length of the forehead and their width is less than the width of the incision.
And you may have cut at the edges of both sides where the threads are tied, then gather them gently according to what remains of the forehead's edge, and pull the scalpels from both sides strongly and tightly, and leave it for a while. Then the raised flap will die, become black, and fall off.
Until it falls off by itself, then you should apply a poultice to the affected area, and treat it until it heals. If the forehead rises and does not hollow out the eyes' cavities, this is an image of the scalpels made in this shape and this size in length and width:
The Twelfth Chapter.
On removing the ingrown hair from the eye with a needle.
If it is a hair or two, the work in this case is to take a fine needle and insert a thread of fine silk, then gather its ends and tie them with a very fine knot, and let the length of the thread be about a finger.
Then, you set up another fine thread in the forceps, and tie its ends if you need to, then the doctor places his head on a stone and lets it be near the sun so that the work is clear, for it is a delicate operation; then, you insert the needle in the forceps at the root of the excessive hair.
And you extract it with the forceps quickly until it comes out from above the natural hair, then you pull the thread up to the forceps and insert into the forceps that hair if it was one or two or three, no more.
Then, you pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the forceps in the forceps along with the natural hair; if you pulled the forceps and did not get the hair out with it, you pull the forceps down to the bottom with the thread that you had set up in it until the forceps come out of the upper hole.
Then, you return the hair to its place and pull it out, doing that until it is raised in the upper hole and you see it in the eye; then, you release the forceps and the thread, and remove them, and compress the eye and leave it compressed for two or three days until the hair settles in its place and the flesh grows over it.
If the hair was short, then you can either add a long hair from the natural hair to it and raise it with it, or leave it until it grows longer after a period, and then you raise it.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
On the treatment of the fracture that occurs in the upper jawbone above the eye.
The fracture that is exposed to this injury is called a rhinopyosis, and this fracture is either natural or traumatic. The traumatic one occurs from a blow, a fall, or something similar.
The method of treatment is to split the impacted area and separate the fragments, then place a thin layer of cotton between them, and bind it tightly until it heals. It is not appropriate to use constricting or compressing materials in its treatment.
If you did that, the fracture would return worse than it was. Instead, use relaxing materials like bandages and wet compresses with rose water that has been cooled, and apply them to the affected area, and treat it accordingly.
And the goal of treating it is to strive by every means not to restore the fracture to its original shape, but rather this treatment that we mentioned is only for repairing the fracture, not to return the affected area to its original state.
Chapter Fourteen
On the treatment of the fracture that occurs in the lower jawbone.
This fracture, which occurs in the teeth, is truly called a fracture and is either natural or traumatic. The traumatic one occurs from a blow, a split, or something similar.
And the method of treatment is to take a needle with a thread and pierce it into the flesh, then pass it from the left side to the right side until the thread is in both sides of the flesh, then pull the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a sharp razor.
If the shape of the jawbone returns to what is desired, then take a small rod and place it on the site of the fracture, and bend the jawbone around it, and make two grooves in the inner side of the jawbone, and the edges of the grooves will be at an angle from the cutting edge that was cut, until they meet and form an angle. When it is necessary to unite the fractured parts in a shape similar to this shape:
It is the Greek letter lambda, then remove that flesh to the extent that the sharp edge of it is below what is above the gums, then gather the scattered parts with two sutures, suture with a soft suture, then treat it with the mentioned medications and bandages until it heals.
And if the wound was exposed from a splint or a suture or a dressing, it is necessary to make a simple splint without the hair of the eyelashes also, as mentioned before, then separate between the lips with a bandage as mentioned.
The phrase concerning the treatment of the wound, whether it is from above or from below, is to work according to what is apparent to you from the condition of the wound, for it may have many differences in appearance, and the clever surgeon will manage the trick in any way he can.
So that it returns to its natural shape or approaches it, and the same disease guides you on what is suitable for it from the work and instruments in most cases.
Chapter Fifteen
On the adhesion of the eye's eyelid with the conjunctiva or with the cornea.
This adhesion may appear to many people, where the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye, preventing it from easy movement and obstructing its natural functions, so it is necessary to insert a thin instrument under the eyelid.
And lift it up or extend it with a hook, then cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel that is not sharp enough to cut the surrounding tissues, but rather gentle so as not to irritate the eyelid during the operation, and make the incision as if you are releasing that adhesion.
And stop until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the adhesion is completely healed, then apply a dressing to the eye with a milky liquid or inject it with a solution of zinc ointment mixed with water, then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a bandage.
Place a compress of egg white on the eye, and after three days, use the twisted lint until it heals.
The Sixteenth Chapter
On cutting of the nails and removing of the corns.
For the nails are of two types: either they are nervous, resembling a solid, thin, white splint, or they are not nervous, resembling a hard, white, compact pustule; if you touch it with the iron or grasp it with the forceps, it splits.
And do not fix the forceps in them, and both types, it starts from the larger corn to the point where it gradually covers the sight and obstructs the light and movement of the eye, and the goal of the operation is to place the patient's head on your chest.
Then he opens his eyes and raises the eyelid with your hand, then you grasp the nail with a small forceps and extend it upwards, then you take a needle and insert a hair from the horse's or cow's tail and thread it strongly, and bend the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into the middle of the nail.
And you perform it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread, and extend it upwards, and pull out the hair from the side of the nail that is near the corn, as if you are pulling it to its end, then you cut the remaining part at the base of the corn with a small scalpel or small scissors, and leave the natural moisture of the corn.
So that the one who is performing it may not be exposed to cutting of the sensitive part of the nail, and has extended the nail with the forceps or with the thread as we have mentioned, then he pulls out with the smooth scalpel, the tip of which is illustrated here:
And be careful not to touch the scalpel to the corneal membrane, lest it causes a perforation and the corn is not removed; then after cutting, you apply to the eye something of salt or of zinc ointment and leave it until the next day, then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
If the nail is not numb and you cannot insert a needle in it or fix a splint, it is often treated with medications as described in the chapter on wounds, and if you want to amputate it, open the eye of the scalpel.
Take a blunt scalpel, its edge being slightly curved on this model:. Scrape the nail from above with a blunt scalpel, and if you see that it is loosening and separating, and the scraping has only an effect on the outer layer, then look at it in the eye of the Zanjari or red scalpel, or the scalpel with a curved edge, and fix your eye until another day.
Then, return to work on it until all of it goes away, except that if you encounter an obstacle in the eye and a painful swelling appears, leave it and treat the painful swelling until it heals, then return to work on it with the scalpel until it is healed, and do not neglect to ligate the vein.
If the vein is hurting the eye, then ligate that vein with a splint and cut off some of it, but do not make the cut too deep lest there be an hemorrhage, then cauterize with the red scalpel or the Zanjari until it heals.
Chapter Seventeen.
On excision of the pterygium and what grows from the excess flesh in the eye.
It may grow in the eyes of some people a red, fleshy, overlapping tissue until it covers the pupil or approaches it or overhangs on the eyelids and perhaps turns them outward, resembling a pomegranate.
The operation for it is to place the scalpel's head in a suitable position, then open your eye and grasp that entire red flesh with suitable forceps.
Or hold it with a hook or forceps, then cut the first flesh, and continue to cut until you remove all of it by cutting, and be cautious not to harm the eye during the operation. Your cutting should be either with a blunt scalpel which we described in the section on nail cutting, or with small scissors. The thread is cut by the splint according to its form in the wound which is above this chapter.
If the cutting is complete and all the bleeding has stopped, apply to the eye a medicine that is not sharp or irritating, such as rose water or a red powder, and place on the eye from the outside a white dressing to prevent the formation of a painful swelling.
If some of the bleeding remains and the blood accumulates, and the painful swelling forms, then leave the eye alone and treat it with something that will reduce the swelling; then return to working on it until it heals. And likewise, remove the excess flesh that appears in the eye from this type.
It is necessary for you to avoid treating any weak eye by way of cauterization or by way of performing surgery with an iron instrument, and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member is capable of receiving that treatment.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
Removing the splint from the eye.
The splint is a red thread that is tied on the eye, preventing vision and weakening the eye over time. It is necessary for you to examine first, because if the eye in which the splint was placed was strong and did not have another disease besides the splint.
So, the removal of the splint is that you order the assistant to put his head on a stone, then tie those threads with one or two ligatures according to your skill, and make the ligatures gentle and not tight in this manner.
Or they are two paired ligatures on a single body in this manner.
Then, you remove the threads with a gentle scissors, and wipe away the blood until you see the eye has been freed from those threads and the blood has stopped. Be careful not to harm the eye with the edges of the scissors, and let your work be at noon, away from the sun.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Here is the translation:
The surgeon should put his finger on the opening and carefully feel the whole area until it reaches the membrane, and not cut the tendon, for the bleeding and the bleeding is harmful to you.
Then cut with the forceps what exceeds on the eyelid from above and below until nothing remains attached to the eye socket, for it is possible for you to lift it off the eye socket with a surgical instrument, which is better, and may be suitable for some people.
If you have cut it, let its place be at rest, and do not touch it or move it until the painful swelling subsides, then return to work on it.
The 19th Chapter.
On the treatment of the fracture of the nose.
The physicians call the fracture of the nose 'nasicora', if you treated it with a bandage or with a harsh and painful remedy, according to what has been mentioned and described, and it did not heal, there is no trick in it except that you should make an incision on the swelling when it becomes ripe, and extract all the pus that is in it.
Until the bone is exposed, and if you expose the bone and see in it a fissure or a depression, then scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
And it is called the rasp of the head, made from Indian iron, and its head is rounded like a file, with an engraving on it like that of a scalpel or a razor, delicate engravings. You place it on the site of the fissure in the bone, then hold it between your fingers and move your hand slightly until you feel that the fissure has been smoothed.
And do that repeatedly, then apply the drying and constricting medications to the site, so that the site will scar over, and flesh will grow in it, and the bleeding will stop, and 40 days will pass without anything new happening, and no relapse will occur, and no incident will happen.
Be aware that it has healed, and if not, there is no trick except to return the nasal bone to its hole in this manner: you expose the bone again with the iron or with the harsh remedy, so if you expose the bone, take a shaped instrument like this shape:
Here is the translation:
When the surgeon feels it is coming out, if he presses his hand on his nose, then at that moment he should force the bleeding spot with the compressing bandages, as I have taught you. And if he cuts the flesh and tightens the area, then the matter that was flowing outward will return to its natural place, and that will be easier on the patient, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
Treatment of the Eye.
If you treat the eye with its entirety and no damage occurs in the vision, nor any defect, it is hoped that the patient will be relieved. Then you should bandage it lightly and put a compress on the eyelid from the outside without pressure, and apply a gentle medicine.
Then you put on the eye a poultice made from acquaqia and tar and lanolin and rose water. Then you fasten the eye from above onto the compress with many advantages, and the advantage of the compress is that it takes away the inflammation little by little, so every bit of it is removed in four ways, making many of them.
Then you put one on top of the other according to what the eye needs, then you fasten it with a strong bandage, and reapply the compress with gentle medicine without pressure. Then you remove the compress and leave the eye bandaged for a day and a night.
If the bandage becomes loose during that time, it is hoped that you will tighten it well. Then remove the bandage after a day and a night as we mentioned earlier. If you see that the eye has relapsed, repeat the compress, the advantages, the tightening, and the bandaging until it returns to its natural state.
Chapter Nineteen and Twenty-Eight.
Treatment of the Hernia.
If a hernia appears in the umbilical region, then you treat it and it protrudes outside the abdomen like an umbrella shape, and its image is that of a human being, so I want to cut it off. The operation on it is according to what I have described.
You should insert a needle into the basis of the hernia from below upwards, then you should insert another needle with a thread attached to it from the side of the affected part and pass it through, while keeping the first needle in its position.
Then you should cut the thread at the place of the knot and tie some of the hernia around the needle, pulling it strongly, then you should remove the needle and apply a compress of egg white to the eye, leaving it until the threads come out with the hernia, then you should treat the eye with what soothes it.
Until the wound heals, and the hernia is constricted from all sides with a circular bandage until the eye is in its normal position, then you should apply a gentle compress that reaches the inner corner of the eye, so the whiteness returns to its place, and the eye settles into its socket, and it is constricted until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On the treatment of cataracts.
This ailment, called cataract, is a cloud that gathers in the eye, resembling descending water but not actually being so, and the method of operation is to sit the patient on a chair, upright, then take their head between your hands from both sides.
And you shake it until you see the cloud settle at the bottom of your eye, then you stop and do not move, and the light is released and the patient sees the things as they were before, and if it does not settle to the bottom, we know that it is not water, for it did not settle according to what we mentioned.
And if so, you sit the patient between your hands, then take a fine instrument and make an incision above the corneal membrane, slightly at the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane in the sclera, until the humour comes out.
If only water comes out of the eye, whether it is hot water that has mixed with the vitreous humour or water that has accumulated in it and become cold, then you should treat it with other treatments until it heals.
The 23rd Section.
We have mentioned the types of water in the previous section, and which ones are suitable for dropping into the eye with a spoken explanation, so it is taken from there to be used for treatment. Then, it is necessary to hold the small bottle between your hands opposite the light, near the sun.
And you will hold the small bottle firmly with your hand, then you will tilt the eyelid of the eye with your left hand if the water is in the left eye, or with your right hand if it is in the right eye.
Then you will place the tip of the dropper near the eyelash with a gentle movement in the white of the eye from the side of the smaller angle, then you will push the dropper with force and you will direct it with your hand until it reaches the white of the eye and you feel the dropper that it has reached an empty spot.
And it is necessary to measure the depth of the dropper's passage, which is from the whiteness to the end of the blackness, which is the eyelid of the eye. For if the needle is seen in the same gaze, it will show the clarity of the corneal membrane. Then you will direct the dropper above to the position where the water is.
Then you will lower it slightly, time after time, until the water descends from its container. For if the eyelid sees what has been opened for it by its container and the dropper is in its eye, then it will relax a little, and if the water flows, it will be poured again without the dropper being withdrawn.
If it settles and does not flow, then you will withdraw the dropper gently and you will shake it with your hand a little, little by little. Then you will dissolve in the water something of refined Andranī salt and you will wash the eye from the inside, then you will apply to the outside of the eye all of it, whether collyrium or ointment.
We take a thin, white, and smooth thread, and tie it with the correct eye, and we put on it a soft and compact pad with a white thread; if it does not allow the medicine to enter the eye because of its solidity, for some people have very solid eyes. One must take a scalpel that is called Al-Bared, which has this shape:
You should make a small incision at the site of the conjunctiva only, and do not intend to make a deep incision; rather, you should make a gentle touch to guide the medicine to the location we mentioned, and when you finish your task, you should lay the patient down in a quiet, dark room.
He should avoid all movements and coughing, and make his pillow comfortable so that he does not turn his head to the right or left, and the bandage should be kept on him until the third day; then, he should be moved to that quiet, dark room and have his vision tested.
And then, the bandage should be loosened on the seventh day; it is not suitable to do that during the treatment period or after the inflammation has subsided from your watch, but rather, you should prepare for it beforehand, before the water rises quickly with severe gaze.
If there is a severe and hot inflammation, it is suitable to open the eye before the seventh day and treat it with what reduces the inflammation until it subsides; then, you should test his vision and put a khimarah over his face that shields his eyes from light, while he is in that quiet, dark room.
He should leave the room gradually and take care of his affairs, and know that the inflammation does not fully subside without the doctor's attention and repeated examinations; then, he can return to work. I have been informed by some Iraqis that they mention that they make an eye medicine from Arak, which absorbs the water.
I have not found anyone in our country who has done that, nor have I seen it mentioned in the books of the ancients. It is possible that this may be an innovation, and here are the types of surgical instruments that can be used for it.
It is made from special copper and its tip is bent in this way, with a sharp pointed end like the point of a spear.
Chapter 24.
On treating abscesses of the nasal flesh.
It may abscess in the nasal flesh for different reasons, including a thing that resembles a scorpion's tail, and it may be cancerous flesh that spreads quickly like a snake, or it may be soft flesh that is not spreading quickly.
If it is of the soft flesh that is neither putrid nor cancerous, then you should sit in a sunny place with your hands extended, and open its orifice and insert the scalpel into those abscesses, then extract them outward, and then cut what you have grasped from one side with a fine sharp scalpel.
Until you learn that all the flesh has gone, and if something remains that you cannot cut, then scrape it with one of the fine instruments gently until nothing remains, lest the blood or pus or hot inflammation overcomes you.
Then deal with it as needed, or if it is of the putrid tumors, then hasten to remove it until the bleeding stops and all the abscesses are gone, then insert into the nose a tube and irrigate with water or serum, for opening the nose and draining the pus to the throat.
Know that it has healed, but if the pus is not draining as needed, then know that there is an abscessed flesh inside the spongy bone that the instrument did not reach with the cutting, so then it is necessary to take a thread from a cotton pad with some of its coarseness.
Here is the translation:
I remove the thread and many have done this, like the young surgeons in the medical schools, which is an easy task for those who desire it; then I bring together the two ends of the thread, one end that has come out onto the mouth and the other that remains in the nostril.
Then you use the flesh to hold the knot that is in the thread, doing so until you learn that the flesh has adhered to the thread's knot; then you remove the thread and it appears in the nostril after wiping away the blood, which has been absorbed into the Egyptian balm. You do this for three days or more.
Until the balm has eaten away all that remains of the flesh, then it appears as a last thing in the nostril, a tube of tin or lead, until he recovers; if he needs treatment, I use that.
And this is an image of the instrument that is used to inject medications and drugs into the nostrils:.
He places a silver or copper tube, similar to a small candlestick, open at both ends and bent accordingly.
And if you want to make the tube curved like a reed and the instrument's tip flat.
It has a ring at its end, as you see, to hold it if you inject the medicine or what you want of the syrups or liquid things.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On the polyps that grow on the side of the nostril.
Many times it grows on the side of the nostril, a fleshy growth that increases with the days until it obstructs the passage.
And so it is necessary to remove it at its first appearance and to extract its roots, then to apply to the site either cauterization or a corroding medicine that takes the place of cauterization; if you delay removing it until it grows, it will be difficult, for it has become hard like the tendons, with little sensitivity.
If you do not treat it with iron, it is a cancerous and very malignant tumor. I have seen many cases of this tumor being cut out, but they often resulted in severe harm to the patient, even though the tumor was benign and did not appear to be spreading. You should hasten to remove the limb, without hesitation or delay, and treat the area with what will stop the bleeding and constrict it until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On the surgical treatment of the nose, lip, and ears. If you separate the connection from a wound or something similar, know that when separation of connection occurs in one of these joints, it reduces what can be done about it, except for some people.
When you find that one of these things has occurred, then look: if the wound is fresh and its edges are clean, gather the edges of the wound with suturing and treat it until it heals. And if the separation of connection has separated the edges and each edge is in its correct place, then it is necessary to reunite each edge with a visible suture until it adheres.
Then gather the edges with suturing and tighten them, and apply to it a dressing of wax and lead ointment or other adhering ointments, and put on top a compress from the bandage or something else that adheres, and leave it constricted for two or three days, then remove it.
And change the medicine and leave it until the threads cut off by themselves, then treat it with ointment until it heals. The method of suturing is to gather the separated connection either with a needle as we described in suturing the abdomen, or with a thread as I have shown you there.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the extraction of the nodes that appear on the lips.
Many people have small, hard tumors inside their lips that resemble a grain of barley or a lentil, some smaller and some larger; it is necessary to split the lip and dissect each tumor and ligate it with a suture.
And then cut them out from every side, and then fill the area after cutting with a dressing of vinegar and rose water until the bleeding stops, and then treat the areas with what is necessary to prevent the spread of the ulcers.
Chapter 28.
On excising excessive flesh in the gums.
Many times, excessive flesh grows on the gums, which is called "uwail" by Abul-Qasim; it is necessary to ligate it with a suture or to grasp it with a forceps and cut it at its root, and then to stop the bleeding or the flow of serum, and then to apply a dressing of vinegar.
Or one of the constricting medicaments that dry and wither, for if you treat that flesh and it grows back after the treatment, it is often necessary to cut it again, and then it does not grow back after that.
Chapter 29.
On sharpening the teeth with iron.
There may be a collection of rough, dirty scales on the surface of the teeth, both from the inside and the outside, and between the gums, which may turn black, yellow, or green, until it causes harm to the gums and spoils the teeth.
It is necessary to polish the teeth with a cloth between your fingers and a stone in your hand, and to sharpen the file and the tooth that appears to you with scales and similar deposits of earth until nothing remains, and similarly, you should do with blackness, greenness, and yellowness, and other things, until it becomes clean.
For if the deposits that are on it have gone from the first sharpening, then you return to sharpening it another day and a second and a third until you reach your goal in what you want, and know that the file needs different surfaces of various shapes according to what is required for your work.
For the wound that is cleansed from within, unlike the one that is cleansed from the outside, and the one that is cleansed between the sutures in another way, and these are several types of cleansing methods available to you all.
Chapter Thirty.
Removing Impacted Teeth.
You should treat the wound from its origin with all sorts of skill and caution, so you do not leave anything behind, for it is a noble gem that will not be replaced if it is lost.
It is necessary, when you intend to remove the impacted tooth, that you fortify yourself until it is corrected in your presence, the aching wound. Many times the impacted tooth deceives and makes one think it is in the correct position, then when it is removed, the aching does not cease until the diseased tooth is removed; we have seen that from the actions of the surgeons many times.
If the aching tooth is sound in itself, then it is necessary to loosen around the tooth with a certain force until the gum is separated from every side, and then to rock it gently with your fingers or soft forceps little by little until it is luxated.
Then you grasp it firmly with your thumb and index finger, placing the tooth between your knees, having pressed them together so that they do not move, then you pull the tooth in a straight line, trying not to break it; if it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it underneath from every side with gentleness and rocking movement as you did before.
And if the tooth is curved or hooked, it is necessary to fill that cavity with a pellet and tighten it tightly with a thin, flexible reed so that it does not come loose when you grasp it with forceps, and you should loosen around the gum from every side gently.
Preserve your effort to avoid exhausting yourself, and leave some of it to return to you, for it is greater than what you initially acquired. And be cautious not to create what the surgeons create in their operations, nor to rely on their experience in their craft.
They do many great things to people, but the most serious of them is to sever the connecting vessels and to leave all or part of their roots. And if you extract some of the jawbone, as we have seen many times, then you should stop the bleeding with cold or vinegar and salt, for it often happens that blood flows from the site, so apply something of the cautery to the site at that time.
And if the cautery does not benefit you, use the gentle forceps that grasp the connecting vessels, or those with long handles and short blades, thick and strong, so they do not bend when you grasp the vessel with them. And these are the forms of the large forceps.
They should be strong and thick, so that when you grasp them, they do not break nor bend, with short handles, made of Indian iron or forged steel, with curved edges and teeth on their ends that fit into each other, to grasp firmly and tightly.
And the edges should be made like a file, so they are also strong in grasping.
The straight forceps and the curved ones.
For extracting roots of teeth and removing broken jawbone.
If a root remains when extracting the connecting vessel, it is fitting to apply a compress with wax or grease for a day or two until the site relaxes, then you insert the forceps or scissors. Those that resemble the beak of a bird, called the Pelican, and this is the form of the forceps:
You have made it like a scalpel from the inside or like an elevator, if you are not forced to remove it with these instruments. It is necessary to make an incision on the basis and to expose all of the flesh with the retraction, then to introduce the instrument that resembles a small rod, whose shape is this.
The short arm is slightly curved and not straight, so that it does not get in the way. If the basis protrudes with this, then hold it with these other instruments, whose shape is this, the first being a triangle on the arm, some of which are curved.
A figure of another triangular instrument:.
And we also use this instrument with two hooks, whose shape is also this.
And besides them, from the instruments and tools that we mentioned in the chapter on surgical instruments, we also use this instrument that resembles a large forceps, whose shape is this.
The triangular arm is slightly curved in some of its thickness, so that it does not get in the way, and it is not straight. And know that surgical instruments are numerous, and so are other instruments, but it is difficult to collect them all, and the skilled craftsman who makes them with his own hands may invent new instruments according to what he is guided to by the work and the diseases themselves.
Because some diseases have not been mentioned, for which the first instruments were not suitable due to the difference in their types, it is necessary to extract a bone from the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth, or to scrape it in its place with what is suitable for it from these instruments and tools that were mentioned in extracting the basis.
And we use an instrument with this shape:.
It has some thickness, slightly, to grasp the bone with it, so that it does not slip until the bone is extracted. And we clean the location with suitable medications for that. If there was decay in the bone, we scrape it from its decay and putridity until it becomes pure, then we treat it until it heals.
The 32nd Chapter.
On the separation of the adherent membranes from each other.
The membranes, if they adhered to something other than their natural passage, would be deformed by that and the shape would not appear as it should, especially when this occurs in women and children, and it is necessary to consider that, for if the membrane has adhered from behind another membrane.
And it was not possible to separate them, nor did he succeed in doing so, and if it was stuck to another membrane, he would cut it with this instrument, which is of this shape.
It resembles a small beak and is made of Indian iron, sharp at the end, and it would be used to make incisions on many days for adherent membranes, and it would not touch any other membrane; and if it was necessary to separate it by force, he would use a file made of Indian iron, which would have this shape.
It would be made entirely of Indian iron, and its edge would be sharpened very finely to be like the file with which the needles are made; it would be used to slowly scrape away the membranes little by little on many days with gentleness so as not to irritate the membrane, then it would be smoothed out finally and pushed back with some force.
And if a membrane had become torn from it, and was irritating the tongue during speech, it would be necessary to separate it as well until the roughness of that tear disappeared and it became smooth, so that it would not irritate the tongue and would not hinder speech.
The 33rd Chapter.
On the suturing of movable membranes with gold or silver wires.
If the anterior membranes were torn and moved away from a blow or a fall, and the patient was unable to control his excrement, so that it would not flow down, and treatment with constricting medications did not benefit them, then the treatment was not successful.
The trick in it is to use a thread of gold or silver, and gold is better because silver corrodes and decays after a few days, whereas gold remains in its condition forever without being affected by that, and the thread becomes firmly attached to the wound and the inflammation subsides to the extent that it allows for healing.
The method of suturing is to take the thread and pass it between the sound edges, then you sew the ends of the thread between the moving edges, one or more, until you reach the sound edge on the other side.
Then you return the sewing to the side from which you started, and you tighten your hand with gentleness and skill, until the wound does not gape, and your tightening of the thread is at the roots of the edges so it doesn't come loose. Then you cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors, and gather them together, and fasten them with a ligature, and place them between the sound edge and the moving edge.
So that the tongue does not get in the way, then you leave it like this, tightened, as long as it remains, and if it becomes loose or cuts through, you tighten it with another thread, and it will be comfortable for a while. And this is the image of the edges and the form of suturing between sound edges and moving edges, as you see.
And you may treat a single edge or two edges after they have fallen into their position and suture them as we have described, and it will remain. And if one does that, a skilled craftsman will be able to make a model of the edge from a bone of cattle, fashioning it in the shape of the edge and placing it in the position from which the edge went. And he tightens as we mentioned, and it will remain, and he will be comfortable with that.
Chapter 34.
On the section of the ligament that is exposed under the tongue, which obstructs speech.
This bandage which is applied under the tongue, whether it is a natural one that grows in the human being or an artificial one due to a wound that has been inflicted.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient and place his head on a stone, then raise his tongue and cut the neural bandage in the transverse direction until the tongue is freed from its obstruction. If there was some stiffness and complexity and it was due to an injury, you should put a splint on it and split it in the transverse direction until the bandage is severed and the knot is released.
And beware that the incision is not in the depth of the flesh, lest you cut a blood vessel there and cause bleeding. Then, you should apply compression with a rose-water compress or vinegar and cold water, then place under the tongue a piece of cloth soaked in katn, which the patient holds in his mouth every night.
If the bleeding returns, and blood flows out, apply to the place a burnt ceruse, and if the blood overflows, hold the mouth of the wound with a cotton pad, and tighten it with a binding, which will be suitable for that. Then, resort to the usual treatment until he recovers.
Chapter 35.
On extracting the tonsils that have grown under the tongue.
It may happen that under the tongue a tumor forms, resembling a small tonsil, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, and perhaps grows until it fills the mouth. The operation is to open the patient's mouth with a speculum and examine the tumor.
If you see it as a black or very hard tumor that the patient does not feel, do not touch it, for it is a cancer. And if it inclines to whiteness and has moisture in it, apply a splint to it and split it with a fine scalpel, and extract it from every direction.
If the bleeding dominates during your operation, apply a zajja masruqa until the bleeding stops, then return to the operation until you extract it with a komah, and then tighten with the thread and the patch.
Then treat him with the suitable treatment until he recovers.
Chapter 36.
On the treatment of cancer of the luzzetina.
And what grows in the gullet from other tumors that may appear inside the gullet are glands similar to those that appear outside, called luzzetina; if you treat them with what I mentioned in the section, they will not recover.
If the tumor is hard, like a rounded stone, with little sensation, do not touch it with iron; and if it is red, with a thick base, do not touch it with iron either, fearing bleeding, but leave it until it matures, so that you can remove it or it may break apart by itself.
And if it is white, flat, and has a thin base, this is the one that should be cut, and the operation for it is that you examine before operating whether the tumor has become established and taken hold strongly or some of its parts are lacking.
Then sit the patient in a sunny place, and make him lean on a stone, and open his mouth, and take a small knife between your hands, and insert it into the bottom of the ulcer in this shape.
Make it from silver or copper, thin like a Sikeen; if you insert it into the ulcer and expose the tumor to your gaze, and focus on it, take a small hook and insert it into the luzzetina and pull it out to the outside, as much as possible without pulling out any of the surrounding tissues.
Then cut it with an instrument of this shape, similar to scissors, but with the ends curved inwards, each one opposite the other, sharp and strong, made from Indian iron or Damascene steel.
If you do not prepare this instrument and otherwise cut it at the mark of its shape.
It is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so after cutting one loaf, you cut the other according to this type of cutting specifically, then after cutting, you clean the scalpel with cold water or vinegar and water.
If a patient has a bleeding wound, clean it with water that has been boiled with pomegranate peel or willow bark or the like of these remedies until the bleeding stops, then treat it until it heals; and if any abscesses or other tumors form in the throat besides tonsils, cut them out as I mentioned for cutting the tonsils.
I treated a woman who had a tumor that had grown inside her throat, which was constricting the passage and almost blocking the throat, and the woman was having difficulty breathing through a narrow airway, and she was unable to eat or drink water.
She was close to death if she had remained like that for a day or two, and the tumor had grown from it two branches until it reached the nostrils of her nose; so I hastened to operate and inserted a scoop into one of them, then pulled it out, and a sound piece came out with it.
Then I cut it where I had inserted the scoop through the nostril, then I did that with what remained of the tumor in the other nostril, then I opened her mouth and held her tongue back, then I inserted the scoop into the very tumor itself, then I cut out some of it, and only a small amount of blood came out.
So the woman's throat was cleared, and she hastened to drink water at that very hour, then she regained her appetite for food; and from that time on, I did not cease to cut out that tumor repeatedly over a long period of time, and the tumor would recur in place of what had been cut out, until it finally subsided, and she was cured.
I released and pulled out the varix that was inside the throat, then I stopped the bleeding, and after that I cleaned the area and did not notice what God would do to it afterwards.
Chapter 37.
On excision of a varix on the neck.
That which is called a "wand" if it has descended to the neck and has become twisted, and was white and elongated, then it is called a "column". And if it was thick, flaccid, and rounded, then it is called an "abouta". If you treat it with what we have mentioned in the incision, the treatment will not be successful.
I have seen the hot varix that has settled in it and was thin, so it seemed that it should be cut, but there was no gathering place for it, nor was it long, and it was dark blue or black, or had no sensation, so it seemed that its cutting should be avoided.
It is necessary to make an incision on the patient, for if you see it on the aforementioned sign, from its whiteness and length, you should sit the patient with his back towards the sun and grasp his tongue with the instrument that has been prepared and described, then insert the scalpel into the varix.
And you pull it down to the bottom and cut it with one of the two instruments mentioned in cutting the luzzatin, and it is necessary that you do not cut more than what exceeds the natural size, without excess, for if you cut more, you would harm the sound and speech.
Then, after cutting, you use what we have described in cutting the luzzatin, and treat it until it heals. If the patient is frightened about cutting, it is necessary to use cunning with him without fear or caution, and direct his attention to it, for it is by gentle treatment, which is to put the patient's head on your lap.
Then, you grasp his tongue with the instrument that we mentioned, then you take from the gentle water that we mentioned in the chapter on cunning, and you wash it without sprinkling or pouring, and you make him feel neither cold nor hot, and you fill it with this instrument, and its shape is like this.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Take your hand with the medicine and rub it on the affected part for about half an hour until you see it has become black, and if you wish to take a piece of cloth, wrap it around the tip of the finger and dip the cloth in the medicine.
And insert the finger with the cloth into a tube from above until the cloth adheres to the affected part, do that repeatedly until you achieve what you want from the ulceration. Then leave it; it will dry and fall off after three or four days. If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it.
And after the ulceration, rub around it with a cloth soaked in rose oil and remove what is around it from the medicine. Then, treat it with cold water and apply compresses externally and gargle internally until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than surgery and farther from danger.
And the affected part can also be treated with something milder than cauterization and surgery, treating it with fumigation in this manner: take lavender, rue, and cyclamen, and dragon's blood, and a little of each from the aromatic plants, then gather all or some of them in a vessel and steep them in vinegar.
And boil the vessel, covering it with a tin of wisdom, and place it in the middle of the wrapping, making a tube fitted to it in this manner, manufacturing it from silver or copper.
And insert the tube with the remedy into the mouth of the affected part until the vapor reaches the affected area through the tube, until it is well-absorbed. Then repeat it several times until it dries up. And be careful to apply this treatment at the beginning of the tumor's appearance.
For it often increases in the tumor, and it is better to do that when the tumor is still gentle. If you don't have this tool, take a silver tube and fix a piece of eggshell on its end so that it doesn't burn the mouth of the affected part.
Because the membrane of the egg yolk prevents the vapor from reaching the mouth and this is one of the good treatments with its safety.
Chapter 38.
On extracting the splinters and what grows in the throat besides that.
Many things grow in the throat, a bone or a fish splinter or something else; it is necessary to extract from it what is visible, after the tongue is touched with the instrument at sunrise.
It is necessary for you to clarify what is in the throat, and what has not appeared to you, and to examine the throat before it becomes entrenched in its flavor in the stomach; perhaps the extracted thing will emerge from the cavity or the tract of the alimentary canal, or a piece of flesh will be dissected.
Or a morsel is taken from dry bread or a piece of soft sea sponge, and it is tied with a thread, then it is swallowed; if it reaches the place of the splinter, the thread is quickly pulled, doing that repeatedly.
Many splinters or bones stick in it and come out, but if they do not come out by what we mentioned, then use an instrument made of brass in this form:.
It is made slightly thicker than the rods, and at its end there is a loop that enters the alimentary canal through the throat with gentleness, while raising his head above it, and taking care not to touch his trachea lest he coughs or expels the bone or splinter, or the physician inserts it with his hand.
And the insertion of the alimentary canal is better for him to know the position of the extracted thing, and he expels it downwards or pulls it out with the instrument upwards, all of that according to his ability, until it comes out.
Chapter 39.
On extracting the ingrained thing in the throat.
If you have treated the ulcer as we mentioned in the section on treatment with medicinal remedies and it has not healed, then examine it when the patient is exposed to the sun after he has been given a purgative medicine that we have described to you.
If your gaze falls on the ulcer, grasp it with a small forceps or a delicate hook, and if you are unable to do so, take a curved tube and insert it into the patient's throat near the ulcer, then insert a sharp instrument through the tube.
Do that repeatedly, and the patient should refrain from drinking water all day, then he takes a full bowl of cold water and opens his mouth into it and gargles with it, without swallowing a single drop, and moves the water around in his mouth after a while.
If the ulcer falls onto the gum when it comes into contact with water, and if it has not come out as we described, then fumigate the throat with a poultice and with the instrument that we described in the chapter on fumigations; do that repeatedly, for it will fall out.
And direct the work in the fumigation by taking a quantity of it, heating it with fire, and covering its opening with a cloth, then place the tip of the instrument in that cloth; then let the fumigation reach the patient's mouth at the end of the tube, and he should close his mouth so that the fumigation does not exit until he feels that the fumigation has reached his throat.
If the ulcer falls onto the gum, and if it has not fallen out, then the fumigation is repeated repeatedly, and the patient is forbidden from eating sour and salty foods and drinking water; it is inevitable that it will come out with this treatment. And this is a picture of an instrument used to extract the ulcer from the throat when it comes into sight.
It resembles a scythe as you see, except that it has this curved part that enters the throat and its end resembles a bird's beak with a roughness like a file, which if it is placed on something, it does not leave it.
Another instrument which has a ring and a wide circle of iron, as much as the width of the mouth above the tongue, enters the mouth with its edge on one side, and the mouth remains open without the least effort, and the patient cannot spit it out until it is removed.
The description of the instrument that opens the mouth to this measure, specifically for it.
Chapter Forty.
There is a section on extracting fragments of speech from the cavities of the organs and splitting them.
The organs have many kinds, which will be mentioned one by one in this book, and they differ in their cavities and splitting from two aspects: one of them is the type of tumor in itself and what it contains of abscesses.
And the second type is according to the locations in which they occur on the body, because a tumor occurring in the head is not like a tumor occurring in the belly, and a tumor occurring in a fleshy part is not like a tumor occurring in a joint, each of them having a rule of operation.
And among the organs, there are those that should not be split until after the pus has matured in them and its completeness, and there are those that should be split while they are still green and have not yet matured, like the tumors that are close to the joints.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and its matter reaches it, it may affect the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing stiffness in that limb or being close to a principal organ.
Because if you delay splitting it until it matures, you would harm the principal organ or it would be close to the belly, so you should split it while it is still green and not yet fully matured, which would be near the belly, lest the pus flows into the belly and becomes a fatal abscess.
A incision should be made where it will not suppurate, and it is necessary to learn the time for opening the tumors that have formed on the body while the patient is at rest and the tumor is stationary, and the vital spirit has departed, and the color of the skin has changed, and the pulsation has ceased, and the head of the tumor has shrunk, and other signs.
It is necessary to make the incision at the lowest part of the tumor if possible, so that it will be easier to dissect to the bottom or to a more superficial part of the tumor, and the incision should be made in a longitudinal direction along the body if the tumors are on the arms or legs.
And beware of the muscles, tendons, nerves, and blood vessels, and be cautious in all flat positions that do not bulge, and as for those that do bulge, make the incision accordingly, and if the tumor is in fleshy positions, it is better to leave the incision until later.
As we have said, if the tumor has formed on the body, it is necessary to make sure of its condition before making the incision, for hastiness in this matter leads to much harm and corruption, and perhaps the patient's condition will deteriorate, and some tumors may be operated on in a hurry when the need arises or according to what the member requires.
It is necessary to use a single incision for small tumors and a wide incision or multiple shallow ones according to the size of the tumor, and some tumors may require that the skin be cut and separated if it has become like a crust.
And it happens that the incision is made where it has become like what appears in many ulcers and wounds, and among them are those that are cut with a triple-edged instrument, and among them are those that are excised in the shape of a leaf, such as the Arabic tumor.
And among them are those that use the circular incision and the crescent-shaped incision, and similar ones among the incisions. And if it does not have a head, such as flat tumors spread out, it is necessary to make a simple incision only. And if the tumor is large and has gathered much matter, and its incision is made, it is necessary not to hurry so that all the pus comes out at that time.
I extracted some of it, then I pressed the tumor firmly until another day, then I extracted some of the pus as well, doing that repeatedly on a gradual basis until I extracted all of it.
And be careful, for if the patient is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person, then the vital spirit often collapses with the sudden exit of pus, so the patient may die and you will not perceive it; therefore, beware of this chapter, beware extremely.
And after you have treated these tumors, it is necessary to massage the wound and observe; if the tumor's wound was small or the incision was a single simple one, then use the bandage from the cotton or the plain linen, and if the tumor was large and there were many sutures.
It is necessary to insert a thread into each suture, until some of them reach others, and if the tumor had cut through the skin or turned in, it is necessary to pad it with plain linen or compress it with cotton from underneath without moisture, and fasten it until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with what is necessary of the medicines until it heals, and if a bleeding occurs during your operation, use cold water and vinegar after you have dipped a piece of cotton in them and apply it to the place of the bleeding repeatedly.
If the bleeding persists, it is necessary to use the treatment and remedies we described in many places of this book of ours, and from the sections; for if you are in winter season and the tumor's location is rich in nerves, it is necessary to apply a warm poultice with rose water and hot zerit.
And apply it to the location, and if you are in summer and the locations are humid, it is necessary to apply a cold poultice with water or rose water, all of that being cold, until on the third day, as we said, it is necessary to treat the tumor and massage it.
This is used in the treatment of what is suspected until it is confirmed, and this is what is needed from knowledge of treating tumors on the neck and how to dissect them, for I have mentioned each tumor and the way to treat it with detailed clarification.
The 44th Chapter.
On the incision for tumors that appear on the scalp of the head.
There appear on the scalp of the head small tumors, and they are among the types of swellings that have membranes surrounding them, similar to a capsule containing a poultice, and their types are many, including inflammatory ones and those containing moisture resembling a abscess.
And among them are those that contain moisture resembling a pus, and phlegm, and so on. And among them are hard, solid ones, and all of them do not pose a danger in incising and extracting them, as long as you do not encounter a nerve when incising.
And the operation in incising them is to probe with the instrument that comes into this shape after this, which is called the dilator, until you learn what it contains. If it contains a pus, then incise it with a longitudinal incision, a simple incision on this pattern:
And start the incision from line ~b~ to line ~j~, and if the pus flows out, then evacuate the cyst that was containing that pus, and remove all of it, without leaving anything behind. For often it returns if some of it remains.
Then insert a dressing into the fresh wound, and sprinkle it with salt water, and bandage it, and leave it until the next day. For it devours what remains of the cyst. Then reapply the dressing with the salt water for a second and third time if you need to.
Until you are certain that nothing of the cyst remains, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. And if the tumor contains an inflammatory swelling, then incise it in this pattern:
Make a curved incision and dissect around the wound, and free it from every direction, and strive to expel the surrounding fascia that encompasses it. If you encounter a blood vessel, do as I have described to you previously, and likewise do in the case of a tumor if it is adhering to the incision.
The treatment is specific to what I mentioned, and the incision around an adhering tumor is easier because it has little blood and inflammation. Some of these tumors in the head may have no inflammation with them at all, that's why I made an incision on a tumor.
I treated an elderly woman who had a tumor on her head, as hard as a stone, rough and white, which did not respond to medication, and if one of the surgeons had operated on it, he would have been exhausted. And there were no other tumors occurring in the head like these that appear on the heads of children.
And when you dissect the jugular veins, dissect them all with a simple incision and place a pad under them to facilitate the flow of matter downwards, then treat them with the suitable treatment.
Chapter 42.
In the incision of the tumors that appear in the neck, it often happens that these tumors appear in the neck and under the armpits and in the axillae, and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body. One of them may be single and another may be multiple, and some of them may be connected to each other.
And each of these tumors has a specific fascia around it, just like the ones in the neck and head tumors as we have described. And there are many types of these tumors, some of which adhere, some contain inflammation, and some are malignant that do not respond to treatment.
I have seen some of them that felt smooth to the touch, and their surface was close in color to the skin, moving freely in every direction, not adhering to the neck vein or artery or nerve, and were not depressed. It is necessary to make a gentle incision from top to bottom of the abdomen in this shape, from line ~j~ to line ~b~.
And separate it from each side and extend the edges of the skin with a single suture or two sutures or many sutures, if you need to, as we mentioned in the tumors of the head, and remove them little by little, being careful not to cut an artery or a nerve, and let the incision not be too deep.
So that you do not increase the cutting or make the ligature too tight, and cut what is not needed to be cut, if you cut an artery or a vein and stop its function, put on the wound a dressing of zinc oxide or some of the medicaments that stop bleeding.
And close the wound and leave it until the swelling subsides, and the wound becomes relaxed, and it is feared that the bleeding will stop, so return to your work until you are satisfied. Then, feel with your finger if there remains, then ligate the remaining small blood vessels and cut them off.
If there is a large artery at the base of the vein, it is necessary not to cut that vein from its base, but rather to ligate it with a strong thread and leave it until it separates by itself without harm. Then, fill the wound with rose oil that has been perfumed with Egyptian balsam, and then dress it.
And if you cut the entire vein, it is necessary to gather the edges of the wound and suture it from its edge after you are certain that no part of the vein remains. If you saw that a remnant of the bone's vein remained,...
It is necessary to intend to cut at its base and ligate it, and use the suture as we mentioned. And if there were veins that surrounded the marrow, you should close them with a simple closure where you see the place of their union, and make the closure from what is above, just as we said.
The surgical instrument is used after the surgeon has cleaned it with Egyptian boric acid and washed off what remains of the filth, until when I see the wound has been purified by the medicated cotton, so that it may heal.
Chapter 34.
In the incision of the throat when a tumor occurs inside the cavity.
I mentioned this incision of the throat, and I did not see anyone in our land who performed it, and this is their method, but those with experience should avoid the incision of the throat, as they do not benefit from it.
So that all the vessels and lung are healthy, but for those who have a malignant tumor in the mouth or throat or larynx, if there is no obstruction in the trachea, it is necessary to perform the incision of the throat to escape the asphyxiation that occurs from the blockage.
It is necessary, if we want to do that, to make the incision of the throat under three rings of the tracheal rings or four small transverse incisions between two rings, as much as the incision is in the skin and not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for the incision.
Because it is lacking in flesh and the blood vessels are far from it, if the surgeon is skillful, it is necessary to stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then make an incision in the skin until, when he reaches the trachea, he can see some of its blood vessels.
Then he makes an incision in the skin, which we have described, and examines the incision of the trachea for the phlegm that comes out with what is coughed up and the breakage of the voice, and leaves the wound open for a time. If the time passes during which the asphyxiation was feared, he closes the lips of the wound from the skin.
Here is the translation:
The surgeon should be cautious of death and intend to make an incision in the throat to explore the wound, and let him be careful not to touch the surrounding area so that he can avoid death. And if they are ordered to leave the wound open until the soreness of the disease subsides, and it becomes three days, and its soreness will subside.
When they are ordered to sew up the wound and treat it until he recovers, and I have seen with my own eyes that a woman had an abscess on her chest, so I sent it down to the trachea only, and cut off some of the lung's attachments, and called for its treatment, and found it to be corrupt like the rotten limb, so I exposed the wound.
I found that the blood which flowed from the wound was minimal, so I knew that she had not cut an artery or a vein, and the pus was coming out of the wound, so I treated it until she recovered. And nothing appeared to the servant except for a slight hoarseness in her voice, without any remainder.
And she regained her best state after a few days, so from this we say that making an incision in the throat is not dangerous.
Chapter 44.
On making an incision on the tumor that appears in the throat from the outside, and it is called a pharyngeal polyp.
This tumor, which is called a pharyngeal polyp, is a large growth on the skin of the neck and it is common in women; it has two types.
It is either a natural one or a symptomatic one; the natural one has no harm in it, and the symptomatic one has two types: one resembles a malignant ulceration, and the other resembles a tumor that occurs due to the entanglement of the artery, and its incision is dangerous. It is not advisable to touch it with the sharp iron, except for a small part of it; if you have cauterized and explored it with the probe, you would find that it resembles a malignant ulceration, and it was not connected to any of the arteries, so incise it as you would incise an ulceration. Extract it with its capsule if it is in a capsule, and if not, then evacuate all of it, then treat the location with suitable treatment.
Chapter 45.
On incisions for different types of wounds.
Wounds have many types, and I mentioned all their types in the classification. It is necessary to distinguish here between a wound and an abscess, as it is a difficult matter. So I say that an abscess is accompanied by heat, inflammation, and severe pains until it relieves the patient's body. The abscess is completed when the inflammation and swelling subside, while a wound does not have heat, nor inflammation, nor pains. It has a capsule of suppuration, which has a specific place, and it is on the color of the skin, and its beginning is like an elevation, and it becomes like a pustule, larger or smaller.
It is of two types: either it is dry or it contains moisture. The colors of the moisture are many, as I mentioned in the classification. It is necessary that if you intend to treat a wound, you should inspect it and explore it first with the instrument called 'Madds' according to its shape, as it will be described later.
Feel the bone of the tumor, then bring out the 'Madds' and look at what comes out after it. If a clear moisture emerges, whatever its color was, then make a simple incision according to what I mentioned in other tumors. And if no moisture comes out after using the 'Madds', then know that it is dry.
Make an oblique incision on it, as I instructed you, and hold it with the forceps, and dissect the skin from every direction with ease, and take care to evacuate the capsule if you are able to do so correctly with the wound.
If the abscess does not burst open during surgery and you are unable to drain it properly, it is common for that to happen, so drain it by sections until nothing remains. If something remains, whether a little or a lot, the ulceration process will take care of the rest.
If you have overcome it and a little remains, cauterize the wound when you are finished with some of the sharp, fine medications and tighten the wound firmly. Place above it what will soothe the painful swelling and treat it with a suitable treatment until it heals. If the ulceration is large, make an incision in its lips and treat it with what will bring it together.
If you encounter a bleeding artery, whether it is a vein or not, and there is a flow of blood, then cauterize the area with the burning iron and leave it closed for two or three days until the wound starts to heal and the bleeding stops. Then return to draining what remains of the ulceration.
Chapter 46.
Illustrations of the instruments.
Those that are inserted into the incision, and their forms are those of the probes, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Image of a large probe:.
Image of a medium probe:.
Image of a small probe:.
It is made of iron, with a broad base and sharp edges, to facilitate insertion into the tumors, and these are the forms of the dilators, called the spreaders, and they are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small. Image of a large dilator:.
Image of a medium dilator:.
Image of a small dilator:.
It is used to scrape out the tumors, wounds, and abscesses, and to remove what is inside them of bone and other things. It is made with a curved, smooth edge, like the scalpel knives, from fine steel or from steel or iron or from silver, and the best ones are those made from steel.
You can also make sutures from black silk and they are suitable for the nerves that are in their sheath, wrapping them with a twist, although it is of three types: long, medium, and short.
According to the need of each nerve sheath, he makes its thickness according to the width of the nerve and its narrowness, making a suture from large silk.
A suture from medium-sized silk.
A suture from small silk.
The types of forceps, and they are many kinds, because among them are simple ones, which have a single grasp, and they are three types: large, medium, and small. And among them are the curved forceps, and they are three types. And among them are the forceps with multiple grasps, and they are three types. And they are three types, and among them are the forceps with three grasps, and they are three types. All of these types require each one of them in its place. A picture of a large simple forceps. A picture of a medium simple forceps. A picture of a small simple forceps.
A picture of a large curved forceps. A picture of a medium curved forceps.
A picture of a small curved forceps.
A picture of a large forceps with multiple grasps. A picture of a medium forceps with multiple grasps. A picture of a small forceps with multiple grasps.
A picture of a large forceps with three grasps.
A picture of a medium forceps with three grasps. A picture of a small forceps with three grasps.
And these are the pictures of the scissors that cut and dissect with them the veins and the tumors, and they are three types: large, medium, and small. A picture of a large scissor.
A picture of a retracted wound.
A picture of a small wound.
Its edges are limited and the other sides unlimited, and it was made thus to be used in the surgical incision of a tumor when there is fear of cutting an artery or nerve, and to spare the patient from the harm that he would find if the tumor were cut.
And these are the pictures of the forceps, and they are of three kinds, for there are large ones, medium ones, and small ones. A picture of a large forcep:
It is made from a single piece of iron, like a rod, which has at its end a broad, flat blade with two layers, having at its head a hidden groove for the ligature, resembling a bird's tongue, going in and out as you want it to.
Pictures of the ligatures that are placed between the fingers when operating on tumors, which the patient does not feel, and they are of three kinds, for there are large ones, medium ones, and small ones. A picture of a large ligature:
Pictures of the scissors that are used to cut off blood flow, and they are of three kinds, for there are large ones, medium ones, and small ones. A picture of a large scissor.
It is made from iron or from polished steel, curved slightly in length as you see, and it is suitable for the wound. It is necessary to have these types of scissors with you, large and small, to quickly cut off blood flow when needed and when medicine is not available.
Do not use it to cut the veins at every location on the body, but rather use it in fleshy places such as the muscle of the thigh and calf, and the muscles of the arm and forearm, and the abdominal wall, and similar fleshy and soft parts.
And you can make from it small instruments that resemble the peel of a pistachio nut in this shape:.
It is used to cut the blood if it flows from a location of bleeding or when cutting a vein or artery, and you can make from it a straightening instrument on this shape:.
Chapter 47.
On the surgical treatment of gout in men.
That which resembles the breast of women, and some people's breast may become enlarged at puberty until it resembles the breast of women, and remains with a ugly appearance; thus, whoever dislikes that should be operated upon by making an incision on the breast in the shape of a hilal.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~:. Then, strip the fat completely, then fill the wound with a poultice of melhem, then bring the edges of the wound together with sutures and treat it until it heals. If the breast inclines downwards and relaxes its tension, as it appears in women.
It is necessary to make two incisions in the upper part, which resemble the shape of a hilal, each connecting with the other at its ends, so that the larger line surrounds the smaller one, in this shape:. From line ~b~ to line ~j~, then strip the skin that is between the two incisions, and remove the fat, and use the sutures and bandages, and whatever treatment is needed until it heals.
If you cannot stop the bleeding, and what is necessary for you to cut from fear of gangrene or because of blood flowing, it is necessary to stuff the wound with cotton soaked in rose water, and leave it until it absorbs what remains of the fat, then treat it until it heals.
The 80th and 84th Sections.
On the surgical incisions that are made beneath the armpits.
These surgical incisions that are made beneath the armpits are of the kind of hard, dense abscesses that have a pouch and some of them have pus, and if they have pus, it is necessary to make a curved incision on this pattern.
From a line ~b~ to a line ~j~, and if you have evacuated all the contents of the abscess from the period, then dress it with a simple dressing and leave it until the next day, then remove the dressing.
And treat it with a suitable poultice until it heals, and if the abscess is of the kind of indurated abscesses, then incise it as we mentioned in the section on incising abscesses, even if the wound reaches the point where it discharges pus, so use the cautery on it according to what we mentioned previously.
The 94th Section.
On the incision of an abscess that is located in front of an artery or a vein, and it is called aneurysma.
If the artery is wounded and the skin above it becomes adherent, it often leads to an abscess, and similarly, it also often leads to a swelling and abscess in the vein.
And the signs by which it is known that the abscess and swelling are from an artery or a vein, for if the abscess is from an artery, it will be a gathered collection deep in the body, and if you press on the abscess with your finger, you will feel as if it has a pulse.
And that which is from a vein will be an abscess spread out on the surface of the body, and incising these abscesses is dangerous, and it is not suitable, especially in the armpits, elbows, neck, and many other places of the body, and it was very severe, so it is necessary to avoid treating them with branding iron.
What was in the periphery or in the head, it is necessary to avoid, so what was of it from the prominences of the veins, then he made an incision on the scalp with a longitudinal incision, then he opened the incision with sutures, and then he freed the vein and released it from the adhesions.
Until it is exposed, then a needle is inserted beneath it and passed to the other side, and the vein is ligated with a thread in two places according to what you have been taught about ligating the two veins in the temples. Then, it is tightened at the site between the ribs until all the blood that is in it comes out.
And the tumor is resolved, then the treatment that generates pus is used until the abscesses form, then it is treated with suitable medications until it heals.
If the tumor was on the side of the vein, it is necessary to grasp with your hand what you can from the tumor along with the skin, then insert a needle beneath the site where you grasped with your hand and pass it through, with a thread in it, until it comes out the other side. Then tie it to the tumor, tying it strongly according to what I mentioned to you about tying the vein from two sides with the thread's ends. If you fear that the threads will come loose, then insert another needle with another thread underneath the entire tumor where the first needle intersects.
And tighten your threads in four places, then make an incision in the middle of the tumor until what is in it comes out, and cut off the excess skin and leave what was attached to it. Then, put a dressing that has been soaked in wine and oil on it. Then use the treatment that consists of ointments and medications until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
The nerve that is affected by the fracture.
Just as the tumor appears in the artery and vein, so it also appears in the nerve if it receives a blow or suffers from excessive movement or a similar condition, and this is more likely to occur in constricted areas and joints.
In every location where the joints move, there is a tumor-like swelling that resembles the color of the surrounding body and is more likely to occur without pain. And if it is pressed firmly, a sense of numbness similar to paralysis is felt, but the tumor does not gather in the depth of the body.
But it is under the skin and moves in every direction, neither going forward nor backward. So, if it is among the joints, it should not be touched with a cautery, lest it cause a bad time, and it is not among those in the head or forehead.
If you dissect the skin with an incision, and if the tumor is small, then remove it with a scalpel and excise it from its root. And if it is large, then ligate it with a thread and sever it, then clean the wound with a dressing and cover it until it heals.
The Sharp Surgery and the Five [Operations]
On excision of the excesscences that appear in the abdomen.
Some people may have many growths in their abdomen and other parts of their body, called Fungal-like because they resemble a mushroom, with a thin base and a thick head, which may change shape and become small or very large.
I have seen a man who had two growths in his abdomen, which were like mushrooms, without any difference, white and thin-based, which had changed shape and become detached, and the fluid was pouring out of them. I removed them and weighed each one: one weighed around 18 ounces and the other around 6 ounces.
When you operate to cut it, you should look carefully, for if the diseased part is rotten and its color is white with a thin origin, you should cut it with a sharp instrument and avoid cutting into the surrounding tissue, lest you cause much bleeding.
If the bleeding is severe, you should compress it, and if you see the diseased part swollen and you are afraid of cutting with iron, take a thread from a sturdy rope, tie it tightly around the affected part, and leave it for two days; then tighten the rope further, but do not over-tighten it.
Whenever you operate on the affected part until it is separated and falls off by itself without effort, if the affected part is of a dense origin, you should cut some of it with caution and gentleness, but not too much, for what was in the abdomen may be able to be cut off, either half or some of it.
Then compress it gently so that it returns, then treat it until the wound heals, and beware of making an incision in a place where the sensation is minimal, for it is a cancerous tumor and it will be mentioned as a type of cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
On the treatment of elephantiasis.
Elephantiasis occurs due to many causes, either from the rupture of the peritoneum that is on the abdomen, so that the pus or abscess emerges, according to what appears in other swellings, or from blood that flows from a vein or artery, as has been mentioned before, or from bad air that is trapped beneath it.
If it is due to the rupture of the peritoneum and the emergence of pus, then the color of the tumor will be similar to that of the body and it will be soft without pain, and its appearance will vary. And if it is due to the emergence of abscess, its condition will be as we have described, with a severe difference. If you press on it with your fingers, it becomes depressed and then returns, and perhaps there is a sensation of numbness, and it hurts greatly when entering the bath or during intense exercise. If it is due to humidity, it will be soft.
It does not surpass if it is confined with a band, and neither increases nor decreases; if it was before the blood, then it appears with these signs to the blackness, if it was from before the swelling began to be solid and fixed on one measure.
If it was from before the rhysis, its touch would be weak, and the work in that is to examine; if it was a tumor from before the blood of the artery or vein or rhysis, it is feared that it will not be cured, for there is fear and danger as I informed you in the chapter where I mentioned the tumors that occur from before the artery and vein.
If it was a tumor from before the spleen or liver, it is feared that the patient will be weakened, and he should be ordered to hold himself back and stand upright, then taught to lean on his side around the tumor. Then order him to lie down between your hands on his back, then make an incision with a curved instrument around the tumor at the spot where you leaned with your side, then extend into the middle of the tumor up to a large scalpel, then tie the spot of the incision with a strong thread, and bind it tightly.
And the binding of the ligature is like a knot, then open up the middle of the tumor that is constricted above the ligature and insert your finger into it, and feel for the spleen; if you found that the ligature has taken hold, then loosen the knot and push the spleen inside the abdomen, and if you found a liver, extend it with a scalpel.
And cut its attachments, if an artery or vein opposed you, then ligate it firmly and return to your work, take two needles and insert into them two strong threads, and insert the needles into the incision that you made around the tumor, having tied them in a secure manner, then tie the tumor in four places on the needles.
If you dislike the needles and leave the site until the swollen flesh subsides and falls off by itself or is cut off if it suppurates, then treat it with what is necessary of the remedies until it heals. If the abscess was from a gathering of pus in the flesh.
Or from a fluid collection, it is necessary to evacuate the pus as we have said, and let out the blood or the fluid that is in it, then treat it with what is suitable for the site.
Chapter 35.
On the treatment of cancer.
We mentioned in the section on tumors, types of cancer and how to treat it with medications and warned against treating it with cautery lest it worsen, and we mentioned cancer that develops in the womb and warned against its treatment.
And we mentioned to the experts that if cancer is in a place where it can be completely removed, such as cancer that occurs in the breast or in the thigh and other solid organs, it is possible to remove it entirely, but not so if it has spread widely and become great, even if it was small at first.
For I did not find that anyone was cured of it, nor did I see or hear of anyone who reached that point, and the work in it is, if it is a solid tumor as we said, to ease the pain from the black bile, and then to separate it if it is in the veins, manifestly.
Then, the pain is eased by settling it in a solid tumor with the treatment, then you throw in the cancerous matter that is suitable for it, then you evacuate it from every side with the skin, cutting off until nothing of its roots remains, and let the blood flow, not cutting hastily.
But if you touch the sites and let out all the thick blood with your hands or with the available instruments, for if you encounter difficulty in the work, a great deal of blood will flow from cutting an artery or a vein, so stop the bleeding by ligating the vessel until the bleeding stops, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
The 54th Chapter.
On the treatment of hernias.
We have mentioned in the section on anatomy the types of swelling, how the fluid collects and the signs of each type and their treatment with medication. What is treated with cautery is only the type that is hard and does not respond to treatment with medication, neither the soft nor the fleshy type.
For that is resistant, if you have treated this type of hard hernia with medication and your treatment has not been successful, then consider whether the patient's weakness or another disease besides the hernia has overcome him, such as it being a result of something else.
Cough or dysentery and suchlike, beware that you do not treat it with cautery, for it is a deception. If you see the patient strong and unimpeded, without another disease besides the hernia alone, and he is neither a youth nor an old man, then direct your work to him, and stand firm between his hands. And a servant stands behind him, grasping his waist with his hands and pushing the fluid downwards towards the direction of the anus. Then you take a sharp-pointed instrument in this manner:.
Limit the two extremities for a long time, limited like the pointed instrument, except that there is some slight flexibility so you can move it during the operation towards the anus, and then you notice if the hernia has emerged from the direction of the anus.
It is necessary to make an incision in the flank, a distance of three fingers from the navel downwards, parallel to it above the anus. If the hernia emerges from the front due to a disease of the liver, then let the incision be a little to the right of the navel by three fingers. If it emerges from the front due to a disease of the spleen, then let the incision be on the right side by a distance of three fingers.
And it is also necessary that the incision be on the side on which the patient wants to lie down, so that the fluid does not collect at that weak spot. Then you pierce with a scalpel all of the skin, and then you insert the instrument into that incision and raise your hand.
In the incision between the gland and the aponeurosis, as if you were releasing it, and make the incision according to the shape of the nail or similar. Then, you pierce the aponeurosis until the incision reaches the empty space, which is the place of the urine, then you extract it and insert the instrument through the piercing.
It is a tube-like instrument made from a thin, flexible rod of silver or copper or tin, manufactured with a small hole at its tip and three holes on each side, one hole on one side and two holes on the other side, as you see.
And he may place its end in a quill-like form, on the model of a reed pen, in this shape.
At its upper end is a ring, so that if the instrument reaches the urine, it will flow down from its container onto the instrument, and you can drain the urine at a moderate rate, because if you drain more than needed at the time, perhaps the patient may die due to disruption of his vital spirit.
Or he may present with a condition close to death, but you should drain from him according to his strength and what is indicated by the patient's condition, from the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his complexion. Then, you extract the instrument and obstruct the urine, so that it is withheld from its container.
Due to the gland that holds the piercing on the aponeurosis, which I told you to sew up in that manner. Then, you return the instrument another day if you see the patient is ready for it.
And you also extract a small amount of urine, doing that gently and carefully, so as not to harm the patient, until only a little remains. If you are cautious with the patient and leave a small amount of urine, it will be sufficient to bury in the hot sand.
And give many treatments in the bath and the sun, and apply ointments to the wound, and use drying medications until he recovers. And take care of the stomach, liver, and spleen after extracting the urine, as I have described previously.
The Fifty-Fifth Section.
On treating children who are born with their urachus not being perforated or the meatus being narrow or not in its proper position.
Some children may be born with their belly and navel unperforated, and it is necessary to open a passage for them from the hour of birth.
With a very fine scalpel in this manner:.
Then you put a fine wire of lead into the meatus and tie it and leave it for three or four days, and when the urine wants to flow out, remove it and wash it, and if you do not adjust the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows onto the spot will not be able to flow.
And as for one whose meatus is narrow, you treat it with lead as we have said, for many days until it widens, and those who have a meatus not in its proper position, that is, some of them are born with the meatus at the end of the navel, so they cannot urinate forward.
Until the foreskin is lifted with his hand above, and he is not born from the front because the semen cannot reach the womb on its straightness, and it is a very difficult case, and the way of working in that is to lay the child on his back.
Then you stretch his belly with your left hand, stretching strongly, and you separate the head of the foreskin with a sharp scalpel or a very fine knife, as if you were carving something to be in its proper position, similar to his navel, so that the meatus falls in the middle as it should be.
And beware, during your operation, of the flow of blood, for it is very common to encounter that, so be prepared with what will stop the bleeding and treat the wound until it heals.
The Fifty-Sixth Section.
The ulcer that appears on the scalp and the skull and the blackness and the putridity and the adherence of the scalp to the skull.
This ulcer often appears on the crown of the head and is a bad omen, consisting of evil and non-evil matters; the non-evil ones require to be treated with gentle manipulation.
And cut it until you clean all of it, then apply a compress soaked in Egyptian melh (unguent) and afterwards treat it with Nakhla'ah unguent until it heals. And if the ulcer is evil, a mixture of luncheon should be used after cutting and scraping.
If the ulcer is on a scalp wound that did not heal and some of it is inside the scalp and some outside, then one should remove the ulcer that is inside first until it is cleansed, then afterwards treat what is outside.
Because if you treated them both together, you would not be safe from the scalp being perforated. It may also appear in the Antheya and on the scalp with blackness and putridity, so it is necessary to evacuate all that has become black or rotten, lest it should putrefy or has putrefied.
Then apply to it afterwards honey with the powder of roasted pomegranate, rose-water and kersenne, then treat it with other treatments until it heals. If there is a flow of blood, use Kiy (cupping) with a helalyah cup in this manner.
For cupping is beneficial for both conditions, namely the flow of blood and the wound, if it has become putrid. If the skull is affected and its veins have become dislodged at a certain time, it is necessary to insert into the channel of the vein a tube made of tin or lead, and likewise the adherence of the scalp to the skull.
And this adherence only occurs in one whose scalp is sound and did not need to be cut, and it may appear due to a wound or abscess; it is necessary to release it by making an incision with a fine scalpel until the adhesion is loosened and the skull is freed from every direction.
If you find it difficult to distinguish it from the surrounding tissues on the scalp, it is advisable to detach something from the skin and the periosteum, because the periosteum is delicate; perhaps its roughness will be apparent soon, then separate between the periosteum and the skin with a fine thread that has been soaked in cold water so that it does not stick.
Then he treats it with a dressing that is moderately tight until it heals completely.
Chapter 57.
On the treatment of ulcers in children and the management of the defects that occur in them.
The excision is not something that should be avoided, as it is one of the surgical operations, except that it was not part of our usual practice and we used it specifically in children, and it is necessary to re-evaluate its use.
And the easiest path leading to safety, I say that the predecessors did not mention excision in any of their books because it was not used in their surgical practices, and indeed it is what we have acquired.
Through experience, I found that the majority of surgeons and barbers use cauterization with a branding iron and scissors, and they use a file and a thread for cutting, and I have tried all these methods.
I did not find anything better than cauterization with scissors and cutting with a thread, because cauterization with a branding iron often slips onto the skin, since the skin of the periosteum has two layers; perhaps it cuts the upper layer and leaves the lower one.
It is necessary to resort to a final cut and painful repeated cauterization, and cutting with a file does not ensure the amputation of the limb, for it may enter its cavity; as for cauterization with a rasp, perhaps it will split the skin and spoil your work, or the child's skin may be naturally short.
Many things that are born in this way do not need to be treated, and I have seen that. As for treatment with scissors and stitching with thread, experience has shown me its usefulness because the scissors are suitable for cutting so that the stitches above are like the stitches below.
When you cut with your hand in harmony with the two stitches, cutting on one measure and at one time, it becomes a thread similar to a thin string for the suture of the wound from all directions, so that no defect occurs with it, and the work is done first, then the bandage is applied.
It is not necessary that if someone understands a little, you tie the thread in his wound only and leave it until another day, then untie it and bandage it from all directions, so that you can do it and what is above it with your intellect, then hold it between your hands, standing upright.
And do not sit and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the glance of the patient does not fall on it, nor on any of the instruments. Then, insert your hand into the wound and inflate the swelling and lift it up until the head of the wound emerges.
Then, clean what gathers in it from the pus. Then, tie the marked place with a thread, then tie below it a little, a second tie. Then, hold with your thumb and index finger the place of the lower tie, holding firmly, and cut between the two ties. Then, lift the swelling quickly to above and bring out the head of the wound. Then, let the blood flow a little, for it is better and less painful for the wound. Then, sprinkle it with a rose ointment, then dust it with powder of Yemen's dry limestone, which is better than what I have tried or the fine powder of Huwariri, which is also excellent.
Then, lift the swelling quickly to above and bring out the head of the wound. Then, let the blood flow a little, for it is better and less painful for the wound. Then, sprinkle it with a rose ointment, then dust it with powder of Yemen's dry limestone, which is better than what I have tried or the fine powder of Huwariri, which is also excellent. Then, apply the poultice to the wound from above, with a soft egg white dissolved in rose water, and leave it on until the next day. Then, remove it and treat it with a suitable treatment until it heals.
And this is an image of the surgical instrument suitable for excision.
It should be a straight-cutting instrument, not curved, with the edge of the blade being the length of the nails, and as for the incision, if you were to cut out the entire internal tumor or part of it during the excision, you would need to extend it from your finger before the site becomes inflamed.
And cut it out while it is straight, if you cannot grasp it with your finger, then use a forceps to hold it and cut it. If it has been three days and the area under the head of the tumor remains inflamed and swollen, leave it until the painful tumor subsides and its inflammation decreases.
And cut it out according to what seems appropriate to you, and beware of the head of the tumor, for if you cut off a part of the head of the tumor, it will not harm that. Rather, treat it with the poultices we described in the chapter on poultices.
And if you cut off a part of the tumor above the required amount and it is reduced to what is above, it will not harm that either, a lot of harm. Rather, treat it with what we mentioned until it heals.
Chapter 58.
On the treatment of the obstructed urine in the bladder.
Obstructed urine in the bladder occurs due to a blockage from a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or a swollen and inflamed tumor, and so on. If you treat that with what we mentioned, namely the varieties of treatment described in the chapter.
And the urine did not flow, and you found that its obstruction was due to a stone that had settled at the neck of the bladder. It is necessary to make the patient sit on his haunches, then let him lean back, stretching his belly towards his back, and holding the penis itself as much as possible.
When the rectum is constricted and the feces are driven back, and the urine is not emitted as we have mentioned, and the matter becomes severe on the patient, it is necessary to use the instrument called a catheter, which has this shape:
It is made of silver and is thin, smooth, and curved like a bird's beak in the shape of a long tube about a finger and a half in length, with a small hook at its head. Its purpose is to take a thread that is bent and tied at its end with a soft or cotton thread.
One inserts the thread's end into the lower part of the catheter and pushes it with a finger, so that a bit of the cotton thread enters the tube and blocks it like a stopper. Then one lubricates the catheter with oil or melted fat or egg white, and seats the patient on a chair.
And one opens the anus and lubricates it with warm water, oil, and rose-water. Then one inserts the catheter into the anus with gentleness until it reaches the base of the anus, then one bends the anus upwards towards the region of the navel, and then one pushes the catheter inside.
Until, when the anus is bent, then one pushes the catheter inside until it reaches near the bladder, and the penis inclines downwards, and the catheter is inside, then one pushes it further until it reaches the rectum, and the patient feels that it has reached a empty space.
And it is done on this rank because the passage through which the urine flows is curved, then one pulls the thread with the cotton strongly a little, so that the urine follows the cotton, then one extracts it and makes the urine flow, and returns the catheter.
One repeats doing that until the rectum is evacuated and the patient feels relief.
The Ninetieth and Fifty-Fifth Sections.
How to ligate the womb with a ligature.
You make instruments suitable for that, crafting them from silver or ivory, with a long tube attached to a curved end and a canal through which the waters and medicines flow, and it is called a ligature, and this is its form:.
You craft it from silver or ivory, making a long tube on a curved end, all of which is conical except the tip, for it has three holes: two on one side and one on the other side, as you see.
And the empty space, which has the syringe, is according to what is needed, without excess, until when you draw with it something from the vessels, and if you press with it, it injects, and after that, you craft the irrigator through which the oil is poured in the naval battles.
So if you want to insert the vessels into the womb, you introduce the tip of the ligature into the vessel and draw with the syringe upwards, then the vessel is inserted into the cavity of the ligature, and its tip is introduced into the cervix, as we described in the catheters, then you inject the vessel with the syringe.
So that vessel reaches the womb according to the position, until the fetus feels it, and this is a picture of a ligature also, which ligates the womb.
You craft it from silver or tin, its upper head resembling a small hook, and it has a groove in which the ligature lies. Then you take a womb of a camel and put in it the vessel you want to ligate the womb with, then you tie it between the two grooves, a strong and tight bond with a twisted thread.
And you push that vessel a little onto the cautery, then you insert the tip of the ligature into the cervix, and you hold your hand on the womb with the vessel, holding firmly until the fetus feels that the vessel has reached the womb.
If you do not have a pair of scissors, take a piece of iron and make a circle with it and pierce it from all sides, then insert a thread and tighten it in the hole as it turns, then gather the circle as you gather the suture after placing what you want of medicines and lotions and water.
Then tie it to the lancet and make it as you made with the scissors, from the edge of your hand until the medicine reaches the lancet.
The Sixty-Second Chapter.
On Extracting the Cataract.
We have mentioned in the chapter on ophthalmology the types of cataract and their treatment with medications, and we have distinguished between the cataract that develops in the brain and the one that develops in the eye, and all its signs, and we have mentioned the cataract in which operation is performed by hand and scissors.
And it is the cataract that develops in the eye, specifically, and which grows in the iris, and I have described that with clear explanation and concise expression.
So I say that the cataract that develops in the eye is more common among the elderly, and among its signs is that the urine comes out of the eye similar to water in its clarity.
And it shows up with blurred vision and weakens his memory, and many times it becomes cloudy, then it spreads and appears with the conjunctiva in many of them; and it is easy to remove it from the elderly until they reach fourteen years, and it is difficult for the old and likewise for the young, so it is moderate between that.
And the one whose cataract is greatest, its treatment is easiest, and the smallest is opposite to that; so if we turn to treatment, it is necessary first to evacuate the conjunctiva with an evacuation that removes all the impurities that are in it, for it may prevent the existence of the cataract when examining.
The patient is taken and placed on his back, with his legs raised to let the anus drop down towards the pubic area or protrude from a raised position, then it is held firmly between your hands, one hand underneath his thigh to turn the anus completely downwards.
And if you feel the anus in the cavity, you should quickly insert your finger on it; if it doesn't fit under the palm of your hand, you should wipe the index finger with the oil from your left hand, whether the patient is a young boy or the middle finger.
If it is a small boy, you should insert it into his anus and feel for the anus until, when it comes under your finger, you move it slightly towards the pubic area, then you grasp it with your finger and push it outwards towards the place where you want to make an incision.
And you order a servant to hold the anus with his hand, and you order another servant to stretch out his right hand above the pubic area and his other hand to stretch out the skin underneath the pubic area near the place where the incision will be made. Then, you take the surgical instrument that has this shape.
And you make an incision between the anus and the pubic area, not in the middle but towards the left side of the anus, and the incision is on the same level as the anus, with your finger inside the anus and you press it outwards, making the incision wide on the outside and narrow on the inside, as much as possible to allow the anus to come out of it.
It is not larger, perhaps the finger that is in the anus at the incision site will press and it will come out easily; and be aware that there may be something in the anus with adhesions or ligaments that makes its removal difficult.
And among them is a slippery one that resembles a bladder and is easily removed, but if it has adhesions or ligaments, you increase the incision slightly; if it doesn't come out like this, it is necessary to hold it with a hook, being careful to have its edge like a scalpel.
Stop the hemorrhage, and do not let it flow from there; if you cannot, insert a gentle instrument with a curved end, and if you are unable to stop it, enlarge the incision slightly, and if blood overflows, stop it with a compress.
If there are more than one, ligate the larger one first to the mouth of the vessel, then make an incision in it, and afterwards ligate the smaller one; do the same if there are more than two. If it is very large, it is better not to make a large incision in it, for it may lead to one of two evils.
Either he will die, or urine will constantly flow from it, because the spot does not heal properly unless you try to ligate it until it is expelled, or until it forms a fistula in its cicatrix.
When you have finished your operation, sprinkle the wound with pounded burnt crust and rose-water, or oil and rose-water, or butter and cold water; do not let the patient get into a hot bath until the third day.
If the wound has been washed with water and rose-water, and treated with Nabul and Basilic ointment until he recovers, but if there is an inflammation in the wound, and a hot swelling, and suchlike, it is as if blood has become stagnant in the vessel, and urine is retained, and this is known by the presence of blood with the urine.
Put your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will cause putrefaction of the vessel and its destruction. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and adapt each type to what is suitable for the treatment until he recovers.
It is necessary, at times of treatment, to bind the thighs together and constrict them to fix the medicines that are applied to the spot. If the hemorrhage is small and has entered into the course of the ureter and has stopped the urine from flowing out, treat it with what I have described before making an incision.
It is often the case that I have been forced to abandon this treatment for the fracture, and that is because I took a splint made of iron in the shape of a foliad.
You should make a triangular bandage, pointed and narrow, on the extremity of the limb, then take a thread and tie it under the splint to prevent it from returning to its natural position. Then, you should insert the iron splint into the wound gently until the splint reaches the same position as the bone.
You should insert the splint with your hand in the same position, little by little, and you should press it gently until it is fixed from the other side. Then, the pus will flow out with its discharge, and you should tighten your hand on what remains of the bone from outside the splint. Thus, it will be united and come out with the pus, and the patient will recover.
If this treatment does not work for you, and the fracture is difficult for you to manage, then tie a thread under the bone and another above the bone, then make an incision on the bone in the same splint between the two ties, and then remove it.
Then, you should release the splint and clean away the stagnant blood that has collected in the wound. You should have tied the thread under the bone so that it does not return to its natural position, and the other tie above, so that when you release the thread after the bone is removed, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
Therefore, it is necessary for you, when you tie the upper thread, to elevate the skin above so that it returns to its natural position and covers the wound, as we have mentioned.
The Sharp Instruments and the Stoons.
Extracting the Bone for Women.
It is rarely the case that a bone is dislocated in women, for if one of them suffers a fracture, it is difficult to treat her and there are many obstacles. One of them is that the woman may be virgin, and another is that you do not find a woman who would allow a doctor to examine her.
If it is a simple or compound fracture, you will not find a woman who excels in this craft, and also the work by hand is the fourth reason, because the location of the incision on the pelvis of women is far from the location of the pelvis, so it requires a deeper incision.
There is danger in that, for if necessity requires it, it is fitting to take a skilled female doctor, but they are rarely found; their absence necessitates seeking a skilled male doctor or taking a capable female doctor who has some expertise in this craft among women.
You should prepare her and instruct her to do all that you instruct her, from examining the pelvis first, and then looking to see if the woman is a virgin; it is fitting to insert the finger into her vagina and examine the pelvis, and if you find it and press it under your fingers.
Then instruct her to make an incision on it, and if she is not a virgin but rather experienced, instruct the capable one to insert her finger into the vulva and examine the pelvis after placing her left hand on the perineum and constricting it strongly.
And if you find it, it is fitting to guide it from the opening of the perineum down to the extent of its strength, until it reaches the bottom of the thigh, then make an incision on it at the middle of the vulva at the base of the thigh, from whichever direction it is convenient for her and feels the pelvis in that direction.
And her finger should not cease from the pelvis, constricting it underneath, and let the incision be small at first, then insert the director on that small incision; if you feel the pelvis, increase the incision according to what you learn, that is, how much the pelvis will emerge from it. And know that there are many types of pelvis.
Some are small, some are large, and others are smooth, rough, long, curved, or those with a prominence; know their types so you can proceed accordingly on what you want. If blood overflows, compress the bleeding vessel for a period of time until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
When you extract the hernia, and you are about to cut with the instruments I mentioned for extracting hernias in men, so you can use them in your work. If you are overwhelmed by the profusion of blood and you feel the pulsation of the blood, it is because it is from a severed artery, so apply the cautery to the spot.
Make an incision with a sharp instrument and leave it, do not touch the hernia or extract it, for perhaps you have injured the surrounding area. Then treat the wound and if the bleeding stops after a few days and the spot suppurates, return to your work until you extract the hernia.
The Second Chapter, The Sixty-Sixth.
On the incision on the watery veins.
The watery veins are actually a collection of fluid in the white peritoneum which is beneath the membrane surrounding the testicle and is called the spermatic cord, and it may be in a special membrane that has a natural tendency towards one side of the testicle.
So it is thought that there is another testicle and it is between the membrane of the testicle and the white peritoneum which we mentioned, but this is only in the hernia. And these watery veins are generated from a weakness that exposes them to the anthela, so they deserve to have this matter attributed to them, for they are exposed to a blow on the anthela.
And this fluid is of many colors, either it is yellowish, or it is bloody red, or it is dark blue, or it is whitish watery, and this is what it is most likely to be. And the signs by which it is recognized.
When the fluid collects, if it is in the white peritoneum which we mentioned, then the tumor becomes stretched out a little towards the length, like an egg shape, and the testicle does not appear because the fluid surrounds it from all sides.
If the varix is in a thin membrane of its own, then the tumor becomes straight with a direction towards the egg.
So the person imagines it is another egg, and if the varix is between the skin of the testicle and the white vitelline membrane, then it falls under the sense, and as for knowing the color of the varix, you should press the tumor with the square flat instrument that I have described its shape, and what appears after pressing the instrument is a judgment on what is inside it.
So if we resort to treatment with iron, it is necessary to warn the patient of the pain, for it may be possible and you see his body relaxed, then he lies on his back on a mattress or a small pillow, and many cloths are placed under him, then you sit at his left side.
And you warn the servant to sit at his right side, extending his hand towards one of the sides of the testicle and towards the region of the umbilical cord, then you take a wide scalpel and split the skin of the testicle from the middle to near the cord.
And you make the incision on a straight line parallel to the line that divides the skin of the testicle into two halves until it reaches the white vitelline membrane, then you dissect it and be cautious not to cut too much, and your dissection will be from the side that adheres more to the egg, and you remove the dissected tissue as much as possible.
Then you open the full membrane and evacuate all the fluid, then you separate the edges of the incision with compresses and extend the membrane upwards, without touching the skin of the testicle that contains it, and you cut the membrane however you can, whether by a single cut or multiple cuts.
And do not neglect its thin side, for if you did not completely remove the cut part, you would not be safe from the fluid returning; so if the egg emerges outside its skin while you are operating, then when you finish cutting the membrane, return it to its place and reunite the edges of the skin of the testicle with sutures.
If the patient's condition has deteriorated due to a previous illness, it is necessary to ligate the vessels in the affected area to prevent bleeding, then cut the excess flesh from the affected area and extract the abscess, and treat it with what we have mentioned.
If the pus has collected in both areas, then know that they are two abscesses. Open the other area according to what you did with the first one, even if it is easier for you to make it a single operation. Then, stop the bleeding.
And insert into the incision a piece of cloth that has been soaked in oil or rose-water, and place another piece of cloth that has been soaked in vinegar and oil on top of it, and apply it to the affected area, and bandage the abdomen with a wrapped binder, which is the dressing. And tie it above with a bandage that has six straps, in this manner:
Then, take two binders and tie them, and stuff with the soaked cloth according to this example. Make the straps that are attached to it from cotton or damp cloth, and gather them in a belt around the hips, and one of the straps takes hold of the chair back to the spine.
And the second binder takes hold towards the thigh, and the straps on the lower legs from below, and the remaining straps on the hips, gathering all of them in a belt around the hips. You can also make these bindings with leather instead of iron.
And it is that you take a gentle, fine scalpel and dissect the skin of the affected area, which is an incision according to what we have described, until you expose the white peritoneum covering the abscess. Take another scalpel on this manner:
It resembles the Greek incision, then you open it and dissect until you remove all the purulence. Then, you extend the peritoneum with the instruments and scrape off the layer containing the abscess with the scalpel, cutting according to what is possible for you, until you remove all of it and avoid touching the abscess with your hand.
You should know that this work is more refined and farther from the necessity of bloodletting, and better than operating with a surgical incision, because if you encounter an obstruction in the incision or during the cutting, or a vein is opened or another vessel, it is necessary to treat each of what you encountered from that with the treatment that is suitable for it.
For if the patient was weak and did not withstand this operation due to his frailty, do not operate on him according to what I have described, but rather take into account what is suitable for him, as it has been mentioned in the previous chapters.
That the emaciation is watery, it is necessary to place the patient on a high cushion, then make an incision in its lowest part with a fine scalpel, and direct the incision along the length of the body, making the opening wide enough until all the water drains out, then apply a compress to the site and bind it.
And leave it until the rest of the water drains out, then treat him until the wound heals. If you find that the drainage of water is slow during the operation, and it is not happening, it is because the white membrane constricts at the mouth of the wound, preventing the drainage of water.
It is then necessary to insert into the wound a silver tube or an instrument that extracts the watery matter, which I have described in its form, or add to the opening of the wound a little.
You should know that the water may return and collect after six months or thereabouts, so if it collects, operate on it in the same manner and treat the patient as you did initially.
Chapter Three, Section Six.
On Incisions for Fleshy Emaciation and its Treatment.
You should know that incisions on this emaciation are among the most dangerous things that lead to perdition in most cases, therefore we see abandoning them and refraining from them, and I warn against operating on them and the types of wounds.
I say that many tumours occur in the bodies which are composed of anthoids and that is due to several causes, either from a sharp inflammation affecting the anthoids or from a blow, and the colour of the tumour is on the colour of the body and it has no moisture.
And the tumour is rigid and perhaps the tumour has changed its colour to black, and it has no sensation; and it may be due to the twisting of the nerves and their inflammation, as I have mentioned before, or from the inflammation of the arteries. Whatever is due to the inflammation of the nerves, that is recognised by the spreading of the tumour.
If you compress it with your fingers and it does not respond to the pressure, and as for what is due to the inflammation of the arteries, nothing spreads from it when compressed with the fingers. And this type can be opened up and along with other abscesses.
And it is that you open the skin of the scrotum, then extend the testicle upwards and extract it from the white peritoneum, and free the epididymis from the vessels, and ligate the vessels, and cut the epididymis after freeing it from every direction of the testicle's directions, for if the testicle has adhered to those inflamed tissues.
It is necessary to extract the testicle and cut it off, and if there is adhesion between something of the peritoneum or between the vessels, it is necessary to free all that adhesion and cut it with a straight incision.
If the flesh has grown at the site of adhesion which is behind, it is necessary to cut all of it and extract the testicle as we mentioned. If you have completed your work, wash the wound with rose oil and vinegar, then apply a bandage, and afterwards treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Chapter 4, Section 6.
On the treatment of hernias that occur with diarrhea.
Diarrhea is a loosening of the intestines, similar to a rupture, with relaxation of the anus, and contraction on the ligamenture, movement, and exercise; and in treating this ailment, it is close to what has been mentioned previously.
But it is necessary to mention the work done by the predecessors, so I say that it is necessary to sit on a raised seat, then push the ligamenture of the anus downwards, and grasp the spermatic cord with your fingers, along with the vessels that are close to the testicle.
And let a servant hold it for you, and press it strongly, then make an incision with a sharp, slender instrument, making a curved cut while avoiding the vessels until they are exposed, then extract from every side as I mentioned to you in the section on surgical instruments, those that are in the arm, then insert a thread with a double knot.
And tie it at the first sutures that were affected by the hernia, and also tie it at its end; then make a longitudinal incision in the middle, cutting along the length of the abdomen, and remove what has accumulated in it from the putrid, festering humors.
Then treat the hernia with other surgical treatments that you want to use to remove the vessels that nourish one of the intestines, and there is no problem with that; for if the hernia has affected all the vessels, it is necessary to remove one of the intestines with its vessels so that it does not hinder the nutrient supply. Before cutting the vessels, they should be ligated and not benefited by.
The fifth and sixth sections.
On the treatment of congenital hernias.
These hernias occur from a weakness that appears in the abdominal wall, extending to the navel, and near the umbilical region, which is one of the weakest points on the belly, where the peritoneum descends from that weakness to one of the intestines.
This fracture occurs either from a split in the periosteum or from its detachment, and these two types occur due to many causes, whether a blow or a fall or a thrust or lifting something heavy, and so on. Its sign is that if it occurs from the detachment of the periosteum, it happens gradually over a long period of time.
And it does not occur suddenly, and the swelling becomes even towards the depth before the periosteum is inflamed, and its sign if it occurs from a split in the periosteum is that it happens from the start with severe pain and the swelling is varied and appears under the skin nearby.
And that is by the exit of the pus and its direction to the outside from the periosteum, and it may come out with the pus a thick discharge, so this abscess is called periostitic and thick, and it may be with a fetid smell, and it may form in the periosteal abscess and become stagnant there, causing the destruction of the limb.
Because it happens with severe pain and numbness, and it is not hidden if it becomes inflamed. The treatment of these types of abscesses is by ironing danger, so one should beware of falling into it. The method of work is to order the limb to return the pus to its inside through the orifice, if it inclines towards returning.
Then, he should lie down on a cushion between your hands and raise his legs, then stretch the skin that is near the affected area upwards and split the skin of the entire wound along its length, then insert sutures in the edges of the split according to what is needed to close the split.
And the split is according to what is possible for the pus to come out of it, then scrape off the periosteum that is under the skin of the wound until, if the white, hard periosteum appears from every side, then insert your finger into where the pus is.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Then take a needle with a thick thread that has been spun from ten threads, and insert it at the end of the suture under the skin flap of the wound, then cut the edges of the thread until there are four threads. Then gather some of them together in a shape like a plait, and tie the skin flap that we said was under the skin of the wound, strongly from two directions. Then also twist the edges of the threads and tie them tightly so that nothing can come out of the vessels that feed it, until something reaches it. Let it be exposed from that and insert a second suture, also making another tie outside the first tie, at a distance of less than two fingers, and after these two ties, let the skin flap under the skin of the wound be equal to the size of the finger bone.
Let it be exposed from that and insert a second suture, also making another tie outside the first tie, at a distance of less than two fingers, and after these two ties, let the skin flap under the skin of the wound be equal to the size of the finger bone. And cut the rest of it circularly and remove the pus with it, then make a shallow incision in the skin of the wound to let out the blood and serum as we described previously. Then use the soaked cotton in the oil and apply it to the wound, and use the suture that we described.
And the white skin flap that we mentioned after cutting it carefully to avoid bleeding, often exposes that. And leave the suture until it falls off by itself, for if you hurry its removal, it will be painful and inflamed, and it will take time to settle.
Then treat the wound with usual treatments for wounds until it heals.
Chapter 66.
In these arterial wounds, I have not seen anyone dare to treat them with iron, and the ancients mentioned that it should be done as we described in the wounds with a pulse, which is to tie off the vessels after the incision with a bandage below.
Make a incision in the middle and treat the swelling as it is described, until the abscess discharges its contents and the wound heals as we have mentioned, until it recovers.
The seventh and eighth sections.
On the fracture that occurs in the hip joint.
The fracture may occur in the hip joint, as we have mentioned, without displacing anything from its position, and if it does displace, it will be slight and will return to its place at all times.
But if it is left for a long time, the split will increase in the hip joint until the abscess and the pus discharge from the groin, and this occurs due to the extension of the split that occurs in the hip joint, as we have mentioned. And that is because it extends to the hip joint, then it becomes inflamed and fills the space, and its treatment is by drainage, as we have described and explained.
And it may be treated by ironing in this manner: place the patient on his back between your hands, then make an incision at the site of the fracture, a horizontal incision about three fingers wide, and then drain the fluids that are under the skin.
Until, when the white hip joint is exposed, you take a roller and place it on the site of the fracture, and push it down to the depth of the abdomen, then sew the two sites together with a suture, one side to the other.
Then release the roller, and do not cut the tendons or muscles, nor touch the veins or anything else, as I have instructed you in treating wounds of the abdomen, then treat it with treatment of surgical wounds.
If the sutures are cut, clean them and close the wound until it heals, for the hip joint will contract and not increase in fracture.
And drainage is better in this position because it is closer to being safe.
The Eighty-Eighth Chapter.
On Relaxation of the Fractured Hip Joint.
Many people relax the fractured hip joint without relaxing the humors that are inside it, and its appearance is concealed, so it is necessary for whoever desires to treat it to anoint the affected part with oil.
He should cut all the skin that has relaxed over the thick skin, then gather the edges, and if you wish to suture, you should suture the relaxed skin with three or four sutures, and tighten from the suture, then cut what is between the sutures.
Then treat it with other remedies until it heals and the sutures fall off.
The Eighty-Ninth Chapter.
On Excision.
Indeed, excision is prohibited in our law.
And therefore, it was not necessary for me to mention it in this book of mine, and I only mentioned it for two reasons: one is that it should be known to the physician if he is asked about it, so that he may know how to treat whoever is afflicted with it; and the other reason is that we often need to excise some of the limbs for our benefit.
Like the humps, and the wings, and the tails, and such like that from the animals. So I say that excision is of two types: either by crushing or by cutting and severing. As for what is done by crushing, its method of operation is that we sit with the animal in hot water until its joints relax and become flaccid and loosen.
Then you crush it with your hand until it disintegrates and does not resist upon being touched, and as for excision by cutting and severing, it is necessary to hold the animal firmly and constrict the joint of the affected limb with your left hand, then tie the veins and cut at each single joint.
If you have extracted the two testicles, then cut them off after you have dissected them, and do not leave anything of the fasciae on them except for the delicate fascia that is on the vessels, and this method of dissection is better than the one done by traction.
Because traction might leave something of the anthium behind, which would harm the healing of the wound, and then you would have to treat it until it recovers.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
Treatment of Hernia.
Hernia occurs in men in two types, one of which appears below the navel or in the cord of the testicle between the anthium in the shape of a woman's vulva with hair, and urine may flow from what is in the cord of the testicle.
And in women, there is one type, and it occurs above the vulva on the perineum like small testicles of a child protruding outside, as if they were a man's penis, and the two anthium are like those of a woman, and the treatment of these three types.
The two types in men and the one type in women require that those excess flesh be cut until their effect disappears, then they are treated like other wounds until they recover. But as for the second type in men from which urine flows, being in the cord of the testicle, there is no operation nor can the testicles be returned to their place.
Chapter Eighty and Seven.
On excision of the clitoris and the excess flesh that grows from the vulva of women.
The clitoris sometimes grows in size due to a natural cause, until it becomes large and protruding, and its appearance is ugly, and it may become so big in some women that it resembles that of men and leads to intercourse.
It is necessary to grasp the base of the clitoris with your fingers or with a clamp, and cut it off, and do not hesitate in the cutting, nor be concerned about the depth of the incision, so that bleeding may not occur.
The treatment of wounds should be continued until they heal, and as for the inflamed flesh, it is flesh that becomes inflamed in the affected limb until it is fully restored.
Sometimes it protrudes outward, for example, like a fistula. Therefore, some of the authorities have called this type of disease a "fistula", and it is necessary to cut it off, just like a polyp, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 27.
On the Treatment of Ulcers.
An ulcer is when the woman's vulva is not perforated or has a small perforation, and it can be either innate or acquired; the acquired one occurs due to a previous disease, and it can be from inflamed flesh that has protruded.
Or it is a thin or thick ulcer, and it can be either in the depths of the womb, or in its sides, or at its top or bottom, and it prevents from sexual intercourse and pregnancy, and sometimes from menstruation, and knowing that requires examination by a capable woman.
If the ulcer is visible and close, and if it is not visible, then feel for it with your fingers or with a probe; if the ulcer is from a thin membrane and is close to the labia, then scrape it gently, which means making a slight depression on the labia, then place all your fingers of both hands.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs apart, then she should spread the labia strongly until the thin membrane is scraped and the ulcer opens up; then take a piece of cloth and dip it in oil and place it on the affected area, and the woman should do this every day so that the area does not adhere again.
If the membrane is thick and dense, it is necessary to split it with a thin, narrow scalpel, like a paper knife; if the ulcer is from inflamed flesh, then cauterize it with a hot instrument and cut it off, and have with you medications that stop the bleeding without causing pain, such as agarics, and tragacanth, and gypsum, a collection of white medicines.
A tube of wide copper is used to drain the wound quickly, and it is left for a while, then a piece of cloth is used to dress it, and treatment with vinegar is applied until it heals, and it may show a plant-like shape at the end, which requires being cut according to this method.
What has not become a cancerous tumor, the cancerous tumor that is in the womb does not respond to treatment with iron cautery.
Chapter Three and Seventy.
On the treatment of abscesses, hemorrhoids, and bloody fluxes that occur in women's vulva.
As for abscesses, they are inflations of the blood vessels until a lot of blood is discharged from them constantly; if an abscess has developed into hemorrhoids, we have mentioned their types and symptoms in the section on anatomy, and we will mention them here.
What can be treated and what cannot be treated; I say that if the abscesses and hemorrhoids are in the depth of the womb and have not been felt by palpation, there is no treatment with iron cautery, and whatever is on the surface of the womb can be felt by palpation, it is what can be treated.
It is necessary for the woman to enter a cool room, then the hemorrhoids are pulled out with a smooth or rough cloth and cut off from their roots, then they are touched when the bleeding stops from one of the cutting veins without causing pain.
Like the astringent and the cyperus grass and the Laburnum, and similar things; then her legs are raised to the wall for an hour, then they are immersed in cold water; if the bleeding persists, she is seated on a mat of Sammac, and pomegranate skin, and walnut, and similar things; then fine powder of the arrowroot is applied with honey and vinegar.
And a plaster is applied to her back, and if the bleeding stops, then the solid and firm bandages are wrapped around the thighs without being too tight; then take a soft cloth and dip it in the decoction of Tartarith or the decoction of Lisan al-Haml or the decoction of Ullication, with a mixture of pomegranate vinegar, and the affected area is tightly bound.
If the tumor is located in a sensitive area, it should be treated with caution until it heals, and if it is a red abscess, it resembles an erythematous rash on the skin, requiring careful examination to determine what appears on its surface, as I mentioned earlier.
Chapter 74.
Concerning the abscess that appears in the womb.
It may appear in the womb various kinds of tumors, such as cancer, confluent tumor, aposteme, induration, apostasis, and carcinoma, and I have mentioned all these diseases and their types and symptoms in the section.
It is necessary to mention in this article the acute tumor that appears in the womb, if it is one of the tumors that gather over time, how it should be treated with iron, and it is necessary to consider whether the tumor was severe from its beginning, with a strong pulse and anxiety and fever.
And if it turns red when touched, do not hasten to treat it, but rather wait until the swelling subsides, and then it is necessary to make the woman sit on a chair with a pillow under her buttocks and lean back against its back.
And bring her legs together towards the lower abdomen, and keep her thighs slightly apart, and place her arms under her knees, and bind them with a suitable bandage.
Then, the operator should sit on the right side and use the instrument that opens the womb's mouth, whose shape will be explained later, and it is necessary, if you want to use this instrument, to estimate the depth of the woman's womb so that what enters from the instrument does not exceed the depth of the womb.
If the instrument exceeds the depth, it is necessary to place a guide on the rim of the womb's neck to prevent the entire instrument from entering the womb's depth, and it is necessary to curve the rod that moves inside the instrument from the upper side.
You should hold the instrument and let the servant hold the patient's limb until it becomes relaxed, then if the abscess appears and is touched by the hand, it would be better to incise it at its base with a gentle touch, and if the entire duration has passed.
It would be better to make a gentle incision in the abscess, making a gentle curved cut in the direction of the vein or a green-colored oil, including some constriction, and making the incision exit from the wound at the base of the abscess, and scraping from the outside onto the abscess and onto the surrounding skin with a gentle curved motion in water that has been cleansed by khabazi.
Then treat it with a poultice after two days, using a remedy that is suitable for it, until it heals.
And it is washed with water and honey, then with water that has been cleansed by the juice of the Sos plant or long zuwarand, then returned to the poultice, if the abscess was fluctuating inside the limb.
It would be better to abstain from treating it with cautery, but rather treat it with what we have mentioned in the section.
Chapter Five and Sixty.
On teaching about ulcers, how to treat the living flesh if they deviate from the natural shape.
It is necessary for the surgeon to recognize the natural shape of birth, and from its signs, if he sees the woman straining down and stretching out to breathe deeply and relaxing what is on her from the pains.
And he accelerates the delivery of the fetus, and knows that this birth is in its natural shape, and its delivery is on its head, with the placenta attached to it or suspended from its navel. If he sees these signs, it is necessary to press her belly so that the fetus comes out quickly.
For if it comes out headfirst, the placenta comes out with it and is cleaned from those filths, cleaning well. And whatever is not in this birth is unnatural and reprehensible, because it may come out feet first or hands before its head and feet.
Here is the translation:
We expose every form of it and how the trickery is in it, so that we can rely on it and stand on it. If the fetus turns its head to the natural birth position and presses on the woman, making delivery difficult for her and weakening her strength, then I make her sit on a chair and order the women to support her.
And we massage her uterus with the warmed-up compresses and soft gloved hands, then insert a small rod between her fingers to gently scrape the afterbirth or scrape it out with her fingers until the excess is expelled from her uterus and the woman's belly is constricted until the fetus comes out.
If it does not come out, we should make the woman cough by applying the compresses with deer fat and then order her to move her hips and contract her belly while holding her mouth and nose, for the fetus will come out at that hour. If the hand of the fetus comes out first, we should slowly pull it out little by little.
If it does not come out, we put the woman on a bench and lift her legs up high, then shake the bench on the ground while the woman holds onto it so as not to fall during the shaking. If the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, we cut it into pieces and extract the remaining parts of the fetus.
Or we tie his hands to a cloth and pull them gently, for it will come out. The fetus comes out on its legs. If the fetus comes out on its legs, we should push them upwards and then rotate the fetus little by little until it is freed. Then we take one of its legs and stretch it little by little.
If it comes out to the thighs, we order her to move her hips and contract her belly, for it will come out. If it does not come out by what we have described, we gently turn the fetus little by little until it takes its natural position, for it will then come out with a smooth delivery. If all our descriptions are followed, it will definitely come out.
Take the ligament of the thigh and the ligament of the waist, and fat of the shoulder blade, and a small cushion, and hit all of them in the hollowness of the womb with a gentle hitting, then insert it into the woman's vagina and below her belly, then sit her in warm water until the lochia flows.
If you saw that it did not come out from below her, then make for her a shield of myrrh and carry her, and if the shield is stuck for an hour, then sit her on the birth stool, and sprinkle it and close her mouth and nose, and press down gently below her belly, for the fetus comes out at that time, the fetus coming out with its hands and feet.
If it comes out in this manner, then insert his hands little by little, and the woman will relax on her back and bend her knees towards below, and she is stretched out on a bed, and her hands are grasped, then press gently above her belly little by little. Then bring out what is beneath her thighs from the cushions until they are in a upright position, and if the fetus does not come out, take both of her legs and shake them with a strong shaking motion, then press gently above the womb little by little until the fetus rises upwards, then insert the handler's hands and pull the fetus out little by little.
And order the woman to push until the fetus comes out, the fetus coming out with one of its hands stretched out, insert it in her hand, if she is not able to push it back, then make the woman stand and walk, and if she is not able to walk, then let her lie down.
Shake her sides strongly, then use the birth stool that is prepared from the cushions, for if it takes hold of the fetus, then sit her on the birth stool, and handle the hand and adjust the fetus to its natural position, and sprinkle the woman, and order her to push until it comes out.
The expulsion of the fetus is done by gently placing one's hands on the mother's back, and its face should be towards her spine. It is necessary to grasp the foot of the fetus and then turn it slightly, little by little, and pull it out with gentleness. If it comes out, take hold of it before it changes position from the birth canal and the womb.
Then, move it slightly, little by little. If you do that, sit her down on the birthstool and instruct her to lean towards her right side, then, instruct her to push and exert herself with the contractions, for the fetus will come out, its delivery being facilitated by her position.
If it descends to the mouth of the womb in this manner, with the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth with your fingers until you release it from the fetus. Take hold of the face and neck of the fetus and separate it from the navel so that it does not suffocate and die. Then, push the fetus inside until it assumes its correct position.
And instruct the woman to push repeatedly, for it will come out easily. The delivery of twins or many babies is like that, know that twins are often born and sometimes three or four are born, and they may live, although that is rare and usually only two survive, whereas five is something outside of natural norms and they do not survive at all.
And if they are connected by one afterbirth and separate membranes, each with a navel cord, they may come out just like a single fetus, easily and naturally, and they will be delivered in the same way as we have described.
For if some of them are difficult during delivery and deviate from what we have mentioned as unnatural forms, then manage them as we have described, and let the midwife be gentle and perform her task with gentleness and caution, and be aware of every situation that requires skillful and careful management to ensure safety.
What is imagined in the womb of the fetus, may be one or two or three or four or five or six or seven and more than ten. And I have seen that a woman has miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them being imagined as such.
By the will of the Almighty, all this must be in the knowledge of the accoucher, so that he may be prepared for it on the day it occurs, and thus receive it with what is fitting.
The 67th Chapter
On extracting a dead fetus.
If you treated the dead fetus with what I mentioned in the section on treatment and it did not come out, and you were forced to resort to manual extraction, it is necessary to examine if the woman was healthy and strong, and there was nothing among the symptoms that would make you fear for her safety from the complications, it is necessary to lay the woman on a bed with her back raised.
And her head should be inclined downwards and her thighs raised, and an assistant should hold her from both sides or tie her to the bed so that she does not move her body when the fetus is being extracted.
Then he should anoint her womb with warm ointments, and the milk of the colostrum, and the juice of the Katan plant, then the accoucher should introduce his hands with these ointments and lotions, then gently insert them into the womb, seeking the place where the fetus is lodged, and the suitable positions for that.
Examine, if the fetus is lying on its head, then insert the fingers into its eyes or nostrils or mouth or neck or under its armpits or elbows or in the nearby positions of the joints or under the clavicles.
And if it is lying on its feet, then in the crotch and middle joints. And it is necessary to hold the fingers with the right hand and bend them between the fingers of the left hand, and gently insert the hand, seeking to insert the fingers into some of those positions we mentioned.
You reach a empty spot, then you insert another suture or a third if you need to make the pull even and not inclined to one side, then you extend it evenly and not on a straight line only, but rather it is flexible towards every direction.
It is easy to extract it as one constructs with the drill at its base, and it is necessary between that to relax the extension so that if it inclines to one side, it is necessary to insert some fingers through the opening and enter from one side to direct it where it inclines, so some of the fetus is extracted, then the instruments are transferred to other positions.
You elevate it a little, doing this until the entire fetus comes out, and if you extracted one hand before another and could not return it because of its contraction, it is necessary to wrap it with a bandage and then pull it out until all of it is extracted.
Either at the wrist joint or at the elbow, and so it is necessary to do this with the other hand, and with the legs, for if the fetus's head was large and there was pressure on its exit or if there was a collection of water in its head, it is necessary to insert between the fingers a perforated spoon.
And you scrape with it the head to make the water exit, or you hook it with the instrument called the Moshdakh, which is depicted in its form along with the forms of other instruments in the following chapter.
Likewise, you do it if the fetus has a large head by nature; it is necessary to scrape the cranium or hook it with the Moshdakh as we mentioned, then extract the bones with the forceps. If the head is extracted and contracted at the thorax, you scrape until the fluid that is in the chest is evacuated.
If it does not conjoin the thorax, then it does not conjoin the thorax and does not come out for extraction, you make an incision according to what is possible, for if it was below the abdomen or had a hernia or had a swelling, it is necessary to open it until the fluid is evacuated from it.
If the fetus is on its back, it is easy to pull it out and direct it towards the mother's womb, so if you press on the abdomen or chest, you should pull it out with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand and split open the abdomen or chest until what is inside comes out.
If you have extracted the other organs and returned the head and it is stuck, then introduce the left hand into the womb, if the mouth of the womb is open, then insert your hand into the neck of the womb and grasp the head with your fingers and pull it towards the mouth of the womb, then insert a hook or two hooks and pull with them.
If the mouth of the womb has adhered to a rough, warm and moist place, it should not be forced, but instead, it is necessary to use soft, smooth and wet instruments and apply gentle pressure, and sit in lukewarm water that is soothing and relaxing.
And if the fetus is on its side, it is possible to straighten it, so use what we mentioned for the living fetus. If that is not possible, then make a section and bring it out. It is necessary not to leave any part of the placenta inside the uterus. When you have finished your treatment, use what we mentioned in treating rough, warm and moist tumors that occur in the womb.
If there is a flow of blood, then descend into the constricting waters and use other treatments. I have seen a woman who had conceived and then died with the fetus in her womb, and then conceived again.
Then the other fetus also died, and after a long time, it became rotten in her womb and putrefied until it opened and discharged pus. I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal, so I applied some strong, stimulating medications to it.
Then a bone came out from the site, and after some days, another bone came out. I was amazed by that, as the abdomen was a site with no bones in it. I concluded that she had the dead fetus' bones inside her. So I opened up the wound and extracted many bones from the fetus' head.
Here is the translation:
Because it has signs and indications that the skilled physician can use to diagnose from the treatment.
Chapter 77.
There are pictures of the instruments that are needed for extracting the fetus.
A picture of a dilator that is used to open the mouth of the womb:.
This is the dilator that is used to open the books, and it has two arms on both sides of the forceps, but this dilator must be more delicate than the forceps, and it must be either made of ivory or boxwood, and each arm should be a finger's breadth in thickness.
And their extremities are a finger's breadth and their length is a finger's breadth and a half, and in the middle of the forceps there are two rods of the same material as the forceps itself, which have been attached to them, their length being a finger's breadth or slightly more, and their width being about a finger's breadth or slightly more, and these are the rods.
These two are the ones that enter the mouth of the womb to open it with them when you use the dilators, a picture of another instrument similar to this one, more delicate and lighter.
It is made of boxwood or ivory in the shape of a spoon, but it has two rods on its end as you see, each rod being about a finger's breadth in length and their width being a finger's breadth, so if you want to open the womb with it.
The woman sits on a couch, spreading her legs apart between which are the thighs, then you insert these two rods, closed together, into the mouth of the womb, and you hold the end of the instrument below between her thighs, then you open your hand with the instrument as you do with the dilators, according to how much you want to open the womb. Until you make the opening as you want, a picture of another dilator mentioned by the predecessors:.
A picture of the expeller that is used to expel the fetus:.
Image of the forceps used to extract the head of the fetus:
It resembles a pair of scissors, with handles like those of the elevator, as you see. It is made with a straight blade, like the blade of the scissors, with which it cuts and dissects.
Image of a scoop also:
Image of a saw:
This saw is made with a slight thickness so that it does not break when pulling the fetus with it, image of a saw with two hooks.
Image of two narrow forceps for extracting the fetus:
All these instruments, each of their kinds, were prepared by the craftsman and were hastened in their work, and were esteemed by people for their value; therefore, do not despise any instrument that is prepared for you, for it will be necessary when needed.
Chapter 88.
On extracting the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after birth, it is necessary to order the midwife to insert her hand and grasp it with her fingers and then extract it by pulling on it; if it does not come out in this way, take a sufficient amount.
And perforate the uterus with a perforator, placing in it the open-ended tubes for the mouth of the womb, such as the Fudhaj, Sudadhab, Shibat, Babunaj, Shi'ah, Silikhah, and Qanturiyun, all these medications or some of them, and immerse them in water and carry them on the fire, then place a silver tube on the perforator of the uterine cavity and the other end in the mouth of the womb.
And massage it until the vapor reaches the bottom of the womb, then extract as we mentioned, for the placenta will come out quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to insert her left hand into the perineum or the cavity of the uterus.
Then insert it into the peritoneum and gently feel with the palm, so if you touch it, grasp it firmly and pull it out slowly until it emerges. If it is stuck in the cavity of the uterus, put your hand on what we have described until you find the membrane, then pull it out slowly by degrees on the abdominal wall.
One should not pull the uterus strongly, but rather move it gently to the right and left sides, then increase the pulling gradually. If it does not come out, it will eventually release from the adhesion. If the mouth of the uterus is constricted, we have described the treatment by dilatation, treatment of the cavity, and the protrusions.
If it does not emerge with all that we have described, then return to pulling it out, but it is necessary to reconnect what has emerged from it to the mouth of the uterus, and then perform a circular suture on the woman's thigh. For it will heal her after a few days.
And it will be resolved and emerge, but if it becomes inflamed, then a foul smell will emanate from it to the intestines and head, and that will harm the patient. Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fomentations.
Therefore, some physicians have tried fomentations with the help of a tube and a flexible pipe, in the shape of an instrument that is inserted into the woman during retention of menses and the membrane, and so on.
It is made from copper, resembling a reed, or made from iron, with the narrow end placed in the peritoneum and the wide end on the nostrils, and the pipe is bent over the hip until that pipe releases the vapor and returns another.
Chapter 9 and 67.
On the treatment of the non-obstructed hernia.
Some children are born with non-obstructed hernias, which are closed by a thin membrane. It is necessary for the accoucheur to perforate that membrane with her finger and not to make an incision with a sharp instrument, lest she touches the muscle.
Then you put on it a dressing of olive oil and rose water, then bandage it with soft wraps until he recovers. If you fear that it may suppurate, you put into the wound a drainage tube, which is usually done for several days, and remove it when the patient wants to bathe.
And it may happen that the patient's bowel also becomes obstructed due to induration or inflammation, so he should be treated with what we have mentioned of treatment and regimen, and his obstruction should be opened.
Chapter Eighty-Eight.
On the treatment of ulcers that occur on the soles.
Ulcers that occur on the soles are a complication and hardness that occurs near the ankle, either from outside or in the hollow from one of the sides, and the ulcer is single or multiple.
So if that hardness becomes inflamed, a white watery discharge or thin pus may issue from it, and it may be among those ulcers that are connected to the marrow and the intestines, and they may not be connected; the connected ones can be recognized by what comes out of them in terms of pus and smell when using the tube for irrigation.
And sometimes worms may come out of them, and they may be among those ulcers that are connected to the bladder and the passage of the penis, and they may be connected to the joint of the thigh and the back of the ankle; and what is known about the ulcer connected to the ankle is different from one that is not connected.
You should insert your finger into the ankle and insert a fine probe into the ulcer, made of copper or iron; if there is no roughness in the ulcer, but if there is roughness, you should insert a probe made of fine silver or a hair from horsehairs.
Until you feel with the probe or hair in your finger, and if you do not feel any roughness and nothing comes out of the wound, neither pus nor smell nor worms, as we have said, then know that it is not connected, so proceed to treatment.
If the fracture extends to the bladder or to the passage of urine, then it indicates that the urine will exit from there and stop flowing from its normal place, and if it extends to the joint of the thigh or to the back of the hip bone, then it is marked by the arrival of the affected part to that location.
If there is no penetrating wound to the bone and the pain is in the direction of the affected part, and the pus constantly exits from it, then there is no benefit from treatment nor will it adhere to the limbs, and all these fractures are non-perforating, so none of them will heal.
And its treatment is vain for whoever relies on it from the ignorance of the physicians, and as for those that are not penetrating and not chronic, I will describe their healing with the iron, according to what I have experienced and what has been tried, which is to place the scalpel between your hands on its surface.
And you will elevate his leg above and incline it towards his belly, then you insert the copper or lead probe, if there is a penetrating wound in the fracture, until you feel with the probe where it ends, for when you sense the affected part near the seat of the injury, you should insert your finger into the seat.
For if you feel with your finger that the probe has passed through to the other side, making its tip palpable without your feeling any obstruction between your finger and it by way of a membrane or flesh, then you will know for certain that it is penetrating, so do not hesitate in this, for there is no healing from it, as we have said.
And they have said that it heals in some people through rest and with the treatment that is hoped to be beneficial, which is to apply a thin gold plate according to the size of the fracture, as you have prepared it, and insert it into the fracture until it reaches near the seat of the injury, then fix it with a bandage for two or three days.
Until you know that it has burned all those excess fleshy growths that resemble a bird's pipe, then you treat them with a poultice of wax in the naptha until those burnt growths come out, and then you treat them with salty remedies, for it will heal.
Unless it is treated, it will not heal at all. If the scalpel has been inserted and does not reach the abscess which is in the cavity, and there was a thick membrane between them from either flesh or aponeurosis, and I saw the abscess on the surface of the skin, I would incise the skin from the beginning of the abscess. And you proceed with the incision along with the scalpel while it is in the abscess until you reach the end of the scalpel and it is freed, then you remove those adherent tissues that resemble a bird's feather pipe, and nothing remains of them.
Then you treat it with soothing medications until it heals, for if the blood overcomes you and there is a delay between you and your work to cut those tissues, it is better what you do and quicker in benefit, whether by cautery or sharp medicine, because cautery collects two good qualities: it reduces those excessive tissues.
And you stop the bleeding and remove the blood clots, then you treat it with rose water or borax, or with vinegar mixed with oil until the area is cleansed and those putrid tissues are expelled in the pus, then you treat the wound at that time with soothing medications suitable for consolidating the sound flesh.
And these are the medications that have astringent and drying properties, for if they are applied, it will heal and not become inflamed again. If the abscess has reached the depth of the cavity and is far from the surface of the body, you should insert your finger into the cavity and open it up with it.
For if you feel with the scalpel and between it and you there is a membrane from aponeurosis or flesh, and it was close to the affected area, the work in it would not be except through the path of gentle touch and hope, and that is to use one of three methods: either to cauterize it as we mentioned.
If you do not cut until you reach the cavity to insert the spatula and treatment from a nearby location, do not depend on cutting for it might cut the surrounding tendons of the anus, causing the rectum to protrude outward unintentionally, then treat it as we have mentioned, perhaps it will heal as we said.
And if you perforate the perineum and dissect it after cutting near the anus as we said, either with a scalpel or another sharp instrument at the tip, then strip those adherent membranes that are in the incision until you reach the desired spot by scraping.
Then fill the wound entirely with the incision and the upper lip of the anus until it is constricted, and the rectum remains open inside the anus, thus being easier on the patient; indeed, the rectum may be constricted in this manner.
And it is when you insert the scalpel into the rectum and it is on one side of the anus near the surface of the perineum with the skin and the ring of the anus, take then a scalpel with a sharp tip like an awl on this manner.
And insert a thread with five strands or thereabouts, then insert the scalpel with the thread into the rectum until it reaches the cavity; if it was protruding from the edges of the anus from the inside near the perineum.
Then bring out the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the anus and bringing out the end of the thread, and gather both ends together and tighten them, and leave it for a day or two. For whenever you cut the thread in the flesh, it will constrict strongly until those membranes between the ends of the threads are cut off and drop, then treat the wound until it heals and recovers.
If the rectum is not protruding, then it is hidden as much as possible so that you cannot do it because of the tendons, lest you cut them; then deal with it as we have mentioned until it heals.
Here is the translation:
The Nineteenth and Twentieth Operations.
On the ligation of the blood vessels that supply blood to them and their severing, and the treatment of varicose veins.
The varicose veins are on the thighs, either inside the perineum resembling red bladders or like a cluster of grapes, and they can be small or large, and blood flows from them constantly.
And they can be one, or multiple, and outside the perineum, in its borders; but those that are outside the perineum are fewer in number, having a yellowish discharge or a little blood flowing constantly, and they are on the skin of the body.
And the treatment of those that are inside the perineum is to order the patient to squat and strain until the perineum protrudes, and the varicose veins appear; then quickly seize them with a ligature or grasp them with your fingers, and cut them off at their roots. If you do not constrict them with the ligature due to their hardness and tension, they will not be cut off.
Then shave them with a sharp razor or with a piece of scraped-off pumice stone, or grasp them with your fingers and cut them off. Then sprinkle some dry powders on the cut, so that you may apply a dressing like the one mentioned in the chapter on dressings, or bandage it as previously described in the chapter on bandages.
Then treat them with the usual treatment until they heal. If the perineum does not allow for the exit of the varicose veins, then make a small incision in it to extract what is inside and hasten their removal quickly when the patient strains, so that the external varicose veins are easily removed outside the perineum.
And it is that you take them with your fingers or seize them with a ligature and cut them off, then treat them with what we have mentioned until they heal. And if you are averse to cutting with iron, it is recommended that you use its sharp edge in this manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle.
Then you pull the thread upwards and pass it through the needle from the other side, and twist the end of the thread under the needle, which is in a loop, and tighten the thread strongly and firmly. Then you tie the thread and remove the needle, doing that with all the sutures, leaving one untied.
You let it drain, then you put a compress of ointment or geranium on the wound and apply it to the suture, and you instruct the patient to rest, then you leave it until it falls off. If the sutures fall out, you treat them with balms and other treatments until they heal.
And as for the treatment of fractures, it often happens that the patient's limb is bent and the fracture is not reduced. If it does not unite after a long time, it may be necessary to treat it with splints or rods until it becomes solid and the upper crust that prevents its union is removed.
Then you treat it until it unites as desired, and if it does not unite, you return to treating it with a stronger splint than the first one until it is well-established and then you remove it, and then you treat it, and it will heal.
Chapter 28.
On the treatment of curved and non-curved hernias, and sutured and un-sutured wounds.
A hernia is a swelling that appears on the skin of the body, resembling the head of a hernia, and it occurs throughout the body, not just in the soles of the feet and toes, and it causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to make an incision around the hernia and grasp it with a clamp or forceps, and then to remove its root. Then you treat it, and if it is small, like what has been mentioned previously in this chapter. As for sutured wounds, one of them is a small, rough, rounded, elevated spot on the surface of the skin.
Many cases occur in the treatment of young boys where it is necessary to extend the foreskin and tear it, or to remove it with a thread or a hair until it falls off, even if it is severe and the nail has grown over it, whether it be treated by cauterization or by medicine.
It is also possible to remove the curved and non-curved nails with the instrument I described for treating the nail, but the nail is a small, thick, and compact thing on the surface of the skin that extends deeply, and if it is affected by cold, one feels a sensation in it like a pricking pain.
It exists in the entire body, but it is more abundant in the fingers, and its treatment is to take a tube made from the feather of an ostrich or a strong eagle's feather, and shape that tube around the nail until it forms a circle around it, then direct your hand with the tube until you dissect what surrounds the nail.
And shape it in the depth of the flesh and remove the nail from its base, and if you cannot do that, then do it with a copper or iron tube, in this manner.
The upper part of the tube should be towards the finger, constricted and bent, so as to facilitate control over the fingers and its direction, and if you cannot control the nail as mentioned in treating the curved nails, in the chapter on treating the nails.
Chapter 30.
On the pictures of the instruments that are used for injecting in the treatment of hemorrhoids, anal fistula, and colic.
The syringe may be made of silver, or of China material, or of copper, polished or unpolished, and it is made in small and large sizes according to the users' needs. The ones used in the treatment of young boys are small, and those whose veins are narrow or constricted have their syringes made very delicate, a picture of a large syringe.
The upper fragment which is connected to the splint is positioned on this manner, as you see, and its lower end which enters into the socket becomes tightly fixed to the bone on one side with two pegs and on the other side with one peg.
The width of the hole is equal to the thickness of the rods or slightly thicker, and the splint that you make from a straight animal horn or a small curved rod is shaped like a small oblong box.
And many pegs are drilled, as it rotates, and the thickness between each peg is a finger's width; then, you insert a string and tighten it from ten to twenty threads or thereabouts, and thus assemble the splint like a box. If you place the medicine in it, it is strongly fixed in the head of the splint between the two stones, strongly and tightly; then, you bandage it, and this is a picture of the circle of the splint and the pegs.
And the way to bandage it is to fill the bone or the straight rod with medicine, and it is wrapped according to the possibility of the disease, and beware that it is not too hot or too cold; then, the patient lies on his back and raises his leg above.
And a compress or poultice is placed underneath, then the end of the splint is wrapped with a bandage or a white cloth or a piece of linen or similar, then it is inserted into the socket gently, and the servant takes hold of the splint with his hand firmly until all that is in the splint is released into the marrow.
Then the splint is removed, and the patient raises his leg to the roof, if the medicine has been effective for removal, he should hold onto what he has achieved, and if he sleeps at night, it was all better in the morning, so he should be cautious with the disease of diarrhea and hasten its exit, until the splint is removed, until he recovers.
If there is a painful abscess or ulcer in the perineum, let the surgeon be gentle and cautious, more so than in other operations that are performed on children, and this is an image of a gentle surgeon leaning over him.
Chapter 84.
On the treatment of wounds.
I mentioned in the section on treatment what is similar to ulcers and I will mention here their treatment by hand and medication according to the perfection, so I say that wounds differ according to the underlying cause of the wound and according to the location where the wound occurs.
The things that cause wounds are many, such as a blow of a stone or a cut of a sword or a knife or a thrust of a spear or a bite or a sting and so on from many things.
And wounds vary according to their locations on the body, such as a wound that occurs on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and so on from the organs.
And I have described the treatment of some wounds to make them a model and a rule for other wounds, and I will start with simple head wounds specifically because the composite ones will be mentioned later in the third chapter of this book.
I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head and does not involve a fracture of bone, you should look to see if it was caused by a blow of a stone or something similar, and only the skin has been split, and the wound is large and you fear the occurrence of an evil inflammation, then hasten to cleanse the wound thoroughly. And do not delay that, and extract from him as much blood as his strength allows, if the bleeding does not stop, or it may be that the blood that exits the wound is slight, and let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the affected place.
And warn the patient against indigestion and diarrhea and oily foods, for if the bleeding stops, then reduce the food and avoid heavy meats and drinks, and take care of the wound if it becomes inflamed with a burning heat, like a blistering fire in its inflammation, or with the diarrhea that has a constricting quality.
If you find that the abscess is immature, then apply a poultice to the wound if it is tender and has not changed due to the air that I will describe to you shortly. And if it has changed due to the air, then apply some of the remedies.
Until the pus forms and it is ready to be opened, until it heals. If the wound is large and resulted from a cut of a sword or a similar thing, and its lips did not meet with the suture, then close it with the sutures as I described in the suturing of abdominal wounds.
If the wound has exposed the bone and it has become attached, but it did not hold except in a place that is suitable for movement, then cut it off, and treat the wound with medications that consolidate the flesh to replace the lost flesh, and order the patient to take nourishing foods that are rich in nutrients, such as broth and egg yolks and their like.
If there is decay in the flesh and it has not adhered to the bone, then cut off all the decaying part and treat it. If in these wounds there is an artery or a vein that is bleeding from it and the blood does not stop with medications, then compress the artery.
If the bleeding does not stop, then constrict it with a tourniquet and bind it. And if the necessity requires it, even if what we mentioned does not benefit, then cauterize until the blood stops. If these wounds are small and superficial, then order that they be treated easily by applying this poultice to them, and it will congeal with its own blood.
Before it is affected by the air, prepare the poultice by taking a part from the laburnum, two parts from the plantain, and three parts from the germinated or non-germinated seeds. Grind them all together, mix well, and apply it to the wound, pressing firmly until it adheres strongly.
Here is the translation:
This action also happens to him in many of the old surgical wounds, if they were treated and dressed properly, and the wounds were fresh with their humors, as long as the air did not alter them. However, if the air had altered them slightly, it would make a difference, especially during the summer season.
There is a benefit in applying this poultice, as we have mentioned, by placing on it some sweet perfumes or a paste made from fine sugar, constructed with water and honey, until the purulent discharge stops, then treating it with other treatments until it heals.
But if the wound has reached the bone and is near the vertebrae, it should be treated with the aforementioned treatments. I have mentioned the treatment of skull fractures in the section on head injuries. If the wound is in the neck, there is no difference between its treatment and that of a simple head wound.
But if a nerve or artery has been cut in the neck, and it is a nerve, there is no trick to its treatment except to compress it strongly with a ligature like a tourniquet and its likes, because they constrict the nerve and calm it down.
And nothing cold should be applied to the wound, because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain is more noble than the other organs, and what is treated with it from the cooling medications, such as the Noura al-Maghsoola with sweet water, or rose-water, or Tootia.
If it is also washed with sweet water and other mineral stones in this manner, and the fresh perfumes, and if the wound is large, then cauterization should be used or its edges should be brought together with a bandage, and then treated until it heals.
If the wound has a cavity and a collection of pus has gathered in its depths, it should be evacuated from the lowest part of it. If an artery has been cut in the wound and its blood is flowing, it should be constricted or ligated, or cauterized, if the need for that arises.
If the wound has severed some of the tendons of the larynx or all of them, then gather the edges of the skin with sutures on the axis of the larynx and do not touch the larynx itself but rather adjust it to its natural shape, then tighten it tightly and leave it for a few days.
Then, treat it with bandages that have a compressing and drying effect until he recovers. If the wound has affected the bone, then scrape off any bone fragments, and if there are fragments of bone, remove them all or as much as possible, and leave what cannot be removed until the wound begins to suppurate and heal, making it easy to extract.
If the wound is shallow, sprinkle on it the powder that we have described, and if there is a bone in the wound, set it in its proper place with what will help to fix it, according to its position in the chest or between the shoulder blades.
If the wound was caused by a blow from a pestle or a stone, and you saw that it had a cavity, then look to see if any air came out of it when you pressed on the surrounding area; if so, know that it is a fatal wound. If it did not have a cavity and was shallow with a little blood in it, do not put powder on it from the start, nor should you tighten it so that the blood does not accumulate in its cavity.
Return to the heart in the morning, and kill the patient, but make a soothing medicine for him and let it sit for two days. If you did not prepare a soothing medicine, then put a cotton plug in the mouth of the wound to absorb what comes out of it from the fluxes, and let the patient sleep on his wound.
There is no congestion in it, and if three days or more have passed since the wound was inflicted, and the patient has not experienced any tension, fainting, or difficulty breathing, and you see that his other conditions are good, then know that the wound is sound and functioning well with the treatment, until he recovers.
If you feel a resistance and the abscess is still firm, know that it has become inflamed from its mouth, and the pain in the wound is not what gathers there; even if it has spread to the breast or back, it becomes inflamed by what precedes from the suture.
If it is large or in the vicinity, if it is small, if it has affected the bone and broken off fragments from it, then open the wound and try to extract those fragments; if they are accessible, then extract them, but if not, leave them until later.
The wound will be easy to open, and as for the rest of the wounds that occur in other organs, their treatment is governed by what we have mentioned.
Chapter 85.
On surgical operations on the abdomen and the extraction of theomentum and its suturing.
The hernia that appears on the abdomen may be large, small, or medium; a large one may extrude momentum or multiple omenta, making their insertion and suturing more difficult and laborious.
And the small hernia also may be difficult from another aspect, for it requires that its return be more difficult and the momentum, if it is not hastened to insert it into its position quickly, it becomes inflamed and thick, making its insertion more difficult; therefore, the medium hernia is better because it does not cause difficulty in returning the momentum as it does in these two types.
And know that suturing the abdomen is of four types: two general types that are suitable for suturing the abdomen and other bodily wounds, and two special types that are specific to certain wounds, except that they are more specific to suturing the abdomen.
And I will describe them to you one by one, with explanation and clarification; so I say that if the wound is small and something of the momentum has come out and its return is difficult, then it is due to one of two reasons: either because the hernia is small, as we mentioned, or because the momentum has become inflamed beforehand due to the air being blocked.
If it is thus, it is advisable to soak a compress or a piece of cloth in warm water and squeeze it out, then apply it to the affected area, and repeat this until the swelling subsides.
And the sherbet that is in it, being more effective than water alone in reducing swelling. If you see that the swelling has subsided, then apply the affected area with a warm lotion of khitm or khabazi, for it will ease its entry into the skin with gentle massage.
If the patient complains of return of the affliction after this treatment, make a small incision in the skin with the instrument that makes the incisions for the veins, and repeat the first treatment if it is more beneficial than the incision; for it is necessary to resort to incision after the failure of the remedy and the weakness of the patient's condition.
The single curved instrument is limited in its direction, while the other end is not limited, and the thin edge does not become rigid at the site of the incision but becomes slightly flexible, and it resembles a small scalpel as you see. If the wound opens up and the affected area enters, it is advisable that it be returned to its natural shape.
And its specific position, if you operate on it, is better. If the incision was wide and was in the lower abdomen, it is advisable to make the patient lie on his back and elevate his legs above his head, and if it was in the upper abdomen, to elevate his head and chest above his lower parts.
And similarly, if the incision was on one side of the abdomen, you should always elevate the affected area above the other side, and thus it is advisable to use this method in major surgeries and intermediate ones.
And in minor surgeries, you should adjust it according to what is convenient for you. Then, prepare between your hands a gentle compress that holds the entire incision with its edges and brings them together, then uncover it to inspect the suture thread after a short while.
This type of suture is the simple running stitch, and it is done by taking a needle or multiple needles according to the width of the wound, then leaving a space at the edge of the incision equal to the thickness of the knee, and inserting one needle without inserting thread in the edges of the skin. With the edge of the aponeurosis under the skin, from the inside, you penetrate it from that aspect, and you gather the edges of the skin and the edges of the aponeurosis, and make four stays, then you tie with a twisted thread around the needle several times from both sides until the lips of the wound meet together perfectly.
Then you leave a space equal to the thickness of the finger as well, and insert another needle, then you tie it with thread as you did with the first needle, and do not cease doing that until you have completed the entire wound and the needles are evenly spaced between the thickness and the skin.
Because the thin needles cut the flesh and the aponeurosis quickly, and it is difficult to enter the skin, so it is necessary to be gentle in the skin and the aponeurosis, and it is not necessary to insert the needle at the edge of the skin by force.
So that the flesh is not cut suddenly and the wound does not open before it has healed, and you do not delay also with the suturing so that the wound may be delayed from healing. Then you cut the edges of the needles so that they do not harm the patient when he moves, and you make for him a dressing of two pieces of cloth from each side to hold the edges of the needles.
And you leave it until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of suturing with needles is very effective in small surgical incisions because it can be done with one or two needles or around that.
Or another type of simple running stitch is that you gather the four edges, namely the edge of the skin and the edge of the aponeurosis, at one time with a needle containing a thread twisted in a straight line in the skin and the aponeurosis, then if you penetrate with this needle, these four edges will be gathered, and the needle will return to the side from which it started itself.
The thread is passed through from above the wound to make the suturing according to the suturing of the wise ones, which tightens with it the instrument and makes between each suture and suture after the small finger's thickness, and this suturing is known to all people.
And with this suturing, a wound was stitched for a man in his belly that had been wounded by two blows, and the width of the wound was more than a finger's span, and it had opened from its middle to about two fingers' span from the middle of the belly.
He treated it after he had stayed with him outside the wound for twenty-four hours, and the wound took about fifteen days to close, and he was cured until he recovered, and lived many years afterwards, moving around in all his functions, and the physicians were judging that he would not recover at all.
And it is amazing that I did not treat him with their methods, because I was in a place where there was nothing of the medications, so I put on the wound a cotton pad moistened with honey twice a day and covered it with a plaster until he recovered.
And one of the types of special suturing is what I remember from Galen's text, which is to start with the suturing from the skin and insert the needle from outside inwards, so if you insert the needle in the skin and in the underlying muscle according to the straightness along the entire belly.
I left the suture thread from the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle, and I passed the needle through its other edge from inside to outside in the other edge of the peritoneum, so if I passed it, then I passed it again in this same edge of the peritoneum from outside to inside.
And I pushed the edge of the peritoneum that is on this side, and I passed the needle through its other edge from inside to outside, and I passed with it into the peritoneum to the edge of the peritoneum that is near it, until all of it was passed.
I'll make sure to provide a straightforward translation without any notes, comments, or explanations. Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Take it out from the plaster that is on its surface, and do that repeatedly, and repeat it time after time until the entire surgery is performed according to this example, and the description of this suture is that it sutures the sutures of the fracture for the fracture.
That you suture the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the plaster and leave it once from the other side until it is healed, and as for the second type of special suture which Galen also mentioned, this is his statement in brief.
And it is to suture it according to the example of how the experts suture, by gathering each part to its similar one, matching the edges of the peritoneum to each other and the edges of the affected area to each other, and that will be according to what I have described to you.
It is necessary to insert the needle at the edge of the affected area close to you from the outside, and pass it inside, and then pull out the peritoneal edge, and then withdraw the needle and pass it from the outside into the peritoneal edge, both of them, and then withdraw it also.
And pass it from the inside to the outside at the edge of the affected area on the opposite side, and this type of suture is better than the common rough suture, and it is the suture that I mentioned earlier, this is Galen's statement in brief. Some of them have said that you can perform abdominal suturing with two needles. And that is to insert one thread and start by inserting the needle from your side and passing it to the other side, and then insert the other needle from the opposite side to you, and pass it according to the suture of the sac-like type.
And know that if the perforation is in the middle of the abdomen, its suture is more difficult than other abdominal locations. And as for the treatment of the wound, its rule is like the rule of other wounds, and that is because if you close the wound quickly with its blood before it is exposed to air, and you reposition and suture it, then you will have mastered it, and you will have carried out the correct treatment.
If the wound has been exposed to air, apply some of the medicaments that you have prepared until it suppurates and the sutures fall out, and the ulceration is contained, then treat it like other wounds until it heals.
If you have no medicaments, apply to it a dressing of sweet canteneum and change it twice a day as I have instructed you until it heals. You will not need another treatment in most cases if the wounds are small, for I fear that you may irritate the main organs with pain.
You should soak a piece of litteena in warm oil or rose oil and place it around the areas between the axilla and the arm, for if you feel pain or numbness in its vicinity, it often happens that way; so apply to it a cold vinegar poultice.
And do not neglect that if the numbness has reached the axilla and become a putrid wound to its hollow, and know that whatever of the veins is thick, it is easier to heal, and whatever of them is thin, it is more difficult to heal.
And as for the axilla known by its fasting, it does not accept healing from a wound that occurs in it with a lancet, because of the abundance of vessels and bones in it, and the delicacy of its nerve, and if the material that comes out of the wound is thick and you have treated it with a remedy according to your treatment of the axilla, so be it.
If a period of time has passed and it has become green or black, you should apply a thread above the spot that has turned black, lest it bleed, for there are vessels and sinews in the wound; then cut what is below the ligature.
And make the two ends of the thread dependent from below the wound, coming out of it, so that you can easily pull and extract it when the wound opens and suppurates; this is for a wound that occurs in the axilla. But if a small abscess appears in the axilla...
It may happen to some people that I saw a man who had a wound in his belly, and the wound was on the right side of the navel, and the wound was above the groin area, so I treated it and made an opening for it, and pus and discharge came out of it. I then removed the dressings until the wound was completely healed, and I treated the area, but when I saw that the area had become constricted, I feared that a bad accident might occur to him in his belly, so he did not experience that bad accident, and his belly remained in its best condition. He eats and drinks normally, and takes a bath, and his service is good. Some people of experience have mentioned that when he was presented with a small wound in the belly, it would not be necessary to treat him according to this method.
He takes the large ants' heads, then gathers the edges of the wound, and puts an ant's head on each edge of the wound, with its mouth open on the edge of the wound; if it bites down on it and holds fast, it will stick and not come loose. Then another ant is placed near the first one.
And you do not stop doing that with several ants according to the size of the wound, then you tie them and sew the wound, for those heads will stick to the belly until it heals and becomes well, and no bad accident happens to the belly. It is also possible to treat the belly with a thin thread.
That which is extracted from the living animal that sticks to it after it enters into a needle, and it is that one takes an end of this thread from the living creature, extracts it gently, then ties its end with a thin twisted thread, and inserts that thread into the needle. And there is a thread of the living creature that is used to treat the belly, then it is returned to its place, and this type of treatment with ants and living creatures is based on the method of hope and expectation.
If the wound is large and open, and not in one of the fleshy parts, there will be no trickery and no setting of a broken bone.
Chapter 86
On the treatment of catarrh and nasal polyps
Know that every wound or tumor, if it becomes chronic and persists, and turns into a ulcer, and does not heal, and the pus continues to flow, it is called by the name of 'nassour' in whichever member it occurs, and we call it 'zukama', and 'nassour'.
It is a hard, white, compact, dense, bone-like substance that does not have a cavity like the cavities of bird bones.
And therefore, some have called it 'riecha', and it may be that at times it becomes suppurating, constantly discharging pus, and sometimes the suppuration ceases; this suppuration may be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
And it is possible that I mentioned in the section on wounds that every ulcer does not heal and does not grow flesh, unless for one of nine reasons: either because of a lack of blood in the body, or because of its weakness, or because there is hard flesh within it and around its edges that prevents the growth of good flesh. Or because it is abundant in evil humors and corrupt matter, or because the ulcer itself is rotten and the material that flows from it is foul and putrid, or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or because of a bad constitution in the body, or because of a specific characteristic in the body.
Or because it is abundant in evil humors and corrupt matter, or because the ulcer itself is rotten and the material that flows from it is foul and putrid, or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or because of a bad constitution in the body, or because of a specific characteristic in the body. As I have shown in the city of Saragossa, where it is difficult to cure diseases and where the healing of tumors is slow by nature, or because there are one or several hard bones; I have explained all these reasons, signs, and treatments with medicines in the section.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
What was not of these incisions in this form is of the severe and painful chronic diseases that do not accept treatment and are abandoned with despair and ignorance, for if it was of the incisions that did not reach these aforementioned places, it was neglected and rejected in its treatment.
And I advised you to gain knowledge of that, take a scalpel made of copper or iron, if the incision passes through a straight line, open it with it. If there is a curvature in the incision, open it with a scalpel made of fine wire, because the wire is more flexible and conforms to the body.
The scalpel enters and curves towards the curvature, if the incision has many branches that you cannot reach with the scalpel, leave one of its branches and the connection that occurs with it will lead to the other branches.
Then, explore the wound on any side you can to recognize if there is a bone or nerve, or if the incision is shallow or deep, or if it is a single incision with many branches, and pause on all of that according to your ability from your careful consideration of its existence and the pain when you touch the spot.
And clear that from the signs and symptoms occurring with the tumor, for if you stopped at all of that and stood firmly on it, then you would have arrived at the treatment with confidence, which is that you should look carefully to see if it was.
The incision appears close or in a healthy place far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the aforementioned locations, so you should dissect the incision according to what has been described and remove what is in it of the adhesive and adhering tissues and the redundant tissues.
And what grows in it of flesh or granulation, and so on, and strive to heal until it recovers. If the incision was deep-seated and straight, it would be necessary to dissect it deeply as much as possible, then remove all its adhesive tissues.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
You have not reached the complete removal of the corrupted tissue, so reveal all that is on it again and dissect its connection and purge it with the greatest effort you can, then cut and if you cannot, know that the corrupted tissue is in a remote area far from the corrupted tissue, so reveal all that is on it again.
And dissect its connection and purge it with the greatest effort you can, for the corrupted bone was a small bone and you were able to extract it, so extract it with fine forceps that are suitable for that.
If there were many bones, dissect their extraction all of them and do not leave any of them with your effort. If something from the ligaments bothered you without it, and there was no danger in cutting them, then cut those ligaments and the tendons if they were there, and free the bones.
If you were not able to extract the bones at that time, put on the wound what covers it and leave it for a few days until it forms what is around those bones from the tendons and ligaments, and preserve the wound so that the split you made during your operation does not become infected.
But put on it, if you fear that, a dressing soaked in camphorated spirits with oil or a dressing soaked in Egyptian myrrh or one of the green unguents, for they will make those ligaments supple and free the bones, making their extraction and dissection easy.
If it was a single large bone, such as the tibia or femur and its like, and the corrupted part was only on one side, then dissect around it slightly until the blackness and corruption are gone, then cut the wound. If the corrupted part was a large portion and the corruption had reached the marrow of the bone, there is no alternative but to expose it.
And cut it all to where the corruption ends, and then stop until it becomes attached, and I will tell you about a case that was presented to me of a man who had it in his leg, making it an example and a warning for your treatment, this man was over sixty years old.
For thirty years, a swelling had appeared on his leg due to a reason inside the body until the matter reached the leg and became very large and painful, but there was no external cause, then it progressed over time with the doctor's treatment until the abscess opened.
A large amount of pus was discharged from him and he improved with treatment until the leg was strengthened and many wounds were formed, all of which discharged pus and sanies from the body, and a group of doctors worked on it for nearly two years without any of them being skilled in the craft of surgery.
Until I was approached, and I saw his leg, and the matter was issuing from those wounds in a large amount, and the leg had become putrid and its color had turned yellowish, so I inserted the scalpel into one of those wounds, and the scalpel reached the bone, then all the wounds were opened.
I found that some of them had opened into each other from all parts of the leg, so I made an incision on one of those wounds until I exposed part of the bone, and I found it to be decayed, corroded, and worn away, with cavities and hollows, until the probe reached the marrow, and I extracted what was hidden.
I cleared away the decayed bone, and I thought that there was no decay in the bone except what I had cut out and extracted, and I had removed it, then I applied a medicated dressing to the wound for a longer period, but it did not heal, then I returned and opened up the bone again above the previous opening.
I found that the decay was connected to the bone, so I extracted what appeared to me of that decay, then I treated it with a dressing, but it did not heal and did not close, then I opened up again and did not cease cutting away the bone piece by piece until I had removed about a quarter of it.
I took it out with its membrane, then I treated it with the adjuvant, and the inflammation subsided quickly and healed. However, this repetition in his work and splitting for a case of weak constitution and slight possibility, and fear of death on him, because it used to happen to him at all times from excessive bleeding and redness, so he became exhausted and nearly died.
I anointed the location of the bone with a solid paste and his condition improved in his body, and his strength was restored, and he recovered from his affliction, and it did not affect him in walking or harm him with a fracture, for it was as if the bone had been rejoined in its place in the body.
Then I ordered that it be spread on this manner, and that is to take a bandage and tie it at the end of the rejoined bone, and to direct someone to extend it upwards and to make another bandage thicker than the first one.
Then I bound it to the flesh beneath the bone, and extended its end to pull the flesh downwards to the bottom, and you should expose the flesh from the location that you want to spread it, so that the sharp edge of the bone does not hurt the flesh, and put a spatula or a blade underneath the bone from the bottom, making sure.
For if you do that, the sharp edge will not be prevented from cutting the rotten bone, and it is necessary to spread above the location of the rot a little so that it does not become in the hollow of the bone, thus it appears on its surface, so you are forced to spread it again another time.
If the bone was rotten and did not reunite, but rather some of it connected with others and the rot was in its middle or in some of it, then you should expose the flesh from all its directions, and then put the spatula from below, and then spread it from the first direction where the rot is.
If you finish spreading it, then spread it from the other direction, and let the spreading be a little beyond the rot as we mentioned, for if the rot was in a joint, you should cut off the rotten joint itself and spread the bone where it connects from the other direction.
If the corruption is in the connection of two joints, there is no trick other than scraping. If the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, the matter is very difficult to treat, but it is necessary to scrape the corruption as much as you can see and rub it and clean it on whatever condition you can.
And with whatever trick you can use to distract you from the cutting of a nerve or a vein, and know that the incisions and the saws are for cutting these bones according to their position and direction and roughness and smoothness and largeness and smallness and their twisting and straightening. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare a specific instrument for each type of operation suitable for that work.
And know that the operations themselves will guide you on the type of instrument you need, if you have long experience and knowledge of the arts of this industry, for it is a matter of craftsmanship and observation of various diseases. So he will be able to choose for himself what is suitable from the instruments for each disease, and I will describe to you at the end of this chapter several instruments.
You make them examples, basing yourself on them and measuring others against them, God willing, a picture of a saw:.
A picture of another saw:.
A picture of a small saw:.
A picture of a large saw:.
The head of this scalpel is in the shape of a scalpel's head, curved and designed like the design of the scalpel, and it is suitable to use it to cut the joints if they are corrupted or very large, a picture of another small scalpel:.
A picture of a broad scalpel:.
It is made with its upper part and blade from iron, and its handle from a wooden cone-shaped precision piece, a picture of a scalpel with a hollowed-out area:.
A Picture of Another Simple Suture
A Picture of Another Simple Suture with the Edge Bent
A Picture of a Small Simple Suture Resembling a Comb
A Picture of Another Small Incision
And its edge, like a rasp, is rough in many places on the surface of the bone; a picture of a simple suture suitable for a fracture that has not penetrated to the bone.
Its edge, like a sharp scalpel, is made of Indian steel, and it is desirable that all we have mentioned of the sutures and incisions be made, A Picture of a Simple Suture.
Chapter 87
On Cutting Off Limbs and Setting Bones
The putrefaction of limbs may be due to a cause from outside or a cause from inside, and if you treated that corruption with medicinal treatment and the treatment did not benefit, and you saw the putrefaction spreading in the limb, nothing will stop it.
It is necessary to amputate that limb to the point where the putrefaction has reached, in order to escape death or a great evil which is greater than losing the limb, and a sign of this is that the limb becomes black, until you think that fire has scorched it.
Or it becomes putrid after blackening, until that putrefaction spreads to what is near that limb and affects the entire body, so hasten to amputate it. And likewise, if the cause of the putrefaction is a bite from some venomous creatures like sea scorpions or vipers or similar things.
If the putrefaction or bite is in a finger, then amputate the finger and do not delay, lest the putrefaction spread to the hand. And likewise, if it has affected the hand, then amputate it from the base of the arm, and do not delay, lest the putrefaction spread until it affects the entire arm.
And if you take in the arm, and cut the arm at the elbow in the joint itself, then it is possible to restore it and move it towards the shoulder, but do not cut the shoulder blade, for there is certain death in that, and instead use other treatments according to the patient's strength.
And likewise, if you take in the foot when the decay reaches the toes, cut off the toes at one of the joints; and if the decay reaches the ankle, cut off the foot along with it, for if it reaches the knee, cut off the leg at the knee joint.
And if the decay has reached above the knee, there is no remedy except to leave it and resign the patient to death; or cut off the limb or amputate it by tying a bandage at the bottom of the place you want to cut, and another bandage above the place.
And you apply a bandage to the lower one at the bottom and another bandage above, and you clear away the flesh between the two bandages with a narrow scalpel until all of it is exposed, then cut or amputate, and it is necessary that you place a piece of lint on all sides.
For if you touch the wrong place with the saw, it will cause the patient excessive pain and inflammation, and if bleeding occurs during your operation, stop it quickly or apply some styptics to the bleeding point, then return to your treatment until you finish.
Then bind the injured limb with a bandage that suits it, and treat it until it heals; and I will give you an example of a case where this treatment was effective for a man who had this condition in his leg, which I described to you, and that is what happened to him: a black spot appeared on his leg with a burning pain like fire.
And that decay was the first thing to happen in his toes, until it reached the entire foot, so he began to cut off the foot from its own joint, for when he saw the decay spreading quickly in the limb with intense pain and burning, only at the joint did it heal.
Here is the translation:
When the fracture in the hand is treated by cutting, it is necessary to be cautious about that fractured part and to be careful not to cause death, because the man's strength was dependent on his wrist, and if he lost it, he would lose his livelihood.
He told me that he had only cut his hand with a razor, and I found out that this story was a warning about what happens to those who suffer from this kind of disease, and it serves as an example to be mindful of it and to take precautions against it.
Chapter 88.
On the treatment of ulcers and how to inject them with medications.
If a tumor forms in some of the fleshy members and it persists for a period of time, then it accumulates until the period is complete, and then it bursts or ruptures and all that was in it from the pus exits, leaving the area empty as if it were a vessel.
And the abscess that forms on it, like a blister, has ripened but did not affect the bone, nor the nerve, nor the ligament, and from here it is entitled to be called a superficial abscess, and it does not deserve to be called a deep-seated one unless its duration extends until it affects the fracture in one of these members.
So, it is called a deep-seated abscess or zakama, and its treatment is to cut out the entire abscess as it surrounds, but not if it has ripened and become like a blister, and you are certain that it does not adhere to the site of the fracture.
For if you find that the abscess has adhered and the fracture has not reached it, there being in the abscess a thickness of flesh that prevents the medication from penetrating, and this is because you should look at the superficial abscess; if it is large and the pus that flows from it has a foul smell, then inject it with the Egyptian medicine.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Here is the translation:
Then, you should apply the treatment and pour it onto the affected area until you see that the abscess has opened up, because if it did not have an opening to the Egyptian medication or the medicine of the Romans, it would not be effective unless you mix something from the zinc oxide ointment in it.
You should apply the ointment and the adhesive plaster, because the ointment has the property of cleansing and purifying, and the adhesive plaster draws out the abscess, but it will not be effective unless there is some residue in the abscess, and if you repeat this process several times and notice that the abscess has disappeared, then apply what promotes flesh growth in its place.
Like taking the yellow wax and dissolving it with rose oil and adhesive plaster, or applying it with some medications and other waxes whose properties we have mentioned in the chapter on waxes; for if the abscess is narrow, it does not allow the insertion of the drainage tube.
Open it with a little iron or put in it a small, curved file coated with the Egyptian wax or Serego's wax until it widens, and also if the mouth is wide, then gather its edges with a thread and leave as much as can accommodate the drainage tube without excess.
And also, if the abscess is one that discharges pus in a high place, make an incision in its lowest part so that the pus does not accumulate in the depths of the abscess, because if the pus accumulates in the cavity of the abscess, it prevents the flesh from growing in it.
If you cannot make an incision in the abscess towards its lowest part as you wish, then position the limb in a way that allows the pus to flow out easily, according to what is convenient for you, and try not to let any of the thick pus remain in it.
As for the medications that are applied to the abscess from outside, and how they should be placed on it, it is that you take one of the medications that are suitable for what you want, and spread it on a piece of cloth, letting the cloth cover the entire abscess. Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Several days, and what is on the mouth of the abscess is what extracts it at every time to release what has accumulated in it from the pus, and to recognize what flows from it of the thick liquid, whether it is abundant or little or thick or not thick.
And with this also, you examine the site of the abscess itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or not, and whether there is a swelling in it or not. If you have treated it thus and seen the matter that issues slowly from the mouth of the abscess.
Be aware that the abscess has adhered or is about to adhere, so then it will be resolved from the pus or on the third day, and when you have cleansed the wound, replace the dressing with another and renew the medication. For if it issues from the abscess after a long time a thin pus, do not despair of the treatment.
It will soon be cured, because some people are slow to heal the flesh in their wounds, and they contradict that. If it issues from the abscess after many days a pus not thick, be aware that the abscess has not adhered, so delay the treatment of the abscess.
And consider its condition, so increase the medication and make the medication that is in its strength gentle and in its weakness strong, like the narcissus ointment if it has been augmented with an excess of collyrium, and among what is most suitable to be treated with is to take the narcissus ointment.
And dissolve the verdigris and spread on it the old sharp wine, which is tempered in its strength, then mix it with it and use it. And if you don't have the narcissus ointment, make do with this action: take honey if it has been applied until it becomes thick and use it, or take from the bitter and the patience and the rose-water and crush all of them and leave it on the honey, which is on the fire. Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
The fracture in the bone or in other solid organs or ligaments requires a precise treatment, as will be mentioned beforehand.
Chapter 9 and 80.
On the treatment of gouty and rheumatic conditions, and cutting off excess fingers and splitting of the fingers' nails.
Gout is a abundant humour that grows under the nail of the thumb or toes, and sometimes it grows in other fingers; if its condition worsens and its treatment is neglected, it causes swelling and burning heat.
Or it becomes stagnant and ulcerated until it eats away the basis of the nail, and sometimes it corrupts all of it, and sometimes the corruption reaches the bone, so that it has a foul smell and the tip of the finger becomes putrid and its colour turns black; if you treat it with what we mentioned in the section and your treatment does not succeed.
It is necessary to excise with the iron all the ulcers that grow from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards; indeed, the cauterization in this case is very beneficial. However, if the bone is sound and the nail is also sound.
And the corner of the nail had pushed the flesh inside and caused it to inflame and putrefy, it is necessary to place a thin spatula under the corner of the nail that has pushed the flesh in and lift it upwards and excise that flesh with ease.
And apply to the remaining flesh from the corroding medications, until it is completely cleansed, then treat it with ointments until it recovers. However, if the corruption has affected the bone, it is necessary to excise that bone and remove it, for as long as there is rotten bone, it will not recover.
If you see the putrefaction and corruption spreading in the fingers, cut them off at one of the joints as mentioned beforehand, then treat them until they recover. If the nail is struck or bruised and severe pain occurs, it is necessary to amputate the affected limb first.
Cut the nail with a sharp instrument, sloping from above to below, and take care not to reach the flesh underneath the nail, lest you cause pain and severe injury to the tender skin, and it becomes an obstacle to the growth of excess flesh at that site. Then treat the site with what calms the pain.
And as for the excess fingers that grow on some people's hands, sometimes they are entirely fleshy, and sometimes there is a bone in them, and sometimes there is a nail, and it becomes an extra growth at the base of one of the joints of the fingers.
And it becomes an extra growth on some of the fingers' surfaces, and what grows on some of the fingers' surfaces does not move, and what grows at the finger joint sometimes moves; if it is merely fleshy, it is easy to excise it at its base with a sharp instrument.
And as for those that grow at the base of the joint, their treatment is difficult, so you should refrain from cutting them. And as for those that grow on the fingers at one of the surfaces, it is necessary to cut the flesh obliquely to the bone, then to scrape the bone with one of those suitable instruments.
Then treat it until it heals, and as for the webbing that appears between some of the fingers, it is frequent to see that, and it becomes something that grows in a person, and it occurs when a wound or a burn scars over, and so on. It is necessary to dissect that webbing.
Until the fingers return to their natural form, then put between them a piece of cloth or a soft dressing with rose oil so that it heals quickly and separates them or makes a thin layer of tulle between them until the site is as it should be.
And likewise, if webbing appears between some of the fingers on the palm, dissect that webbing according to what is necessary and correct it to conform to the shape of the limb.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
On the amputation of fingers.
The fingers are nerves, vessels, and tendons, mixed together, with a blackish-blue color, occurring in most parts of the body, but mostly in the legs, particularly in the toes, ankles, and knees. It is necessary to use strong compression from the dark blue vein repeatedly.
Then the doctor treats it with iron, in which case there are two options: one is to make an incision and let out the black blood and pus, and the other is to ligate the vessel and let out its contents; but if he makes an incision, it should be done in this way, letting out the leg or first washing it with warm water.
Until the thick black blood is dissolved, then he should bind the patient's leg from above his knee down to his ankle with a bandage, and then make an incision in one place or two places or three, and widen it.
Then he should let out the black blood with his hand from the bottom of the leg upwards and from above downwards until it is expelled to the extent that he sees sufficient, or what the patient's strength can bear, then he should bandage it and order him to take nourishing food to restore the blue-black color, and forbid him from vomiting and bleeding.
When the vessels are full and that harms the patient, and it is necessary to make an incision in this way: he should shave the patient's leg if it has a lot of hair, then insert the scalpel and wash his leg with warm water until it becomes red and the vessel pulsates or a strong pulse appears.
If he does not use a scalpel, until the member becomes hot, then he should make an incision in the skin opposite the vessel, a longitudinal incision, either at the top near the knee or at the bottom near the ankle, and then he should open the skin with forceps and extract the vessel from every side until it becomes visible to the senses.
When it appears, it shows a red, variegated color. If it is completely freed from the gland, it also looks like a vein. Then, a probe is inserted until, when it is lifted and exits the gland, it is tied with a strong ligature, and then another incision is made close to that one, about three finger breadths away.
Then, the gland is stripped from the artery until it appears. Then, it is lifted with the probe as you did before, and tied with another ligature as you did previously. Then, another incision or multiple incisions are made if you need to do so.
Then, it is detached and cut at the end of the incision near the ankle. Then, it is pulled out until it emerges from the second incision. Then, it is pulled towards the incision above it, and that is done until it is pulled out from the third incision above all of them, until its entirety is emerged and it is cut off.
If it does not come out with pulling and detaching, then insert a strong threaded needle and tie it and pull it, and insert the probe beneath it. Use your hand to guide it to every direction until it emerges, and be careful not to break it. If it breaks, it will be difficult for you to detach it completely.
And he will enter into the patient's harm, for if you have detached it all, then put on the site of the incisions a soothing ointment, such as wax, or oil, or grease, until it heals. For the patient's condition was troubled with twisted swellings that lean towards certain directions.
And do not be on the straightness as we mentioned, but rather make incisions on every direction of its swellings and leaning places, then tie them with strong ligatures until you have detached them all together. And be careful when making incisions that you do not cut the artery or sever it, for it will be difficult for you to detach it completely.
Image of the nail that was injured by the scalpel:.
Image of the deep suture:.
It should not be a tight ligature, nor should it be sharp at the end, lest it hurt the vein and be rough in its curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein by its roughness; rather, it should have a moderate thickness, as we said.
The sharp incision and the ninety [degrees].
In the middle of the artery's suturing.
This artery is formed in the legs in hot countries like Hejaz and Arab lands, and in hot countries with little fat and few hairs, and maybe it forms in other places of the body besides the legs, and its formation is due to a swelling that occurs under the skin.
As it happens inside the living bodies and the swelling and the abscess, and the ulcer that forms between the skin and the flesh, and the sign of the beginning of this artery is that it happens in the leg with severe pain, then the place becomes inflamed, then the artery begins to emerge from that inflamed place.
As if it were a plant or an animal, so if its end appears, it should be wrapped with a small piece of lead, weighing from one dirham to two dirhams, and tied, leaving the lead hanging from the leg.
Whenever something emerges from it to the outside, it should be wrapped in lead and tied, for if it remains much, cut some of it and wrap the rest, but do not cut it from its root before all of it has emerged, because if you cut it, it will constrict and enter the flesh, causing a painful ulcer and putrid suppuration at the site.
Therefore, it should be treated and pulled out little by little until it emerges entirely, and nothing of it remains in the body. It may emerge from this artery in some people what would be five fingers' length and ten.
I was not able to cure a man who had a wound on his shin, so I inserted a seton in the swelling and kept it there for a long time with the dressing until all the pus came out and the area was free from any bad discharge.
Then I treated the tumors, and it may be that this vein has many branches and does not narrow down even if it appears in the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, causing him many pains and exiting from every mouth a prolific discharge, as we mentioned in the section and previously.
Chapter 89.
On the incision on the abscess that forms under the rib and is called "cow's plague".
This disease is called in some of our countries "cow's plague" because it often affects the cows, and it is a small abscess that forms between the skin and the flesh and spreads through the whole body, ascending and descending.
It spreads to the surrounding tissue from one member to another until it reaches where it has perforated, and it forms an ulcer at that place, and it emerges and takes shape from a collection of some inflammatory materials, just as it appears in the abscesses and apostemes, and its affection is in the belly.
And indeed, it is feared that if it settles in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open up there and come out, so it blinds the eye, and this happens often. So, if you want to treat it and extract it, then it must be done when it first appears and spreads to the surrounding tissue.
So, you should make a firm compression above and below it with a strong bandage, then incise over it and extract it. If it has penetrated deep into the flesh and you cannot find it, apply cupping on the affected area with a hot iron until it is scorched, and beware of its damage to the eye as we mentioned.
If you find it has settled in the head near the eyes, apply a strong pressure underneath on the forehead, then make an incision and extract it. It is necessary to pay attention to the patient's temperament, purifying his body with gentle medicaments for the foul and putrid matter, and protecting him from the noxious foods that induce indigestion.
Chapter 39.
On the incision for the disease that is recognized by its foul smell.
This disease which is named in our country "al-Nafr" is a gangrene that appears on some of the limbs and then spreads from one limb to another, and I have seen it as I have described to you.
I was called to a sick woman in one of the villages, so I exposed her arm and inserted a small tube into the artery of the arm, and when it remained for an hour, I saw that tube become blocked with clots, just as a pipe becomes blocked, and it seemed to me that the clot was moving up towards her shoulder as quickly as possible, like a viper.
If it moves from one place to another, the pain departs from that location and settles in the shoulder, then I waited an hour and it spread throughout the rest of the body until it was in the other arm, and it seemed to me that it was affecting her entire body, as I have observed.
So I was amazed at the speed with which it transferred from one limb to another, and I had not seen this disease before with such symptoms as these, although I had seen a group of people who experience pain transferring from one limb to another, but I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
And I did not expect that except because the woman was from the desert dwellers, with a rough and uncovered body, so it was evident for the sensation to appear, and it was necessary for it not to appear in this way among the refined people of the cities, with their smooth and hidden veins.
If you want to treat it and its owner complains of pain, then it appears to you with signs as we mentioned. So, press on it firmly and hold it with the pincers and cut until that rotten matter comes out and the place is cleared.
If you did not see it with your naked eye, treat it by dispersing the swelling and what is putrefied of the bad humors, and evacuate them like the evacuation of the Menten and Sekibinj, and purge them from the medicines.
Chapter 84.
On extracting arrowheads.
Arrowheads may differ according to their types and according to the locations in which they are found in the body. As for their difference according to their types, some are large and some are small; some have jagged edges and some have smooth edges; some have three barbs and some have four barbs.
And some have points and some have fragments; as for those that are according to the organs in which they are found, they are on different patterns: either the organs are principal organs with jagged edges such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, spleen, bladder, and so on. When an arrowhead falls in one of these organs and death signs appear, which I will describe to you later, it is necessary to beware of extracting that arrowhead from them, for death often follows its owner in most cases. And when these bad signs do not appear, and the arrowhead is not embedded in the depth of the organ, then extract it and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain, if an arrowhead strikes it and fractures the bone and wounds the dura mater that is on the brain, then it causes severe headache, vertigo, and stupor.
And when these bad signs do not appear, and the arrowhead is not embedded in the depth of the organ, then extract it and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain, if an arrowhead strikes it and fractures the bone and wounds the dura mater that is on the brain, then it causes severe headache, vertigo, and stupor. And there is redness in the eyes and redness of the tongue, and convulsion, and confusion of mind, and a strong fit, and sometimes blood comes out from the nostrils or ears, and sometimes speech is cut off and the voice disappears, and a white pus-like discharge emerges from the site of the wound, similar to the fat of the meat.
If these signs appear to you, refrain from treating the wounded person and extracting the arrow, if it did not come out, and regarding the signs of the arrow, if it reached the heart and was close to the left ribcage and felt as if it had lodged in a solid piece, not an empty one.
Perhaps the arrow's movement resembled the pulse's movement, and blood of a bad color flowed from the wound, followed by cold sweats and numbness, so know that death is inevitable, without a doubt; and the sign of the arrow if it wounded the lung is the emission of frothy blood from the wound.
And the symptoms that appear on the neck are swelling and changing of the wounded person's color, and panting occurs with a strong panting, and he asks for cold air to be sniffed; if the arrow has reached the diaphragm in the chest, it is close to the small ribs, and the panting becomes very severe with severe oppression.
And all the members of the shoulders become weakened and relaxed, and if the arrow has reached the liver, severe oppression follows, and blood resembling the liver in its redness comes out from the wound; and if the arrow has reached the stomach, perhaps some undigested food comes out from the wound.
And the outward signs are manifest, and if the arrow has reached the abdomen and become stuck in it, and pus or feces or urine that has been obstructed comes out from the wound, there is no hope in treating him or extracting the arrow; for if the arrow has reached the bladder and urine came out.
And a thing bursts out to the outside and the pain intensifies on the wounded person, so know that he is dying; and as for the other members such as the face, eyes, throat, shoulders, arms, back, hips, legs, and similar parts of the body, they have given up to the grave matter.
When the arrow did not meet with a nerve or a blood vessel, and the arrow was not poisoned, and I inform you of some of what I saw concerning these arrows so that you may benefit from it in your treatment; for example, an arrow that reached a man's eye at the base of his nose.
I extracted it from the other side beneath the eyebrow and eyelid, and no disfigurement occurred in his eye. I also removed another cataract that had settled beneath the lower eyelid, and although the cataract had become cloudy, I only touched its small extremity which adheres to the sclera.
And there was a large cataract from the cataracts of the glassy humor, a round hardness in the iris, and it did not have an eye, so I removed it from the Jew's eye, and no bad incident occurred in his eye. And I extracted another cataract from the nasal canal, and the cataract was Arab.
And he was the one who had an eye with a cleft between the eyelids, and it had become buried in its socket, so I operated on it until I extracted it, and the nasal passage was sound, and I removed another cataract from a man whose cataract had settled in his abdomen, and we feared that he would die from it.
He remained for a period of thirty days or thereabouts, and nothing of his condition changed, the cleft settled on the cataract, and I operated on it and extracted it, and he recovered, and no bad incident occurred to him. And I saw a man whose cataract had settled in his back, so I treated the wound and operated on it.
Then, seven years later, the cataract recurred at the base of his thigh. And I saw a woman who had a cataract in her abdomen, and I treated the wound, but the cataract remained, and nothing of her condition changed, nor did she find any harm in anything of her natural functions.
And I saw another man who had a cataract on his face, and I treated the wound, but it remained, causing him little pain. And there were many like this. And I extracted a cataract from a man of the Sultan's guard who had one in the middle of his nose, which had deviated slightly to the right side.
Here is the translation:
It seems that the bruise is from the side of the arrowhead, and the spot was massaged with a strong pull and a slight twist, so that the spot would be affected and show signs of the arrowhead, thus it would be clear that the arrowhead reached the spot.
I massaged it strongly with my fingers several times, but no accident happened, and I was cautious during that period until the wound healed, and the patient remained quiet for a while until he felt the arrowhead moving inside his nose, so he informed me, and I applied a strong and bitter medicinal powder to the wound several times.
Until it opened and I explored, and I felt the fine tip of the arrowhead that was stuck in the nasal bone, then I added to the opening of the wound with that strong medicinal powder until the tip of the arrowhead became apparent to us through the symptoms, and it remained with him for a period of time, nearly four months.
Then the wound did not expand, and I was unable to insert the scalpel to extract it, so I did not succeed in making it exit, and I did not leave off trying until I got a hold of it one day with a well- positioned scalpel, which I had prepared according to its shape, as it appeared at the end of the papilla.
And the physicians were certain that the cartilage of his nose would not be restored, so I closed it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered fully, without anything harming him, and I inform you of how to extract some arrowheads, making it a principle and a lesson for what I have not mentioned.
Because the details of this craft and its subtleties are not grasped through description, nor is it confined to a book, but rather the skilled craftsman perceives the little from the much, and what is absent is made up for by creating something new and inventing a novel instrument at critical moments.
If the arrow is withdrawn from this craft, I say that the shafts exit from the organs in which they were embedded, either by being pulled out from the place where they entered or from the opposite side, and those that exit from where they entered.
Or the arrowhead may be stuck in a fleshy place, so it is pulled and exits, but if it does not come out at the time of its fall, it is better for you to leave it until the flesh that is around it becomes relaxed, making its extraction easy. Also, if it is embedded in bone.
And if it does not come out, leave it also for a while and manipulate it by pulling and rocking every day, so it comes out. If it does not come out after some days, it is better to make a small perforation around the arrowhead in the same bone from all sides with a fine awl until it widens enough for the arrowhead, then pull it out and extract it.
If the arrowhead is embedded in a skull bone and has penetrated one of the brain membranes, and some of those symptoms I mentioned to you have appeared, then desist from pulling the arrowhead and leave it until its matter settles down after some days.
Be careful in pulling out the arrowhead and extracting it, for if it is deeply embedded and does not come out with pulling, use the perforators around the arrowhead as I described to you, then treat the area until it heals. And if the arrowhead has become embedded in a place of the body. And if you are unable to feel it, probe for it with a sounder, and if you perceive it, pull it out with some instruments that are suitable for its extraction, for if you are not able to do so due to the narrowness of the wound, and the arrowhead has lodged in a deep place, neither in bone nor nerve nor vessel.
Place your hand on the wound and expand it until you can see its interior, then if it has two lips, grasp them with both hands and separate the flesh that is stuck from every direction by any means possible. If you cannot free the flesh in the fracture of the lips, continue to manipulate them until you release it.
And if you tried to extract the arrowhead from any position, then use your hand with the forceps towards all directions until you release it, and exert extreme pressure so that the arrowhead does not break in your hand and its extraction becomes difficult for you. If you cannot manage it within your time.
Leave it until the surrounding flesh putrefies, then treat it, for it will be easier then. If you encounter a vein or an artery or a nerve, beware of cutting them, and use the treatment we mentioned earlier in its place, and preserve your effort from severing a vessel or a nerve, and use cunning.
In any case, you can release the arrowhead with gentleness and caution, and steady yourself as I have described to you, and it is necessary for you to use, when pulling out the arrowhead, that you align the extractor according to the shape it was in when the arrowhead fell, for it is more opportune.
If you cannot do that, then use whatever forms are possible, and as for the arrowhead that emerges from the opposite side, either it may have protruded something to the outside, or you may find the tip of the arrowhead by feeling it from above the skin, closely and gently.
Make an incision in it, and let the incision be according to the size that the forceps can enter, then extract it, for it will be easier to remove. If it is stuck to a bone, then place your hand on its circumference until you feel the arrowhead in the bone, and widen it to itself, then extract it.
And if you cannot, then leave it until it comes out on its own, for if the arrowhead has a wooden shaft in it, then push it with it, and if the shaft breaks off and you want to use the pushing method, insert the curved instrument into the wound to push the arrowhead out with it.
If the arrowhead is stuck, push it in with a instrument that enters into the wound; the arrowhead will then come out easily. If the arrowhead is poisoned, it is necessary to cut around the flesh where the poison has spread, and if you are able to do so, then treat it with what is suitable for it.
If the arrowhead has fallen in the chest or in the belly or in the intestines or in the tendons and was close to what you could reach with a spatula, and you were able to dissect it, then dissect and be cautious not to cut an artery or a nerve, and take it out.
Then stitch the wound if you need to, and treat it until he recovers. The picture of the forceps used to extract arrowheads:.
It has edges like a bird's beak, made in such a way that if it grasps the arrowhead or anything, it does not let it go. And it is manufactured in various sizes, large and small and medium, all of which depend on the size of the arrowhead, its smallness, and the width of the wound and its narrowness.
The picture of the evacuator probe:.
The picture of the obstructed evacuator:.
This is an evacuator with a curved end, like a polished rod, easy to enter into the stuck arrowhead and push it.
Chapter 85.
On suturing wounds.
The wounds that are commonly sutured in the body, thirty of them, including six in the head: the two arteries behind the ears, known as the sensors; the two jugular veins in the neck; and the two arteries in the corners of the eyes, known as the gaze controllers.
And the artery that is in the middle of the forehead, and the artery that is at the side of the nose, and the two veins in the neck, and the two arteries in the upper lip from the mouth, and the two arteries in the lower lip, and these are the well-known jugular veins, and the two arteries beneath the tongue.
There are five veins that branch off from the arm and hand. One of them is the cephalic vein, which is located on the radial side and is called the 'vein of the head'. The middle vein is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and a branch from the cephalic vein, and it is also called the 'vein of the arm'.
The basilic vein is located on the ulnar side and is also called the 'vein of the belly' or the 'string of the arm'. It is situated on the zund (a bone in the forearm) and is the one that becomes visible when it is palpated, appearing clearly above the elbow.
It is the vein that lies between the cubitus and the carpus, having two branches. And in the leg and foot, there are three veins: one of them is below the knee joint on the radial side, the second is the safen, located at the ankle on the ulnar side, and the vein of the toes, located at the toe tips on the radial side.
And in the other leg, there are three veins like them. As for the two veins behind the ears, they are beneficial for treating chronic headaches and dizziness, and for alleviating chronic migraines and their symptoms, and how they can be treated according to what I have described.
And it is done by bleeding the patient's head and scratching its back in the place of the veins with a rough lancet, scratching deeply, then constricting the patient's neck with a bandage until the veins appear and their locations become clear behind the ears in the depressed areas of the head, so you can feel them with your finger and when you sense their pulsation under your finger, then you will be aware of it through palpation.
Then you take a scalpel, which is known as a lancet, and insert it under the vein in the skin until it reaches the bone, then you lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein along with the skin, cutting obliquely, and the length of the cut should be about two fingers' width.
Here is the translation:
How to dissect them, as I have described to you, is to incise the skin and expose the vessels beneath it until the artery appears clearly to you. Then, insert the cannula underneath the skin, and afterwards, withdraw the scalpel from above the artery to below the cannula, little by little.
And introduce the cannula from below and withdraw the artery to above, and you extract it as you did with the other arteries. Then, you drain the blood according to your need, and then you release the constricted area of the vessel and place your finger on the artery for a while.
Then, you put a compress and bandage on it, and tighten it from above with tightness and firmness, and leave it until it heals. You have presented the description of these and their sections in the beginning of this book. As for the artery of the forehead, its benefit is after ligating the jugular vein, to treat the afflicted face, like the pustule and the redness and the bluish discoloration.
How to dissect, as I have described to you, is to constrict the vessel with a ligature until the artery appears. Then, take the instrument called the catheter, and this is its shape:
You place the curved needle, which is at the head of the catheter, on the same artery and inject from above with a syringe or another instrument in its way, and let the blood flow according to your need, then release the constricted vessel and tighten it until it heals.
And it may be opened with a narrow cannula, but it is not advisable that the cannula be sharp-tipped like other cannulas, rather it should be slightly blunt-tipped and dissected according to the curvature, because the bone is nearby, lest the cannula breaks if it were fragile.
As for the two arteries that are in the temples, their benefit is for treating the eye ailments of glaucoma and redness and cataract and facial diseases. And as for how to dissect them, it is to constrict the vessel with a ligature, then dissect them and you stand on its edge, and let the incision be on the curvature slightly, with a small, narrow cannula.
If the wound does not have a lip, then if the edge is thin and fragile, you should compress it with a bandage to constrict the bleeding, and apply a compress for one night, then remove it. And if the bleeding from the nose vein is severe, you should apply a cautery to the outer edge of the nose.
And severe bleeding from the face, like the red suffusion that appears on the nose, and how it can be stopped by compressing the forehead strongly, then grasping the nose with your left hand and taking a thin, long bandage.
And you should apply it in the middle of the nostril itself, between the bridge of the nose and the base of the nostril, because the vein does not appear to the sense there, so the blood flows from its orifice. And you should place your hand on the bandage slightly and compress the bleeding strongly, then bind it for a night, for it will congeal quickly.
And as for the wounds of the nose, they are beneficial for constricting the breath and stopping the hemorrhages and the blackish, Sudawi diseases that appear on the surface of the skin, such as black behaq, qubaa, and red qaruh. And how to stop them by compressing the forehead strongly under it with a bandage, and placing the end of the bandage on top of the forehead.
And the forehead is placed on a pillow, then the vein is compressed to its full length, compressing it slightly and strongly, then you should release the blood flow gradually or according to what you see as necessary for that, then you do the same with the other vein, then remove the bandage.
And you should compress the two veins strongly and moderately so that the forehead does not become constricted, and leave it until the morning, for it heals the wound. And as for the veins of the jaw, they are beneficial for stopping them after compressing the palate, for it benefits from the ulcers in the mouth and the cracks and red qaruh and the cracks of the lips and red qaruh.
The part that is in the nostrils and their surrounding area, and how you can dissect them by placing the scalpel in front of you and holding its handle firmly, then turning its edge and looking at the two veins that you see, one on the right side of the nose and the other on the left side, and distinguishing between them by their blueness.
And also, there are many bluish veins around them, which you can dissect by making incisions that are not too deep, so that you do not err and know what you are aiming for, to cut the larger ones and distinguish between them, and likewise, make a distinction in the two veins of the lower nose.
And as for the two veins that are beneath the tongue, it is beneficial to dissect them after cutting the uvula, which is in the throat, due to diseases of the uvula and mouth ulcers. And how you can dissect them by placing the scalpel between your hands with the edge facing downwards and looking underneath the tongue on one side for a vein and on the other side for a vein, and distinguishing between them by their blueness.
You dissect them and be cautious not to make a mistake in cutting them, for you will encounter networks of blood vessels from those veins, and as for the three veins that are cut in the wrist, they are the ones that are commonly cut among people, and their dissection is done on two sides.
You make an incision with a sharp, narrow instrument, either a rhazony or a zitone, to the wound, and you split it open with a skene, and this is its shape. The image of the sharp, narrow rhazony instrument:.
It is sharp as you see, suitable for opening up the bulging, prominent, and visible veins that contain thick, dense, and gloomy blood. And this is the image of the zitone instrument:.
And this instrument has a narrower appearance and a more delicate edge, suitable for dissecting the thin, yellowish veins that contain thin blood. And this is the image of the skene instrument:.
This fracture which is suitable for the splint and becomes from it various types of bandages and wrappings according to the size of the wounds, also their narrowness, and one may rely on this concerning others, and it is well-known among the craftsmen.
And as for the basilic vein which is one of these three veins, it is useful to ligate it because it draws blood from the vessels that are beneath the throat and neck, whence it goes to the chest and abdomen. And when ligating, care should be taken not to cut it, lest a hemorrhage occurs, and it becomes necessary to open the affected area to stop the bleeding.
If a hemorrhage occurs, it is necessary that the ligature not be on the bleeding vessel, but rather on the splint with the fracture; if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, it is necessary to avoid it and shift to another or to ask for some of its branches.
Or if you ligate the upper arm, it is clear and separated by the splint with the fracture, as we have said; if you want to ligate it specifically, it is necessary before tightening the arm to examine the position until you are certain of the location of the pulse, then you tighten around it with the bandage.
Then you bandage the arm and separate the vein from the fracture, as we have said, and take care that the compression is away from the location of the artery; and when you see, upon tightening the bandage, a swelling at the place where you applied the pressure, then that swelling is an indication of the artery, so avoid it.
If you see the blood upon ligature, it will stop as it would stop with a gentle touch, and if the blood is thin and bright red, then know that it is from an arterial bleeding; so, hasten to place your finger on it for a long hour, then remove your finger, and if the bleeding stops, you will have stopped much of the bleeding, and tighten the arm.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Take a straight razor and divide it, take the single half and attach it to the place of the artery, attaching it firmly with a bandage and a pad, until the bleeding stops, for if the bleeding is not stopped, it will be difficult to constrict it in most cases.
For a small wound, tighten the bandage on the arm and teach him, and for the artery that is visible, it will be beneficial to stop the bleeding from the top of the head and the bottom of the vessels, because it is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and a branch from the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the one who applies it to be on guard against it, for if he neglects it, it will increase in the gathering of pus and the ulcer will occur, causing a severe pain that worsens with time, and perhaps the patient will not recover at all. And this ulcer often appears to the senses.
For if you find it in some people and it is subtle, not manifesting, it is necessary to make your incision with caution and avoid the ulcer by effort, for if the artery was between two muscles, incise the artery longitudinally. And as for the cephalic vein, it is beneficial to stop the bleeding from the head.
And it is useful for the diseases of the eyes, and it is necessary in this artery specifically; if you incise it, it will not be a problem to incise it, whether in the temporal region or in the rhadionian region, because it does not contain any vital vessels or nerves.
However, it is necessary for you, when making the incision, to avoid the region of the head of the muscle only and seek the soft spot, and it will not harm if he does not bleed from the first blow, that he may be treated with repeated incisions, although it may become inflamed in some people if not incised at the first blow.
But it does not harm him at all, and as for the method of stitching and its complications, and what is intended by advancing in its repair, firstly it is intended to learn that the stitching is only employed in maintaining health.
And it is employed in diseases, and what is employed in maintaining health and its preservation, and protecting against the occurrence of diseases, is that the stitching is in one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely the cephalic, basilic, and medial, and the stitching is at the beginning of spring if the signs of abundance appear.
And the stitching is on Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours have passed from noon, and as for the stitching that is employed in diseases, it does not have a limited time but rather whenever necessity and urgency require it, whether at night or day.
And in every hour and at every time, and it is not intended to stitch the children until they reach fourteen years, nor to stitch the old who have exceeded sixty years; so if someone is averse to stitching for any reason, it was.
It is intended to clean the area before stitching with a gentle scrub, if there is much dirt and pus, lest it should spread to the veins during stitching from the dirty matter, which would harm the main organs; and one should not stitch those who are exhausted, or those suffering from scurvy, or those affected by hemiplegia, until that is removed from them.
And one should also beware of stitching after bathing, eating, and sexual intercourse, and after blood-letting from congestion, fatigue, exercise, wakefulness, and fasting, and everything that weakens the body from a bodily or spiritual matter; then consider the temperament of the humors before that, if the blood is thick.
With food, drink, and medicine, if possible, then he should enter the bath, if nothing prevents him or he is not worn out by some exercise so that his blood becomes relaxed and his stitching is in the morning, as we said, and it is hoped that he will be free from all psychological disorders that day.
Here is the translation:
The surgeon sits on a cushion that is firmer than the one he operates on, then he stretches out his arm and flexes his fingers twice or thrice, then he tightens the bandage with a jerk and twists it twice or thrice, but the tightening should be moderate.
Because if the tightening is not moderate, either it will be excessive in the tightening and the blood will flow, or it will be towards relaxation and the blood will also flow. Then after the tightening, it is necessary that he flexes his fingers all together with one another.
Until the veins become distended and the sensation is felt, then he massages the affected part with a small amount of old oil specifically, then he places his left forefinger on the same vein under the spot where he wants to make the incision, slightly pressing so that the vein does not get in the way of the stroke. Because some of the veins are wandering and get in the way during incision, and some of them are full of air, so when he places the affected part on it, it becomes depressed under the affected part and the surgeon's fingers get confused, and the affected part does not open to the vein, and if it opens, then its opening is narrow.
Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to be cautious and careful in all these matters, then he should make a gentle incision; if the vein opens from that spot, or else he will make another attempt below or above it with a slight inclination, provided the spot does not become swollen.
If there is swelling or redness, he should leave it for a day or two and not tighten the bandage, lest he causes inflammation or pain, and let him not enter the bath. Then he should make another incision if necessary, for the wound was small and the bleeding was slight.
And beware lest he does not remove the required amount of blood, so return to the wound in the same spot, and gently incline on the straight line, and add a little to the incision with a slight inclination before the spot becomes swollen, for many people have their spot become swollen during small incisions.
If you find it swollen, do not apply cupping to it; for it will not benefit from anything being applied to the inflamed area. Instead, apply something that eases the flow of blood, as this is better in this case than applying cupping itself and other treatments.
You should use cupping for all obstructions of the blood flow when there is difficulty in its passage, and it may be that the dry cupping or the horned cupping will do that if one of them is applied to the affected area, then the blood will flow and be resolved if it was thick.
If a large swelling occurs at the site of obstruction, it often happens and does not occur to those who have not been cupped before, unless the orifice of the vein was small. So, hasten to apply a sponge soaked in rose-water and milk, and bind it slightly for an hour, then it will be resolved.
And it is necessary to do that after the blood has exited from the vein itself, either by its own flow or through another vein. If something remains at the site after a few days, whether blackness or blueness, it does not harm; so, if you wish, apply to it something of soothing and cooling medications.
Or something of the essence of Fūdunj and its likes. Many times, a swelling and a tumor occur at the site of cupping on the basilic vein, so apply your hand to it; if you find it warm when you press on it, then that is a bad sign, so beware of applying to it something we mentioned earlier.
For perhaps a vein was injured, and blood flowed out; but stop it with something that constricts, so the site becomes firm, then treat it with other treatments until it recovers. And it is necessary for each person to let out according to their strength, and what appears of the dominant color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it out until it turns red, and likewise if you find it thick, send it out until it flows easily, and likewise if it was sharp until its edge disappears. And it is necessary for one who has a strong and abundant constitution to let out the blood at once.
When the artery is cut and it becomes a large wound, if it was weak, then one should take care to cauterize it at several points, so that the opening is narrow, and it is best to use a moxa stick with a straight edge, not serrated.
And this stroke from the cut is healthy, free from hemorrhage and nerve cutting, and it is better and more sound than a cut with a width and length. And whoever is going to make an incision in the flesh should cauterize it before making the incision with something from the bread dipped in rose water or vinegar.
If it was bleeding and the blood came out in three or four times, and it was a melancholic temperament, then he should take before making the incision a bread dipped in grape juice or honey wine with clove, or in rose-water with clove, or in the good rose-water.
If the flesh was incised and a lot of blood came out, then it is proper to pour rose-water and thin wine on it, and to use honey with galena, and to anoint his chest with it, and to use other things mentioned in the chapter on incisions.
The one who is suffering from hemorrhage, and whoever wants to calm his veins and stop the bleeding again, it is proper for him whose vein was cut to bleed a little at a time, according to his strength, on consecutive days.
And whoever wants to calm his veins and stop the bleeding again, and his body is strong, then let him do that every seven or nine hours from the first incision. And whoever wants to draw the blood from his body to the opposite side of the one that was affected, it is proper for him to be treated on the second or third day.
And whoever has a lot of blood in his body, which has become stagnant and caused inflammation, it is proper to let out the blood at one time, and to remove a large quantity of it, and to widen the incision until the flesh becomes healthy after meeting all the conditions of the incision. You should place your hand on the pulsation when the blood flows excessively, lest death occur in the ghastly place, for it is frequent that this happens if the bandage is too tight and the bloodflow is obstructed; and it is not suitable if you want to release the arm and restore the blood flow again.
When the mouth of the vein is constricted and the blood flow is difficult, do not press on it strongly or twist it with force, for that would be very harmful; rather, leave it until the blood issues forth again, or pierce the constricted spot where the blood has collected in the mouth of the vein.
Or apply to it something of salt that has dissolved in water, or apply to it something of the powder of Faruk's aristum or of Schizenaya, and press on it with a gentle pressure until the blood comes out; if the vein has become swollen, then leave it.
And do not touch it until the swelling subsides, for if you are forced to restore the blood flow again, there is no choice but to open it at that spot or to open it in the other arm or in the other vein.
And sometimes the arm is opened at the bend of the elbow, and it is opened from the outer aspect and the basilic vein, if they are not found or were hidden because they are composed of them; and how to open it so that the physician's hand enters the warm water until the skin becomes relaxed and the vein appears clearly, then it is tightened above it with a moderate bandage.
Then the vein is opened at a slight inclination, neither obliquely nor longitudinally, and let the incision be wide and let it be above the joint of the hand slightly; if the blood flow is difficult, then return the hand to its position in the warm water and let the blood flow freely in the water.
Until you achieve your goal; if you are in the summer days, you may dispense with returning the hand to the warm water, and it is more that the blood flow occurs in the warm water during winter; and opening this vein is safer than all other veins. Because there is no vein, artery or nerve, and since the ligament of the right hand is cut, it benefits from the pain of the liver and spleen. If you tie the hand with a bandage or after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells up.
Because there is no vein, artery or nerve, and since the ligament of the right hand is cut, it benefits from the pain of the liver and spleen. If you tie the hand with a bandage or after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells up. You should stretch the limb strongly, then bend it slightly, and even if you twist it completely, it would not harm it at all. And take care not to put your hand in a bent position, for there is a nerve of the fingers and the area is sensitive from the meat, then return the hand to the hot water.
And let the blood flow in it, for if you do not put it in hot water, the blood will congeal in the mouth of the vein and prevent the flow. So if you remove the amount of blood needed, then apply a compress to the vein, and massage gently so that it adheres quickly.
And it is necessary to do the same with every narrow vein, and since the ligament of the left hand is beneficial for the pain of the spleen, you should do the same with the ligament as you did with the other, whether it is the ligament of the Safin, which is beneficial for the diseases that are at the bottom of the body, such as the pains of the kidneys.
And it is useful for stopping menstrual flow and kidney diseases, and chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs, and other diseases. And since the ligament is such that it enters the hot water and is massaged until the veins are opened, then it is tied above the ankle joint with a bandage, and the vein is in its place at the outer calf near the knee.
And it branches out in the direction of the leg into many veins, so you should ligate the widest vein of them or at the ankle at their meeting point, which is better and more sound. For if you ligate it on the surface of the leg, be careful not to harm the nerves that are underneath the surface of the leg.
Make an incision on the skin as if you want to cut and be cautious not to cut deeply, for if you are troubled by the outflow of blood, return your instrument to the warm water and leave the blood to flow until it is exhausted. Then, make the suture with the thread at the first attempt.
Then, return the instrument to above a little, for the site is sound and does not fear any harm if you have guarded against the nerve as we mentioned, and do similarly with the vessels of the other leg, and as for the woman's vein, it is positioned as we mentioned at the bend of the outer thigh.
And the benefit of making an incision at the bend of the thigh is that it was from before, with warm blood, and how to make an incision so as to enter the warm bath and hasten and stretch his leg from behind the thigh to above the heel with four long fingers, in a thin, long bandage, for it does not appear except by this.
So, if it appears, make an incision in any case, either on the skin or on the muscle, and it is better, or to cut it with a cutting or to split it with a splitting, for its site is sound, and it is very hidden in most people, so you did not find it.
And it did not appear to the sense of touch, so make an incision on some of its branches, and this is what appears on the back of the foot near the ankle and the toes, and guard against the nerves and release the blood in the amount you want.
Then, loosen the tightness and put a compress on the site of the incision, and tighten the site, for it will quickly heal.
Chapter 86.
On cupping and how to use it.
The cupping vessels may be of horns, wood, copper, or glass, and cupping is of two types: one with scarification and blood extraction, and the other without scarification.
This surgical procedure is not conditional upon two surfaces.
And the incision of the dual veins, which are two sides of the neck, and the incision of the chin, which is below the lower jaw from the mouth, and the incision of the shoulders, and the incision of the armpits on the back of the elbow, and the incision of the wrists, which are in the middle of the forearms, and the incision of the legs, and the incision of the ankles.
And the surgical incision, it is not suitable for extracting blood from the thin and visible veins in the flesh, and for that reason, the power of the scalpel should not be used to incise the vein, whether with a cautery or without, in one of the diseases that are caused by excess, until the entire body is purged.
For if the need for surgical incision arises from a disease or from habitual practice, it is used at every time, in the beginning of the month and at its end, and in its middle, and at any time it was.
And that is because among the people, whoever has an abundance of blood in his body to the point that he needs to extract it through surgical incision, finds heaviness and pain in his head, and some of them find excess and redness in his face, head, and neck, and some of them find dark spots on his face, forehead, and eyelids, and some of them feel a prickling sensation at the site of the surgical incision.
And some of them have a abundance of saliva, and some of them find the taste of blood in their mouth, and their teeth are dyed with it, and the blood bursts forth, and some of them have an abundance of sleep, and some of them see in their sleep the blood and the redness and the ulcers and the surgical incisions, and similar things, so when we saw something of that.
If the middle third of the month has passed and we are aware of that at the time of the bleeding after two or three hours have elapsed from the day, and as for the benefit of phlebotomy on the vein, it benefits from the heaviness in the head and what descends to the eyes.
But it is necessary that this be after evacuating the whole of the body, and this phlebotomy may be instead of puncturing the jugular vein. And one should beware that whoever uses it when they have a cold brain or have inflammation in it, for it would cause great harm.
Therefore, it is not suitable that the elderly use it, and whoever has cold diseases in their head, and whoever has relied on it and has become accustomed to it.
Therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be cautious in lowering his hand with the cupping device a little to the bottom, fearing the production of numbness, and as for phlebotomy on the vein, it is instead of puncturing the axillary vein and the basilic vein.
Therefore, it benefits from the relief of flatulence and tightness of breath, and the removal of the instruments of respiration, cough, and fullness. And it is necessary that phlebotomy on the vein be raised a little because if it is done at the bottom, it would weaken the heart and the stomach.
And as for phlebotomy on the temples, it benefits from the occurrences of headaches in the head, and dizziness, and palpitation, and tension in the roots of the teeth, and it is instead of puncturing the basilic vein. And it is necessary that the phlebotomist be cautious not to cut his hand with the razor lest he cuts a vein and causes bleeding.
And as for phlebotomy beneath the chin, it benefits from the ulcers in the mouth and the putridity of the gums, and their removal from the diseases that are in the mouth, and it may take the place of puncturing the jugular vein that is in the lips. And as for phlebotomy on the shoulders, it benefits from the numbness that occurs due to fullness and heat.
Here is the translation:
It is necessary to warn the surgeon not to cut blindly in the wound because the site is dense with flesh and has many tendons and ligaments, and as for the single ligament that connects to the vertebrae, it causes palsy from the lumbar region and weakness in the lower limbs.
It is necessary to warn the surgeon that the ligament should be large and made of strong material, because the site needs a powerful hold, and perhaps the broken glass ligament will be cut and many conditions will occur, and as for the ligaments of the thighs, they will diminish the lameness by a clear diminishment.
Because it attracts blood from all parts of the body and treats chronic pains in the kidneys, liver, and spleen, and stops diarrhea and treats hemorrhoids and piles, and performs the function of phlebotomy, except that it hurts the body much and causes hernia in most people, and the ligaments of the hips are close to the benefit of the ligaments of the thighs.
How to put the ligaments: it is that you place the ligament first empty and tighten its hold moderately, and do not delay putting the ligaments, but rather put them quickly and remove them quickly to accept the flux into the site equally and do not repeat that until you see the site has become red and opened.
And the redness of the blood appears, then you cut and return the hold gradually, then you examine the condition of the limbs; whoever has weak flesh should be cautious of the openings, it is necessary to make one incision only, lest the site becomes infected.
And warn the surgeon to widen the wound slightly and deepen it a little, and adjust the hold in accordance with the movement of the body, for if there is thick blood, it is necessary to make two incisions: in the first one, he opens a way for the flow of blood and its purification, and in the second one, he removes the thick blood.
If the blood has clotted strongly and we try to extract it a third time, it will hardly come out. And if we want to remove a little blood and use a single incision, then if we want to remove much blood, we must make multiple incisions. And if we think that the blood is thick.
We should make a deep incision and cut moderately in the center of the incision, only what is needed from the instruments when placing the drains and the water, and what is protected from the compression, but if the skin is thick and hard, and its texture is rough and dense.
It is suitable to grease the places of the drains with instruments that are smooth, polished, and fragrant, unless it is during the summer time, then like the grease of rose water or the grease of lavender or the grease of sweet almond oil or the grease of cyperus.
And if it is in winter, then like the grease of narcissus or the grease of iris or the grease of acanthus or rose-petal and its likes. If the poultice is cold and thick, then let the grease be that of marzongosh or that of namnam or that of ban or that of shabath and their likes.
If the compression is wide and the flesh is dense, it is suitable to abstain from greasing and instead they should wash their drains after the incision with rose water or cold water or water of Thalab's plum or cyperus water or rheum water and their likes. And if there is much moisture in the blood.
They should wash their drains with vinegar or water of quince and sumac, and their likes. And if the poultice is thick, they should wash their drains with old wine or marzongosh water or Shibath's syrup or acanthus and their likes. And it is suitable to beware of the incision in the bathroom and after the bath.
It is not advisable to bleed after a bath, or an hour or two hours later, nor should one sleep after phlebotomy. It is not advisable for the bleeder and the one who performs the operation to eat before and after the operation.
It is necessary to examine the patient first, whether he is bilious or sanguineous, and what predominates in his temperament, whether it be heat, cold, dryness, or moisture. It is advisable for him to take medications such as rhubarb, and Indian aloe with vinegar, and hippo and galen and similar things, and to make his diet light and easy to digest, like barley gruel and egg dishes and similar things.
And whoever has a cold temperament, it is advisable for him to take a drink of honey and a drink of milk or rose-water, and to eat moderate-sized dates that are between old and new, and to reduce the amount of food and make his diet light and easy to digest, such as gruel and broth and similar things, and to take a warm bath, and it is advisable for the drink on the day of phlebotomy to be more than the food.
It is advisable to give some people at certain times a tonic of Faroq's theriac or an antidote of Musk or Siltah before phlebotomy, and before and after it, to strengthen the main organs and to calm the blood, but it is not advisable for those who are weakened.
And as for the bleeding points that are without condition, they are the bleeding points that are located on the liver, spleen, lungs, and abdomen, and on the sides of the back, because these organs do not tolerate cupping, and what is intended by them is only to draw blood from one organ to another.
We place the bleeding point on the lungs in a case of bronchitis or we use it to remove cold rheum that has settled in the organ, and we place the bleeding point on the abdomen and the back, for it opens up the organ and clears it and drives out the rheum by analysis, thus removing that coldness.
Here is the translation:
You should not use a heated iron, but rather a cauterized one filled with hot water in the treatment of hemorrhoids, and that is to fill the cavity and make it large enough with hot water or with water that has been mixed with some astringent herbs suitable for that.
Then you place the cauterized instrument on the site and hold it, removing it and reapplying it repeatedly as needed, and this is a picture of the cavity that is used with the heated iron:.
It should have a wide mouth with two small, open fingers on what we have drawn, and its depth is half a finger, and there will be near it, on about half of it, a small hole the size of what the needle can enter, made from polished copper or yellow copper, for treating hemorrhoids.
A polished, smooth, and lubricated instrument that does not harm the member when it is applied to it, and in its center there is a hollow tube made of copper or iron where the heated iron is placed, and this cavity can be made larger than what we have described, and smaller according to the size of the tumors.
And it is suitable to use them, for the cavities of children and women are not like those of men and old people; and as for how to apply this instrument with the heated iron on the member, it is that you take a thread from a twisted cord or a small candle flame and place it in the middle of the constricted vein, which is in the middle of the cavity.
The heated iron should be raised above the cavity, about one finger's breadth below the edge of the cavity, so that it does not burn the body of the patient; then it is placed on the member and the fingers are inserted into the hole we mentioned, until when we hold the cavity, we do not remove our fingers.
And the steam exits through that hole and the cavity is relaxed on the skin, then you bring the thread to the surface and fix it if it adheres to that; as for the cavity that is used in treating hemorrhoids with water, there is no constricted vein nor hole in it.
When it is used, it is filled with water and placed on the limb only, and this is its shape:
And this cup, whenever it was large enough to hold a lot of water, was better.
Chapter 87.
On the treatment of hernia.
A hernia is usually treated in most cases in the organs where cups cannot be applied, either because of their smallness such as the lip and the penis and the like, or because the organ is surrounded by flesh such as the fingers and the nose and the like.
And the method of its application is to extract the hernia that is in pure, clean water free from impurities, then it is left for a day and a night in the sweet water until it softens and nothing remains in its cavity. Then the body is evacuated, either by cupping or by bleeding, then the ailing limb is massaged.
Until it becomes red, then it is placed on it, and if it has become full, it falls; and if the place cannot be treated with a cup, it is more beneficial to wash the place with vinegar and then with much water, and to sprinkle and compress. If the blood flows after the hernia falls, that is a good sign, for then the blood will flow continuously in cold water.
And it is placed on top until the bleeding stops; if the blood flows abundantly, a piece of lint or a compress or similar from the bandages is applied to stop the bleeding or a poultice of cooked egg-white is placed on the affected area.
And it is left until the egg-white adheres to the affected area, and then the bleeding stops; and it should be noted that one must return to re-applying the hernia treatment, so do not apply that treatment if another can be applied, for if the hernia has been removed from the treatment, then the affected area is massaged with cold blood.
Insert a needle in the spot until some blood comes out, then withdraw it. If you feel something thick in the blood that clings to the tip, and you want to drop it, sprinkle some powder or salt or antimony on it, and it will drop off.
The Third Door.
On Ulcers.
This door also includes what is needed for the craft of medicine, which is the treatment of fractures and dislocations that occur in the bones.
Know, my sons, that many of those who claim to be physicians and common practitioners have not written a single book about it nor read a single letter from it.
And because of this, this art has become neglected in our country, and I have not found a single proficient person in it. And I have benefited from it what I have benefited, through lengthy reading of the ancient books and zeal in understanding them, until I extracted knowledge from them. Then, I combined experience and practice throughout my life.
And I have drawn for you from that in this door all that has surrounded my knowledge. And my experience has walked with it after I presented it to you, purified it from the confusion of verbosity, shortened it extremely, made it extremely clear, and depicted for you many images of the instruments that are used in it.
It is an addition to the clarity, as I did in the previous doors, and there is no power except with God, the Exalted, the Great.
The First Section.
It contains a comprehensive and detailed account of the fracture of bones, and it is necessary to present them before we start mentioning the broken and disjointed limbs one by one. It is fitting that we mention in the introduction of this door the general principles and sections. You should first understand them and be aware of their reality, you and whoever is eager to learn this noble craft.
I say that when it happens to have a fracture or a crack or a bruise or a fall, one should hasten to reduce it or set it right or stitch it together. If it is not possible to achieve that, one should not refrain from it, such as weakness of the strength or whether it happened at a time of youth or old age, whenever it was a severe heat or severe cold.
Then he should restrict himself in his diet to cold vegetables and the meat of birds and game, and avoid hot drinks and fatty meats, and refrain from food that fills the veins with blood until, if the inflammation has subsided and it is not feared that there will be a relapse of matter to the affected place.
So then the patient should return to his original regimen which he was accustomed to, and if the fractured bone is in the process of consolidation, it is appropriate that the patient be nourished with nourishments that are rich and fatty, being among them the likes of hare's meat, rice, and roasted chicken, and the fat of young cows. And eggs, and fat fish, and rich drinks, and so on. For with this regimen, the consolidation of the fracture will be faster and better. And know that if the fractured bone is in the bodies of the aged and the exhausted, it cannot be restored to its original natural state ever.
The structure of their bones is fragile and can be restored, and it will reunite what was broken in the bones to the utmost degree, similar to the state of the bones of young children. But nature renews the fractured bone from all its aspects, something like a glue that thickens and strengthens until it unites some of its parts together.
And it will unite some of its parts together until it reaches the utmost strength and solidity, as it was originally, so that nothing of its effects will hinder it.
For this reason, it is necessary to adapt the nourishment of the patient according to the type that is in it, and its mixture and density, as we have said. And know that fractures vary in their types depending on the difference of the members, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the head bone, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone.
And so, each of the other members is different from one another, and we will mention each type of fracture in its specific place, separate from others. It may also happen that a type of bone fracture differs within itself.
For it may be a fracture that breaks into pieces without shattering, and it may be a fracture along the length of the bone with fragments and protrusions, both aligned and unaligned. And the fracture may occur with a wound and a crack in the skin, and the fracture may be a simple one.
And for each type, there is a specific trick in its treatment according to what will be mentioned in detail at its place. And among the things that are known about bone fracture are its curvature and twisting, and its appearance to the senses, and its crunching when you press on it with your fingers.
But when there is no apparent curvature at the site, nor crunching, nor sensation when you touch the bone with your fingers, and the doctor does not find much pain, then it may not be a fracture, but rather a bruise or a slight crack, so it should not be treated by setting and bandaging.
But you should apply to it the medicines that will be mentioned later, according to what suits the site, and then tightly bind it with a gentle bandage. And know that if the bone is broken and split into two pieces without shattering, it is as if each part has been dislodged from its companion.
It is necessary for you to hasten from the beginning to adjust and align it before a bitter ulcer occurs, for if a bitter ulcer occurs, leave it until the inflammation subsides, then adjust it in whatever way you can manage with gentleness and skill.
You should know that setting a fracture is easier than treating a bone that has developed splinters, then it will be attached to what has been mentioned about it. If the bone has splinters, there is no alternative but to stretch the injured limb with both hands, whether it was an arm or a leg.
If the limb is small, then with a bandage, and if it is larger, then with both bandages and hand, and let your placing of the limb be on a surface equal to its natural shape, until when you stretch out the fractured bone, then you will return those projections to their places in every direction, as much as you are able from the manipulation and gentleness.
And beware of making a mistake by not applying force and gentleness, and do not harm him. And try to bring one bone end to its fellow in the best position, and it is necessary at that time to feel them with your hand and adjust them. If you find something contrary, correct and set it right according to your ability.
And beware of strong stretching and violent force, as many of the ignorant ones do, and many are those who harm them with that, and it becomes a chronic condition or a disability in the limb, as I have seen that from their actions many times.
Then, after setting and adjusting, and stretching that limb to a comfortable and suitable position, beware the patient that he should not move it during his sleep, nor while getting up, nor while turning, nor during all his movements, lest it becomes dislocated, and let him be careful that the position of the limb is a secure one, with which he can avoid pain.
And that is when he feels, while his limb is in a position of pain or discomfort, to move it to another position where he does not feel pain with it, and he should be careful that his positioning is straight and upright.
For it is not proper to cause curvature in the limb if it is set, and as for how to stretch the fractured limb, it is according to what I have described to you. You should know that fractured limbs differ in their smallness and largeness, and their conditions, such as the arm, the fingers, and the like.
It is necessary for the bandages to be soft and gentle, and not rough, like those on the thigh, back, and chest. It is necessary for the bandages to be tight and firm, because the strong ligature confines the large limb and presses it equally from all sides without any hindrance.
Then, after you have finished with the alignment, you should apply a suitable poultice to that. There should be a gentle pressing on the place of the fracture, then you start to bandage the ligature on the same place of the fracture itself, three or four bandages according to what the limb deserves, and you tighten your hand slightly with the ligature, then you move it to the upper side of the place of the fracture.
You tighten less than you did for the fractured place, then you loosen the bandage a little from the place of the fracture and relax the tightening a little until you get something suitable from the correct position, then you take another splint and bandage it also on the fractured place.
You bandage, then you move the bandage to the lower side of the fracture, and let your action be in tightening the bandage and loosening it according to what we mentioned in the first upper bandage, then you put between the bandages a gentle poultice or soft cloth that is suitable for straightening the fracture.
If there is a bending and twisting, do not put anything in it, then you bandage another splint over it, and you align these tight, pressed bandages from your watchful hour, if there is no swelling or redness in the limb.
If there is swelling or redness, apply to it what will reduce that inflammation and relieve the swelling, and leave it for a day or two, then tighten the bandages on it, and let the bandages be from strips of cloth cut to fit the shape, or make the bandages from the soft linen cloths, or they may be from the gentle, woven cloths.
What is manufactured from suture, or the thongs of the date-palm or cilantro, and similar to that which is prepared from them, and so the strength of each stitch on this pattern and in this particular form.
Except that the stitch which is placed on the wound itself should be thicker and slightly wider than the other stitches, and as for the length of the stitch, it is manufactured according to what is suitable for the fractured limb, whether large or small, this is the form of the stitch.
Then you reinforce the stitches with another layer according to the first stitching, then you tie above with tight knots as we mentioned in the stitching, and it is that the reinforcement should be on the site of the wound more. And wherever the stitching is farther from the wound, it is less.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and softness, and let them be of the moistened flax specifically, because if the threads are too thick, like what you have seen from the action of the ignorant ones who make their threads from twisted strands of flax, it is a great mistake.
Because the stitching with them goes outside the moderation, and the thin threads are also not suitable, because you do not achieve by stitching with them what you want, and it is not desirable that there be less than a finger between the stitch and the stitch.
For if the patient is distressed by the edges of the stitches after stitching in the healthy places, then put under them a soft cloth or a piece of folded fabric, so that he is not distressed by anything, and as for if the fracture is with a wound and there is a crack in the skin, we would treat it separately.
And know that not every fractured limb should be stitched with stitches from the first day, and that is because if the limb is large, it should not be stitched until after five days or seven or more, according to what you fear of the occurrence of inflammation.
This is the type of bandages that were used to immobilize the joints that are placed on the neck, the waist, and the limbs, a general type of short bandage that immobilizes the neck and is suitable for most fractures, but not for children and women because it does not constrict them or cause coldness.
And you take from the dust of the pumice stone, which is a fine powder that adheres to the skin of the hand when the millstone moves, and you scrub it as it is without rubbing it with the white of the egg and making its scrubbing neither rough nor fine, then you use it.
Another type of bandage that immobilizes the neck, the waist, and the limbs, is taken from the lime, gypsum, and oak gum, and the willow, and the pomegranate, and the rose, each weighing 10 dirhams, and its mixture and concoction, each weighing 5 dirhams, and from the acacia 20 dirhams, and from the Armenian or Roman clay, 20 dirhams. They grind everything and mix it with the water of the acacia or the white of the egg if the mixture is suitable for the treatment, then this bandage is used, as it is good for setting broken bones quickly and is suitable for most people because of its gentleness.
Another type of bandage that is also beneficial for the neck and the limbs, is taken from rose-water, lime, and white wax, each weighing 10 dirhams, its mixture and concoction, each weighing 5 dirhams, oak gum 6 dirhams, Armenian clay 20 dirhams, they grind everything thoroughly and mix it with water or the white of the egg, and it is used.
A type of bandage for the joints and slipping bones in their places, which relieves the painful sensation and does not displace the bone or the neck. It is taken from the rough wool that is soaked in vinegar and rose-water, and is placed on the affected area. And this bandage has no constricting power.
Here is the translation:
You want to analyze the nature of the tumor, take from the origin of the channel and the aperture, and separate the cartilage from each part, and examine it with the scalpel; if the limb is not relaxed, then relax it with the scalpel or with a poultice, and use it.
Another stronger scraper is used for analyzing when a hard tumor occurs at the meeting of the bone, taking from the origin of the channel and the protrusion of the vertebrae, and the King's scalpel, and the razor of Nafsuj, and the aperture, separating each part.
He examines it with the scalpel or the poultice, or with the bandage, all according to the warmth of the limb and its condition; as for Galen, he did not mention in his book that it should be applied to the fractured limb when setting it.
But Galen's ointment is made from wax and oil, nothing else, and it should be moderate between thickness and thinness; as for Galen, he thought that it should be applied to the fractured limb when setting it with things that contain a bit of warmth, such as myrrh, storax, and labdanum, and similar to what we mentioned.
A scraper that benefits the ulcer and the abscess, taking magnesian salt, vinegar, and human hair or bird's feather, and channeling the parts well, examining and evacuating and bandaging it, and as for the amount that should remain in the dressing.
Then he should stop, for if it does not happen with the ulcer or abscess, nor with the itch, nor does it disturb the fractured bone from its position, do not stop at all, even if it happens to him in that position, a severe itch or a persistent abscess or swelling.
Then hasten to heal it at the time, and do not delay that moment, and remove the scraper from it; then take a piece of linen or a sponge with rose water and dip it in the warm water, and wash the place until the itch ceases and the abscess subsides, then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
When I cut to the depth, I saw that the tumor, the swelling, the abscess, and the pustule, as well as all the other signs, had disappeared completely and returned to their origin, which is the bone, so it healed as it was at first, if nothing remained in the member of what we mentioned.
It does not heal except after three days or four or five or seven, and it may be left for twenty days, all of that is according to what appears to you from the condition of the member, as we said, until the fracture is united and the flesh forms over it.
I also found that the pressure was more in the second dressing than the first, and I also found that the nourishment of the affected part was more abundant according to what I mentioned earlier. For I saw that the place of the fracture had become dry and weak by more than what is necessary, so I knew that the nourishment was prevented from reaching it.
So I changed the dressing with a loose one every time it was healing, and let that be every three days, and slightly reduced the pressure; for by this method the nourishment reaches the affected part and it heals quickly. And as for what the ignorant people from among the ignorant surgeons do, they fracture the member again another time.
For if they do not straighten it as it should be, and instead straighten it crookedly, it is a grave error in their action and a great calamity. And even if they were to mention it in their earlier books and work accordingly, I have seen no effect of that from any of them. And the right thing is not to act according to it.
The Second Chapter.
On Fractures of the Cranium in the Head.
The types of fractures in the cranium of the head are many, and their forms are diverse, and their causes are various. For among the fractures, there is what occurs from a blow with a sword, and it may be that the bone is broken entirely until it reaches the dura mater beneath the bone. As it is done with the scalpel in the wood.
Therefore, this type of incision is called 'qdumiya', and it is that the cutting of the sword only reaches some of the bone and the surface of the face, without completing the cut to its end, and this type of incision is called 'qla' mutlaqa. The wound resulting from these two types of incisions may be large or small.
And among the incisions, there is one that is a glancing blow or a slip, and it occurs when struck by a stone or fallen on a stone or something similar. This incision may be either a superficial wound that has approached the membrane beneath the bone, or one that is in the face of the bone.
And the wound resulting from these two types of incisions may also be either large or small. And among the incisions, there is one that is hidden in the bone, at the level of the hairline, and it is a subtle separation.
Therefore, this type of incision is called 'shu'uriya', and among them is an incision that occurs from a fall or a blow with a stone or something similar, where the surface of the bone enters inward and becomes deformed in its position, just as it shows the extent of the deformity if it is struck with a blow, and part of it enters inward.
And this is more likely to occur in the soft, spongy bone of the skull, such as in the skulls of children. And each of these types of incisions may have fragmented or non-fragmented pieces, and we will discuss the treatment of all of them in their respective places. And we will become familiar with all of these types of incisions by examining them.
And we will examine them with the probes and extract the putrid, festering matter from them. And as for the 'shu'uriya' type, it is recognized by examining the bone and scraping and applying the medication to it, so that the incision appears black. And as for the treatment of the incision, we will first look at the symptoms of the patient.
If you observe in him signs that indicate clear fear, such as a tremulous voice, extended arms, and disordered intellect, and interruption of sound, and yellowish hue, and aberrant gaze, and the twitching of his eyes, then do not approach him nor examine him, for death is likely to occur with these signs in most cases without exception.
And if you saw signs that did not alarm you, and you thought him safe, then wait until he recovers from his treatment, for it is likely that the wounded person will be injured again at first, and that was during the winter days.
It is recommended that you do not rush to reset the bone before the 14th day in any case, and if it was during the summer days, it is recommended that you hasten to reset the bone before the 7th day, lest what is beneath the bone from the membrane becomes corrupted, and those signs that we described appear.
If the fracture of the bone has reached the membrane covering the brain, and it is accompanied by a rupture and suppuration, it is recommended that you amputate the affected part, as I have described to you, which is to trephine the head of the wounded patient.
And uncover the bone on whatever aspect is convenient for you, and according to the shape of the wound, and what is hidden from the patient; if, when you uncover the bone, you find a flow of blood or a purulent discharge, then deal with it as it deserves.
And it is to pack the site with lint soaked in wine and rose-water, and to clean the wound until the purulence subsides and the bleeding stops, then to proceed with setting the bone and extracting it, which will be one of two ways of operating.
As for the single way, it is to cut the bone with a fine saw, and this is its shape:.
Then you use another saw after this saw, which is slightly broader than it, and this is its shape:.
You should also use another instrument which is similar to the second and it is necessary that you have several different instruments, some of which are similar to each other and some shorter than others, and they should be extremely sharp at their edges, whether made of Indian steel or good cast iron.
And use the file on the instrument to smooth its edge so that it does not jar against the head, for if the bone is strong and hard, it will be necessary to perforate around it before using the instruments with the screws that are called non-jarring screws.
For it does not exceed the limit of the skull bone to what is beyond it, so that the screw has a straight path on what is beneath the sharp edge, resembling a ring or small circle, preventing it from slipping and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
And it is necessary for you to take from these screws many others, each of which is suitable for the thickness of that bone, until you have prepared a screw for every skull, with its sharp edge in length and width, according to the thickness of that skull; and there are three types of this. Of large, medium, and small screws:.
And as for the perforation around the fractured bone, it is that you put the screw on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been penetrated, then you transfer the screw to another position and put it in between each perforation, according to the thickness of the rod or its like.
Then you cut with the instruments between each two perforations, and do that with extreme precision as much as you can on the file, as we mentioned, until the bone is separated, either by your hand or with another instrument from among those you have prepared for that.
Like the forceps and delicate scissors, and it is necessary to be extremely cautious not to touch the screw or instrument to anything of the membrane, for if you have separated the bone and freed it from the membrane, and it was stuck to it, then it is necessary to remove it.
Here is the translation:
Then the wound is treated with cotton and bandages, which will be mentioned later, and as for the other aspect of the work, it is a simple matter that is far from the complicated ones mentioned by Galen and praised him excessively. It is necessary for you to start by exposing the part of the bone at the site where the fracture is most severe and most famous, until you expose that part, then you will find the end of this section of the splint, and this is its picture.
The smooth part of it does not cut anything, and the sharp part of it is at its curved edge in length as you see, so that the smooth part of it is inclined towards the skin and the sharp edge of the splint is on the bone, then it is struck from one side.
With a small saw, until you cut through all the bone gently, as it revolves, and you are safe from the membrane, no frightening accident occurs, and if the healer is among the ignorant people, they would have been afflicted, and even if he was experienced.
If there remains something of the bone attached to the membrane at some places, you scrape it off with the edge of the splint itself and separate it gently, so that it is freed from it without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone did not reach the membrane, and what was separated from the bone was its surface, and there remained roughness and fine fragments, it is necessary to scrape off that roughness and remove those fragments with a gentle file that you have taken in different ways, so that you can use them in every place and adapt them according to what the work guides you to.
And the same broken bone and its shape, it is necessary to use on scraping first for the exposed bone, then use afterwards a finer one, and do not cease doing that on the file until it becomes fit for using the finest and most delicate ones.
As for the small, fine, and delicate surgical incisions, it is necessary to use each one according to what is most conducive to its healing, which is a thing that does not hide from one who has even a little expertise in this craft, and we have written and clarified in the large wounds.
For if the periosteum remains exposed when you extract a bone, it is necessary to take a piece of cloth corresponding to the size of the wound, and soak it in oil and place it on the mouth of the wound, then take another piece of cloth, either triangular or quadrilateral. And soak it in serous discharge and oil, and place it on the first piece of cloth, and do that with the lightest pressure you can bear upon it, so as not to oppress the sutura, then use a wide bandage from above, and do not constrict it except by the amount that holds the wound only.
And leave it with this treatment for a day or two until the intense inflammation subsides, then remove it and use afterwards the medicines that are beneficial, such as the juice of the willow, and the powder of the crocus, and the powder of the cynanchum, and the rose-water, and their like, which is to make a poultice from these medicines.
And leave the wound as it is, with its dressing, and use in that a medicine that cleanses without irritating, and exert your effort during treatment of the wound to be clean, not having any impurities or pus, nor should it become putrid, and do not let the discharge collect in it.
For if the discharge collects on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and destroys it, and thus occurs a great harm to the patient, and it may appear in the sutures of the head when the bone is exposed, or even more so if its treatment is neglected.
If there is a blackness on its surface, it is a sign that the patient will show the symptoms we mentioned, so know that it is mortal without doubt, and if the blackness occurred due to a medicine being applied to it, and the power of that medicine was to cause that blackness.
Take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them well, then add a drop to it, then apply it to the wound, and treat it with the necessary treatments until it heals.
Chapter Three.
Treat the nose if it is fractured.
Know that the nose does not fracture except for its upper part or one of its two sides, because its lower part is cartilaginous and does not fracture, but rather is susceptible to bruises, dislocations, and distortions.
If one of its sides is fractured, it is necessary to insert a small finger into the nostril and adjust that fracture from the inside with your finger, and straighten the nose from the outside until it returns to its natural shape, and be gentle in doing so, lest you cause harm to the surrounding area.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and you cannot adjust it with your finger, it is necessary to straighten it with a thick cotton pad, and if the fracture is on both sides, do likewise, and do not delay in treating it on the first day of the fracture.
If possible, and otherwise after the seventh or eighth day when the inflammation has subsided, then insert into the nostril a thin strip of lint from a clean cloth, if the fracture is on one side, or insert two strips if the fracture is on both sides.
And shape the strip to fit the nostril, and some of the surgeons among the ancients mentioned that they would grease the strip with butter and change it every day, but I do not see that as necessary, rather it is better to grease the strip with egg white mixed with rose powder.
Then leave the strip until the bone is stabilized and the cartilage is solidified, and you may insert into the nose, in place of the strip, a tube made from the quill of a large bird, after wrapping it with a thin cloth, so that it holds the fracture of the nose firmly and does not allow the surrounding area to become inflamed.
This is something essential if you did not make it and did not make the sutures, for there would be exposure of the nose during your operation and a strong bandage would constrict the nose with a compress or a wrapped turban or a tight wrap with a single cord or a piece of cloth from the diaper.
For if it did not expose and the strong bandage was not tight, it would be necessary to constrict it from the outside with a thick dressing and thin strips of linen, which we have already mentioned in the clarification of the clarifications, then you put on it a compress that is not rough, and do not tie the nose with a thing of bit, for if you fractured the bones of the nose into small fractures.
Or you would have to dissect it, and extract it with the instrument that is suitable for it, then you would suture the incision and treat it with what brings adhesion and consolidation from the suitable medications, for if a wound occurred inside the nose, it would be necessary to treat it with cotton and use nasal tubes of silver. Until he recovers.
The Fourth Chapter.
The fracture of the lower jawbone.
If the lower jawbone was fractured and it was not broken with a wound that you looked at, for it was broken only from the outside and did not break into two pieces and fall inside, then its treatment would be easy.
It would be necessary if the fracture was in the right side that you insert the ring finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient, and likewise if the fracture was on the left side, you would insert the ring finger from the right hand and raise it to the prominence of the fracture from inside outward.
And you would straighten the other side from outside the bone, controlling it to straighten it, for if the jawbone fracture had broken into two pieces, it would be necessary to use a press from the two sides on a straight line until its straightening is completed, for if there was a displacement in the teeth.
And separate what you suspect from it, and leave a thread of gold or silver or copper, then place on the fractured rib a large, curved, and bent splint, and place on the splint a bandage, and apply to the bandage a large, sealed, and rounded adhesive patch. Then bind it from above according to what you deem suitable for its binding, and adjust it until it does not become loose, and order the patient to avoid exertion and hardship, and make his food light and moderate; if you think that something of the shape has changed in one of the aspects, then hasten to release it on the third day.
Then bind it from above according to what you deem suitable for its binding, and adjust it until it does not become loose, and order the patient to avoid exertion and hardship, and make his food light and moderate; if you think that something of the shape has changed in one of the aspects, then hasten to release it on the third day. Then adjust what you have bound with a poultice of rose-water or egg white or fine powder, after removing the splint from it, and apply to the binding a gentle massage; as long as that binding remains on it and does not change for the bone's condition, leave it.
Do not remove it until he recovers and the fracture is consolidated, for it often takes three weeks to consolidate this fracture; if a fever or inflammation occurs during that period, use what we have mentioned repeatedly to calm it down until that inflammation subsides.
And if the fracture is with a wound that has a splinter or splinters of bone, and it has separated from the bone, then gently extract those splinters according to what you deem suitable for removing them from the instrument; if the mouth of the wound is narrow, then widen it with a dilator according to your need.
Then, if you have extracted those splinters and none of them remain, stitch the mouth of the wound if it is wide; otherwise, apply to it one of the medicaments that are suitable for that. And treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Five.
On treating a fractured rib.
The more you cut the tendon from the front of the joint and shorten it, the more it will be on one of three surfaces; either it will be cut and separated into two without any fragmentation occurring in it, which is easier to repair.
And perhaps fragmentation occurs in the cutting, which is more difficult to repair. And perhaps the cutting is with a wound, and the work in it if the cutting was without a wound, to prepare two assistants, one of them to hold the affected tendon that is connected to the cut tendon, and the other to stretch the neck towards the other side.
Then, you straighten the cutting with your fingers until its shape is as desired, and there is no twisting or curvature. If you need to stretch more, it is desirable to place under the armpit of the affected limb a ball of cotton or wool.
And its bone is according to your need, and you stretch and raise the tendon, and press the ball with your hand until the cutting is straightened as desired. If you are unable to draw the edge of the tendon outward so that it becomes deep, it is desirable to lay the affected limb on a cushion.
And you place a moderate compress under the joint in the bone, and you bend the assistant from the bottom until the bone of the tendon that is in the deep rises above, then you improve the cutting and straighten it with your fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the tendon has been cut and is moving, it is desirable to open up and extract that fragment gently; if the fragment was stuck in the bone, you should carefully cut around it with one of the instruments I have prepared for that. After you have placed under the tendon a device that preserves the fascia, which is an instrument made of wood or iron, and its shape is:
It resembles a spoon, without twisting, and its width is according to what you need from the size of the bone, large or small, and its length is also according to what you can do for the work, having two ends, one wider and the other narrower.
If the fragmentation of the wound that you have made while extracting a splintered bone and collecting its fragments, and the inflamed swelling has become swollen, then gather the edges of the wound with sutures. And if the fragmentation is small or the inflamed swelling is severe, then close the wound by fragmentation and apply a compress according to the size of the wound.
If there is an inflamed swelling, then pour rose water or wine vinegar on it, and apply a compress. As for setting a bone, if it was not broken and did not split, it is by applying a bandage made of dust from the riverbank mixed with egg whites. And you put a soft compress on it, then you put a pad under the armpit if needed. Then you take a long bandage that is about a finger's width or so, and apply a bent compress on the compress and the bandage, then take a splint made of thin wooden board. It should be three fingers' width and similarly in length, then you insert it into the fragmentation, then you insert that fragmentation with the splint at the site of the bandage that lies on the site of the fracture, then you fasten the bandage around the fracture as it is wrapped. And you tie it around his neck and under the sound armpit and under the ailing armpit, and return it repeatedly on each side, and as I saw that the fastening controls the fracture with precise control, which is what does not escape from you.
And you rotate all of it so that the splint does not slip away from the fractured bone. And for that, it is necessary to examine the patient every day; whenever you find the bandage has relaxed and see that the splint has slipped away, then correct that and tighten the bandage. Then, make the patient sleep on his back and place a small pillow under his armpit when he sleeps at night.
The joint will elevate from its place, and the fracture of the clavicle will elevate with the elevation of the shoulder or the binding of his arm to his neck, and do not loosen the bandage unless an incident occurs at the site, such as a blow or swelling, until twelve days.
Then I restored the nose to its original form for that reason. I treated the wound and left it to heal, until the swelling subsided, and the bruising disappeared, and it became stronger, which took twenty-eight days. It may be that with some people it will take less than that.
Chapter Six.
The fracture of the shoulder. It is not that the shoulder fractures in its narrowest part, but rather it fractures at its prominent points. So, when it does fracture at a point or fractures in the middle, it can be recognized by palpation, according to the shape of the fracture.
Return it to its natural shape in every way possible, then place a dressing of rose water and egg whites and a gentle compress on top of a soft padding, then put a wide splint from a thin plate.
Make it conform to the size of the shoulder, or a little wider than it. If there is curvature under the splint at a point on the shoulder, correct that curvature with a gentle compress until the splint sits evenly, then fasten it from above with a long bandage.
Fasten it securely and tighten the splint so that it does not move from its position, and loosen the bandage every day. Every time you loosen the bandage, tighten it again and adjust the splint if it has moved from its position. Let the healthy side be opposite to it, and the shoulder will heal in twenty days.
Twenty days or twenty-five days. If you complete this period, remove the bandage and you will be safe. For it is one of the bones that do not become dislocated nor broken, if a splinter has emerged from the bone and was hidden under the skin, split open and extract it. And do what I mentioned regarding the fracture of the clavicle, from the treatment of the inflamed swelling, if something of that happens.
The Seventh Section.
On the Fracture of the Chest.
The chest may fracture in its middle and slightly, but it rarely shows that, and its signs are more pronounced when it fractures and becomes fragmented. And among its symptoms is that if it fractures in its middle, it inclines downwards and becomes heavy, with severe pain and distress in the breast and coughing.
Sometimes the fracture is hidden and does not appear on the bone, and it is not felt by touch. The treatment is to make the patient lie on his back with a pillow between his shoulders, then to bandage the armpits and bring the limbs together with the hands from both sides, and to adjust them in alignment on all sides as much as possible.
And agree to return the shape of the bone to what it should be, then place the compress and the splint on top of it, and apply a cast made of a thin sheet of lead or tin or similar, after wrapping it in a bandage. Then adjust it to fit the fractured bone so that it does not move, and pass the bandage around it in a circular manner towards the back, passing it several times and tightening it firmly. Then check the bandage at every time, and whenever it relaxes, tighten it.
And if the need arises to release it at a time when it appears in its place or becomes painful or inflamed, then hasten to release it and remove the compress, and repair what has appeared from that with a treatment, then reapply the compress if you see fit. And leave him and bind him firmly until he recovers.
The Eighth Section.
On the Fracture of the Limbs, Know that the Fracture occurs in the limbs at the joints which are close to the back and their extremities from the front, because they are delicate and exposed, and that is not felt by touch when examining with the fingers.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
The fracture that is exposed to the one who suffers from it due to a break in the bone, and it is also displayed with difficulty of breathing and coughing, and much blood is poured out, and this is a difficult treatment. The ancient physicians were deceived by many deceptions in it.
Some of them said that it is necessary to make the stomach digest what creates gas and flatulence, so that the belly would expand and the fracture would be expelled outside, but we reject this because it would not be a treatment for the inflammation, if it did not happen then it would increase it and make it worse.
Some of them said that a cupping glass should be applied to the affected area, and then sucked with force, which is similar to a measurement, except that it is feared that the cupping glass would draw the inflammation to the affected area due to its weakness. And some of them said that it is necessary to cover the affected area with a cloth that has been dipped in hot oil.
A padding is created between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage is straight when it is wrapped around. Then, the fracture is treated with dietary and medicinal treatments, for the pain of the fracture is a severe matter that cannot be endured. The bone fractures the rib with a painful fracture, and we fear for the fracture that it is necessary to make an incision at the affected area and expose the broken rib, then we use the instrument that preserves the membrane which is advanced and described, and we cut the bone gently and extract it.
Then we gather the edges of the wound, if it is large, with sutures and treat it with ointments until it heals. If there is a display of inflammation during that time, we hasten to put a cooling compress on the affected area and treat the fracture with what relieves the inflammation from the inside as well.
He lies on his side, which is alleviated by sleep, until he recovers.
The Ninth Section.
On the surgical treatment of hernia in the chest and in the armpit.
As for the bones of the armpit, if they are affected by a fracture and there is little that appears to be affecting them, but most of what affects them is bruises, and likewise the vertebrae of the chest also. So if that appears to one and you want to know whether it will heal or not. So look, if you saw his hands that were numb and paralyzed, and dead, and he could not move them nor stretch them, nor grip with them, and if you pierced them or pricked them with a needle, he did not feel it, and he did not find any pain in them, then know that he will not recover, for most of the time, and he is a hopeless case.
And if he moves them and feels the piercing and pricking, then know that the marrow of the bone has been preserved, and the patient will recover with treatment. If a hernia in the chest is affected like that and you want to know whether it will also recover or not.
So look at his legs, if you saw that they were numb and what happened to them was like what happened to the hands, then if he leaned on his chest, wind and gas came out without his intention, and if he lay on his side, urine came out without his intention. And if he lay on his chest and wanted to urinate but could not, then know that he is a hopeless case, so do not bother with his treatment. For if none of that appeared to him, the matter was lighter, and the treatment for what happened from that is to apply cooling compresses to the painful tumor.
By applying to the affected place a medicated bandage of rose oil and lavender, or with cooked egg yolks, you put that on it three times a day until the painful tumor subsides. Then apply to the location one of the cooling compresses, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct him to rest and settle.
He should not sleep on the side that has no pain until he feels better, for if a fracture occurs in the bone, whether it is a splinter or a fragment, it is necessary to split open the skin and extract that bone. Then bring the edges of the wound together with sutures, and treat it with medicated bandages until he recovers. If the fracture is in the last bone of the spine, which is the weakness of the tail, it is necessary to insert the little finger from the left hand into the buttock.
And adjust the fractured bone with the other hand according to what is possible, and align it properly. Then put on a bandage and splint, if you need to do so, then straighten it.
If you feel a fractured splinter in it, split open the skin and extract it, then treat the wound with treatment that has been mentioned before until he recovers.
The Tenth Chapter.
Treatment of fracture of the ribs.
If you fracture the bones of the ribs, and they do break, then their fracture will be that they split at their ends and separate in length and bend inward, and become exposed to the wrapping, and hurt in the place, and cause numbness and heaviness in the leg on the side where the fracture is.
And treat it by passing your hand over it until you feel the fracture and its shape, for if the fracture is at the ends only, then adjust that fracture according to what appears to you from the alignment until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is in the length or has bent inward, then put the wrapping on his belly until you can treat that fracture. If you have adjusted it, put a bandage on it, then place a splint made of wood or leather and bind it tightly.
Do not fear for him the transfer of the fracture or the removal of the splint, and adjust the pillow from the pillows with what fills it, until he takes a deep breath on his back or on his sound side. If he has a feverish condition, let him be treated and given a remedy.
Here is the translation:
He should not touch it but wipe it from the outside as we mentioned, and leave its dressing until it heals.
The 11th Operation.
On resetting of a fractured bone.
The bone is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, so if it breaks, you should set it in one of two ways: take a straight rod, smooth and of medium thickness, according to this figure.
And you bind it with two bandages, then suspend it from a high place, and the patient sits on a stool, then you apply his broken arm to the rod until it becomes bent in the middle of the curvature of the rod, then you fasten above it something thick.
Or a servant extends it to the bottom, then the physician wipes the fracture with his hands together until the fracture is set in its proper place, and the other way is that the patient lies on his back and his hand is suspended from his neck with a bandage.
Then you order two servants to assist, one of them to hold what is above the fracture with his hand and the other to hold below it, and each of them pulls towards his side; and if you want the pull to be stronger, you tie beneath the fracture with a bandage and above it with a bandage, and each of the two servants pulls towards his side.
If the fracture is near the end of the shoulder, it is proper to put one bandage beneath the armpit and the other beneath the fracture towards the elbow; and likewise if the fracture is near the elbow, it is proper to put the bandage at that place and on the elbow itself.
Then you wipe the fracture with a gentle hand, without violence, until the fracture is set in its proper place, and you bandage it nicely, then you leave it for seven days, putting on it a soothing poultice, soft, and drizzled with rose-water and dusted with powdered rose.
If the ulcer has become chronic, then it should be treated by applying a compress to the wound, and a bandage made from a new cloth should be placed over the compress, and the arm should be immobilized in its original position, and the hand should be placed open on the chest.
And apply the cloth and compress to the arm and forearm, so that the forearm remains in the position of the splint, if it does not bother you from that. And do not let the broken bone move, for if it moves, use the splint.
And it is that you put on the wound itself a splint that is wider and stronger than other splints, and let there be between each splint a space of one finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the wound, increasing by three fingers from each side.
Then apply to the splints the bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandage should be tighter at the site of the wound.
And whenever, after the wound, the bandage was loosened, then you should put the splints and bandages as we said when you set the limb in its normal position from the start, so do it.
And if you fear the ulcer is acute, then leave the bandage and splints until the seventh day as we said, then loosen the wrapping every three days so that no irritation or swelling or obstruction of nourishment occurs at the site, and thus correct that entirely according to what we mentioned.
For if you are confident that none of that will occur, then do not loosen the wrapping except after many days, and let the patient lie on his back with his hand on his stomach and placed under the arm a padded cushion filled with wool, elevated.
And loosen at every time, morning or evening, to check the shape of the broken limb or to relax the bandage, and correct that entirely with your effort. And make the patient's nourishment on the level that we mentioned earlier, so that the nourishment is gentle, until when the bone is about to be set.
If you want to congeal his food, it is necessary that he should be accustomed to the bandage and the splint for forty days; then it is necessary to remove it and use the bath and treat with ointments that are suitable for that, because if the fracture was fresh it would become consolidated.
Do not remove the bandage from him until fifty days or two months.
The Twelfth Chapter.
On the Fracture of the Collar Bone.
The collar bone is composed of two bones, and they are called the "Zundeen". One of them is small, and it is the one that reaches the arm, and the other is large, and it is placed underneath the small one from below. Perhaps the larger zund breaks alone, or the smaller one alone, or perhaps both break together.
When the upper small zund breaks, its fracture is easy and its treatment is quick, and when the lower zund breaks, its fracture is difficult and its treatment is slow. And if both break together, it was as if the bone that broke was the upper small zund.
It is necessary for the doctor, when treating him, to make his medication gentle and soothing, unless the large zund is the one broken, in which case it is necessary to make his medication stronger. And if both zunds are broken, it is necessary to make the medication very strong indeed.
It is necessary to put the shape of the hand in its treatment, and its medication extended on a pillow, and the arm should be above the elbow from all the fingers, and the wrist should be below the other fingers, and the little finger should be bent back on itself.
And let the pillow be elevated with it so that the little finger does not become bent in its joint.
Then a bandage is applied to the collar bone from below, either with his hand or with a splint, and another bandage is applied from above, like that. Then the doctor adjusts the bone until he returns it to its best possible shape, because if there were fractures in the bone, they would be reunited.
Here is the translation:
Take the treatment from there, and apply it at first on a clean area, and make an incision with the scalpel, and remove the diseased tissue with the forceps, while holding the skin in place with the hook, and tighten the wound firmly until the inflammation settles.
Then place the scalpel, having scraped off the dusty remnants of the rhizome with the whites of eggs, and remove the stitches, and let the last stitch be the one that is placed on the wound itself, a little elevated and stronger, and know that the number of stitches on the arm will be more in most cases.
The wound was on one or both sides, then make your tightening at the site of the wound stronger and more intense, and whenever you tighten above or below, make the tightening slightly easier than what was mentioned in the first chapter.
And let the sutures that are placed on the wound be loose and not too tight, and let the thread with which it is tightened be of a special type, midway between the flesh and the bone, as we have described, and examine the limb and the bandage after some days.
If something happens, it should be repaired, like a crack that occurs in the limb, so that the limb is not exposed to excessive movement of water until that crack settles, and the limb is left unbound for a night until it relaxes, then the tightening is resumed.
If the tightening has relaxed and the bone has become loose or similar, then repair it with all your effort, and also look if the nourishment is being blocked from reaching the limb due to excessive tightening, it should be loosened a little and left for some days until the nourishment reaches it, then tighten it.
If nothing of what we mentioned appears on the patient, it is not advisable to remove it until after twenty days or so, then suspend the arm of the patient from his neck and let his forearm be in a moderate position, and protect him from turbulent movements, and make him sleep on his side.
It is known that this fracture will consolidate in thirty days, or in twenty-two to thirty days, and perhaps it will consolidate in eighteen to twenty days, all of which depends on the condition of the fracture and the strength of the patient.
The 13th Chapter
On the consolidation of fractures of the forearm and fingers.
The forearm and finger joints rarely suffer from fractures, but rather they often suffer from contusions, so when a fracture or contusion occurs in the forearm.
He should sit comfortably and put his arm on a level surface.
Then he should put his hand on it, extended, and then the doctor straightens the broken bone, and adjusts it until it fits together well. Then, if it is necessary, he should apply a compress and bandage, unless there is a severe inflammation. Then, a splint is applied from above, according to the position of the fracture.
And he should place it in a linen bandage, if the fracture is towards the lower part of the forearm, so he makes a circular shape with the bandage and orders the patient to grasp it with his fractured arm, then he ties it with a long bandage.
And the splint is made from a single piece of wood, so that it does not bend with the forearm's movement, and it is tied as necessary. If the fracture is on the outside, he should make one splint from above and another from below on the forearm, to keep the arm upright and straight.
Then he applies the bandage as the arm is turned and interlaces between the fingers with a strap, if the fracture is in one of the finger joints, such as the thumb. He should adjust it as necessary, then tie it with the forearm, and if desired, make a small standing splint to hold the fracture in place.
And he should not move it, if the fracture is in one of the finger bones, such as the middle, ring, or little finger. He should adjust and bandage with the adjacent healthy finger, or bandage all of them together, which is better, or put a small standing splint on it.
As we mentioned in the case of inflammation and made a incision at the time of urgent need, and afterwards about the acute abscess, it is treated with what is suitable, until something from that happens according to what is repeated and described.
Chapter Fourteen.
On the surgical treatment of fractures of the thigh.
The thigh bone often gets fractured and becomes deformed because it bends forward and backward, and its surgical treatment is by applying a bandage above the fracture and another below the fracture, with the pillows straight on its surface.
Then, he stretches each bandage to its proper place on a balance of this, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone; and if it was near the base of the thigh, it is suitable to apply two bandages, either from a pillow or something similar.
At the base of the thigh, towards the groin, the bandage is placed above and the other below the fracture; and if the fracture was near the knee, the bandage should be near the knee so that it lies below, then the doctor aligns the bone with both his hands until he returns it to its natural shape.
And the bone is joined with a good joinery, so if it does not happen to the member and an acute abscess occurs, then it happens in it; leave it for some days until the acute abscess subsides, then return to its treatment.
And it is bandaged in a way that a solid and wide compress is applied on the fracture for two or three days, and what remains of it is left; then the leg is bandaged until the heel is at the base of the canon and a long thread is inserted between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and the ends of the thread are fastened above from both sides.
Then, the remaining compress is wrapped around the leg and thigh; then, splints are placed on the thigh at the site of the fracture itself, and a single splint is placed on the bone of the leg, and the void between the thigh and leg is filled with soft padding to make the bandage even.
Start by tightening the bandages strongly from the middle over the site of the fracture, three or four times, and each time you tighten, make it a little weaker and more relaxed.
Then direct the end of the thread that you have inserted between the thigh and the leg, and tie it to the splints above, then pass the end of the thread downwards until it reaches the ankle joint, and tighten it with the ends of the splints from the other side.
Do not leave the bandage in its position, but rather tighten it firmly, without hurting the limb, neither by tension nor by compression, and so on. If something happens from that, then hasten to release it and repair what has happened, according to what we have mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a splinter in the bone that cannot be straightened, then it is necessary to cut down on it and extract it, and treat the wound as mentioned before, until it heals. And this fracture may be reduced from the thigh without adding the leg with the splints.
As we have mentioned in the arm and forearm, except that setting it in this way does not prevent the patient from having a perpetual limp, and if you set it by itself without adding the leg, its owner will certainly always limp.
Know that the thigh is immobilized for fifty days or a little more or less, all of which depends on the difference in temperament and other conditions.
Chapter Fifteen.
On the fracture of the ankle joint.
The ankle joint is rarely exposed to fracture, but it may be exposed to many bruises. If it is exposed to a fracture, then it will be either a splitting or a displacement in its parts, and that would happen with or without a wound.
And rely on that entirely on sensation, and set it by straightening what is dislocated from its parts with the fingers until they reunite and are in harmony according to the proper alignment and connection, then apply the bandage and apply a circular splint if you need to.
You should press above the corresponding compression, then you should examine all the conditions we have described in other wounds, such as the severe inflammation and its likes, so that each wound meets what is suitable for it until it heals.
The Sixteenth Chapter
On the Fracture of the Leg
The leg has two bones, one of them is thick and called the bone of the leg, and the other is thin and called the shin, and they are exposed to various types of fractures that affect the arm's bones. Therefore, its fracture is like the fracture of the arm, with a single treatment. If the thick bone is fractured, the leg will be deformed in all directions; and if the thin bone is fractured, it will bend forward; and if the thicker bone is fractured and that happens from below, it is something that cannot be hidden from you.
You should use bandaging and alignment, and bind the fractures accordingly, unless it was a fracture of the leg with many splinters, in which case the bandaging should be lighter and easier, and you should make less effort in its treatment.
In the leg, there is something additional to the arm, which is that when you have aligned the fractures and completed all your work, take two splints from the wood of the cypress tree, which are used in straightening the curved ribs, or from the palm leaves or their like.
And choose from them what has a slight thickness, not being from the thin ones, and let their length be along the length of the leg from the knee to the bottom. Then wrap each one with two bandages along its length, placing one on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
And let it be from the knee to the bottom of the foot, then tie the two splints in three places: at the extremities and the middle. For with this device, the leg will be prevented from bending to the right or left, and its movement will be restricted in a good way. A wooden board can also be used along the length of the leg.
Here is the translation of the excerpt: When a fracture occurs in it, it is treated with what is necessary until it heals, and the bone of the leg is restored in thirty days or thereabouts.
The Seventeenth Chapter
On fractures of the bones of the arm and fingers
As for the ankle, it is not prone to fractures of the joints, and as for the bones of the arm, they are indeed prone to fractures. The fingers also rarely fracture, and instead are more likely to be injured by bruising in most cases.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the arm, and you find that those bones have overlapped each other, then place the injured limb on the ground standing upright like a pillar. Then, put your foot on what has risen from those bones, and press down on it and straighten it.
Until it returns to its positions, then take the compress and splint from above, placing them under the sole of the foot, which is a small, flat plate having two extensions. Then, bind the foot firmly with it, after wrapping it with a bandage and whatever else you need.
If three or four days have passed, then remove the bandage. You will find that the bones are in their proper places, whether they were fractured or dislocated. Act accordingly as you see fit. And if some of the fingers are broken, then set them and straighten them according to what I described to you regarding setting the fingers of the hand.
Then, make a splint for the fractured finger along the length of the finger and slightly exceeding it. Then, place under the foot the plate I described to you and bind it firmly. If there are two or three or more bones that have been broken.
Make a splint for each finger, according to its measure, inserted into a soft bandage. Bind the plate at the bottom of the foot and let each head of the plate protrude slightly from under the sole of the foot, so as to fit perfectly.
You should not forget to inspect all the things we mentioned to you in the rest of the wounds from the symptoms we mentioned, and to match each wound with what is suitable for it.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
On the fracture of the woman's thigh and the dislocation of the ankle, and the mention of the man.
When you fracture the woman's thigh, you should place her in a prone position, then bend her slightly towards her back, and hold from behind, then bandage the splint to her thigh until it is tight and forms a circle in her thigh.
Then you shake the woman and raise her pelvis slightly, so that the splint comes out until it forms a circle at the opening of the thigh, and the bone fracture is corrected. Then you put a compress on her back, and when she wants to urinate, you remove the splint with her help until she urinates.
And you return it to the position in which you first put it, then you return to her first compress. You do that for seven days or so, and it will heal. And if you wish to take a suppository, you insert a tube into her anus and introduce the entire suppository into her thigh.
Then you blow into the tube with force until the suppository is blown into the thigh, and the fracture is corrected. Then you bandage with a splint and maintain it for some days as we have described, until it heals. And if a bone in the ankle of a man or woman is fractured, this treatment is used to correct it.
And you treat it as we have described for the thigh bone, and do not hide from you the correctness in these strange fractures that rarely occur, and are not known to those who have some experience, and understand my book well, because the fracture itself guides you in most cases.
On the method of setting a fracture, and its treatment: if a man's bone is broken, take a splint of willow and apply it, then place over it a dressing of bandages, and bind it with a wrapping, and leave it for three days or thereabouts until he recovers.
Chapter Nineteen.
On the treatment of fractures of bones if they are with a wound.
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, or even if the bone is large, such as the femur or the humerus, or similar, to hasten and divide it from its place at once, so that you may be helped by the conditions of the division, as we have mentioned.
If the wound is pouring out much blood, it is necessary to hasten to its treatment by applying a hemostatic powder, if nothing else is available to you; then take in setting the fracture on that very day and do not delay.
If inflammation does not occur, but if it occurs, leave the fracture until the ninth day, until the acute inflammation subsides, and do not disturb it on the third or fourth day, for that would cause him severe complications.
If the fractured bone is prominent on the skin, exposed, it is necessary to reduce it and set it in place with your hands, gently and gradually; and if you are unable to reduce and set it in place with your hands, use this instrument, which is a device made of iron, its length being about seven or eight fingers. And adjust it according to the size of the wound.
And therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of them according to the amount he needs from the treatment in each type of fracture, and let them be made with a slight thickness so that they do not bend when pressure is applied during work.
And its end should be sharp, with a bend at the tip, and its upper part should be thick, and from its middle to its lower part it should be very thin, and this is its shape.
Mark the location of the small vein that you want to cut, and let the sharp edge of the bone cutter correspond to the edge of the receiving bone, and strike it with it until the bone returns to its position and some of its parts settle into place.
If the broken edge is fragile and the instrument did not grasp it well, you should cut the edge of that bone until it is grasped by the instrument, and if you are unable to return the bone to its position as we described earlier, then cut it according to the sections we mentioned.
Open it with one of the instruments, as much as you can, then scrape off what remains of the roughness and thin scales from the bone. If you returned the bone and found that the ailment after its return was severe and painful, then know that the bone did not return to its natural position.
If you are able to return it to its natural position, then do so, for you will bring great benefit to the ailment. If you have completed the treatment of the bone, then apply a dressing with a mixture of vinegar and rose water, especially if you are in the summer, and do not put anything greasy on the wound or any ointment.
Lest it becomes infected and putrid, then use the dressings when you are finished with treating the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, applying the compresses in layers, thickly according to the size of the wound.
And beware, with all caution, of constricting the wound with the splint, for many times doctors have done that and caused harm to their patients, resulting in death or gangrene or lockjaw; let your constriction be gentle and not opposing the constriction of other splints.
If the wound is weak or was a large wound and you feared some bad symptoms which we described, and it finds pain in the affected place, then it is not advisable to apply dressings and make compresses of sturdy cloth at the place of the dressings and constrict it with them.
If it was after a day or two and you saw the wound had started to suppurate in it, then remove the dressing that was applied with the cerate, and use the bandages and medicaments that we are accustomed to apply to wounds like the ointment of Rabah, and it is suitable for you to change the bandage.
And examine the wound every evening and morning until it becomes filled and healed, and it is suitable for you to flex the limb slightly so that the pus does not accumulate at the bottom with ease. If many days have passed for the wound and it has not become attached nor has the pus ceased from it, then know that there are small bony fragments.
And it is suitable for you to probe the wound with a spatula, and if some of those fragments are loose, then extract them and remove them, and what was not loose was irritating the limb and causing pain, so cut and extract them in every possible way.
If the wound shows signs of erysipelas or a type of festering or another type of corruption and putrefaction, then it is suitable for you to confront each sign with its corresponding treatment that we have presented and described in its chapter.
And it is suitable for you to stop at the joint and pay attention to your mind if a large bone was broken and you operated on the limb, such as the femur or humerus and their like among the major organs, so do not be negligent of its connection nor delay its treatment. For many cases of this kind end in death, but leave it until it becomes gangrenous, for perhaps it may fall off by itself after twenty days or thirty.
So when you treat the wound, if you see a place for treatment, then do so; otherwise, leave it.
Chapter 20.
Treatment of the complication that occurs after some fractures.
Many cases of this deformity occur after a fracture near the joints, where it distorts the shape of the limb and sometimes deprives the limb of its natural function.
I treated it by using medications that constrict, such as albumen, laburnum, myrrh, and aristologia, and similar things, taking some or all of them and mixing them with a constricting liquid, or egg white, or vinegar.
And apply it to the deformity in a bandage, and tighten it firmly, leaving the tightening for several days, then loosen it and repeat it until the deformity disappears, God willing. Or, you can attach a splint made of strong, smooth metal.
For the splint has a special property of straightening everything that is crooked in the limbs, so if the deformity had become entrenched and stiff, and the need to correct it was urgent, then I would split it open from above and cut off the excess flesh or trim it with some scissors until it is corrected and the wound heals.
The One, the Unique, and the Merciful.
In treating fractures, if it is consolidated and the limb remains fragile after that, not returning to its original strength.
If a fracture of the bone consolidates and the limb remains weak and fragile after that, then that is due to many reasons. Some of them are due to the weakness of the ligaments and their failure to bind as they should, or the excessive tightening of the ligaments until the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb, or the excessive movement of the joint at the wrong time, or the lack of blood in the body of the patient and its weakness.
And the treatment for that is to nourish the patient and fatten their body until the blood increases in it, and to use baths and apply cupping and massage, and similar things. Then, one should apply a poultice to the limb to draw out a lot of nourishment or to bathe it with warm water. When the nourishment is digested in it and returns to its natural form.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of a fractured bone, if it has been set in alignment and its action has been restored to what is desired.
When a limb has been set after its fracture or dislocation, or the bone has been broken and there is a need for its treatment, an image of the limb should be drawn. Unless the limb has not lost its natural function, it is not desirable to accept the opinion of those who claim that the limb must be amputated from the root, although many ignorant physicians and surgeons in our country have done so.
And this act is very reprehensible, leading to great harm and corrupting the treatment. But if the fracture and dislocation are slight, it is desirable to anoint with water that has been medicated with softening herbs such as lavender, rose-water, and royal perfumes, and the like.
And it is treated with softening medicaments such as decoctions of Diachylum, or rose-water is taken and mixed with chicken fat and wax, or the tinctorial nut is taken and crushed with bathing-house soil, and the like, from the medicines that are called inducers of abscesses.
And if the dislocation is treated with continuous gentle traction, which is done by means of a pulley, and the movement of the limb is attempted in all directions at all times, then if the dislocation has been reduced and strengthened, and the necessity for its treatment with iron has been removed.
It is desirable to elevate it and release the connection of the bone, and to cut what remains of the dislocation or the bone with gentle incisions, and to use a bandage in that with diligence and care. Then the wound should be treated with what has been mentioned previously until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
The jawbone is a dislocation of a joint from its position, which hinders movement and deforms the shape of the limb, causing severe pains and aches; therefore, when one suffers from jawbone dislocation, it is necessary to hasten to reduce it back to its place.
One should not delay, for that may cause the swelling of the affected area and make it difficult to reduce the jawbone; therefore, one should not delay, nor should he hesitate, nor should he be slow in treating it, because it often results in painful stiffness and severe aches.
But if that happens, it is necessary to hasten to massage the affected area, then leave it until the swelling subsides a little, and then immerse the limb in warm water and oil, and then reduce it gently and adjust each limb according to its natural position.
And we have also arranged the chapters on jawbone dislocations in accordance with what has been mentioned previously, from top to bottom.
Chapter Forty-Two.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Lower Jawbone.
It is necessary to reduce the jawbones only in the narrowness and to leave them in one of two positions, either to dislodge them from their position slightly or to dislodge them completely until they relax. Until they are near the chest, so that the patient's jaw does not sag and he cannot hold it in place, and he cannot articulate with his tongue, for if it is dislocated slightly, it usually returns to its original position more easily.
And if the dislocation is complete, it is necessary to hasten its reduction quickly and not delay, which means that the servant should hold the patient's head firmly and the doctor should insert his thumb of one hand into the mouth at the base of the jaw, on the affected side.
He should enter his fingers from both sides and the rest of the fingers of his hand from the outside, and he orders the assistant to relax his jaw and let it go, so that the doctor can insert his fingers and push the jaw until it returns to its position.
If it is difficult to return and the jaws are all dislocated, he should use a hot and greasy compress until they become easy to return and do not cause difficulty in their return, as we have mentioned. If they return and settle, and the patient's mouth does not gape, then at that time he should put on them a splint with a bandage made of soft material and grease, which has been prepared previously.
Then he should bind it with a bandage that is relaxed, and the patient should sleep on his side with his arm bent between his two sides so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor does he flex it, but rather makes his nutrition moderate.
Until, if the pain goes away and the jaw is constricted, he should eat what is easy for him, and not use it with bandaging, nor does he exert himself in opening his mouth while eating, drinking, and speaking until the jaw is constricted and healed.
If it is difficult to return the jaws, if they were dislocated at a certain time and did not return to their positions, many bad consequences occur from that, including chronic pains and constant headaches, and perhaps the patient's belly becomes loose, or perhaps his digestion becomes weak. If you see that, then know that it is a failure.
And many are those who die from this condition within ten days.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On the reduction of the jaw and the treatment of the mandible.
As for the jaw, it does not dislocate from the inside because of its connection to the chest, but it dislocates outward and that is apparent to the senses, and it is necessary to force the patient to lie on his back and stretch out his arms.
Then compress the affected area with your finger, compressing it strongly, and then apply a bandage and a pad, and tie them on. And regarding its end that is near the collar bone and connects to it, do not loosen it except in the morning, for if you loosen it, it will be difficult to put it back in place as we have mentioned, and it may become dislocated.
Then apply a bandage and a pad, and tie them on, and instruct the patient to rest in bed until he recovers, and with this treatment, specifically, you will treat the collar bone if it has also slipped out of its position.
Chapter 26.
On treating a dislocation of the collar bone.
Know that the collar bone dislocates in three ways: one is that it dislocates towards the armpit downwards, the second is that it dislocates towards the chest, and perhaps it dislocates above the collar bone, and this happens in the morning.
It does not dislocate behind its place towards the shoulder, nor does it dislocate forward towards the nerve, and most often it dislocates and goes downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have a slight build, for it goes out quickly in them and returns quickly.
As for those who have a sturdy build, it is the opposite, meaning that it goes out slowly and returns slowly. And perhaps some people experience a blow or a fall, which causes the collar bone to become inflamed and painful, so they think it has dislocated, but it is necessary to examine it carefully until its true condition is clear.
So when you proceed with its treatment, and you examine the dislocation, if it is downwards towards the armpit, you will find that the collar bone that has dislocated and the healthy one differ clearly, and you will find that the head of the collar bone is bent and under the armpit, upon palpation, the head of the collar bone feels like an egg.
The patient cannot lift his hand to his ear, nor can he make all the movements, and if you bend towards his chest or above, then you will find that obvious and not hidden.
And this fracture is easy to reduce, if it was a recent one or the patient was a young person; you should order your servant to lift his hand above, then you put your fingers under his armpit and raise the joint with force upwards to its place, and the servant lifts his hand and stretches it upwards.
Then you put it back in its place, and it will quickly return; if it does not return as mentioned and the fracture is several days old, it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in hot water and to use a gentle poultice that softens like cooking the root of the colocynth and the milk of the king in the water.
Then the patient lies on his back and you put under his armpit a ball of wool that is moderate between softness and hardness, then the physician puts his forearm on the ball and grasps the patient's hand with his hand and stretches it downwards.
And he presses the ball with his forearm so that it returns to its position, and if you want to fix it in this way, which is to prepare a longer leg than the patient's and to fasten it from the side of the bed and to insert its end under the patient's armpit and raise it upwards until the patient is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the patient's hand downwards to his belly, and if the patient is weak, it is necessary to hang something else to hold him, so that the fracture returns to its place; it may also be reduced in another way.
And it is to place on the ground a long, straight stick whose head is rounded in shape like the horn of a buffalo, not too thick nor too thin, then you put it under the patient's armpit after placing a soft cloth on the head of the stick and the patient stands upright along the length of the stick.
Then he should push it downwards from the other side and also push his hand strongly from the other direction, so that the joint returns to its position quickly. If it is difficult to return, use this treatment: take a long splint about two cubits in length. And bend it to the width of four fingers and make its thickness like two fingers, with a rounded head, so that it is easy to insert into the armpit in this manner.
Then tie the rounded head with a linen bandage so that it does not hurt the splint. Then, place it under the armpit and extend the whole arm and the cubit on the splint downwards, and tie the splint to the upper arm and forearm and the extremity of the hand.
Then, the cubit is placed on a pillow. The arm is bent and extended downwards, leaving the rest of the body suspended from the other side, so that the joint enters its socket. If it is possible to enter it in this way, it is permissible to place under the armpit a moderate-sized ball made of wool or cotton.
Then, the splint is wrapped with a bandage soaked in rose water and egg white on all of the shoulder, as it rotates from above. Then, the ball is held firmly from under the armpit and tied securely with a bandage from above, and its end is suspended to the neck.
And it is left without moving the arm for seven days, and it is desirable to make the food of the patient a little light until the member becomes strong, as it is faster for its recovery. Then, after seven or five days, it is loosened and moved around, and if it is stable and did not become loose, it has recovered.
If the joint is repeatedly dislocated due to weakness or another ailment, it is desirable to use the method of three splints as mentioned earlier in the chapter on splinting. If this is all done and the bandage is loosened after seven days, but the joint did not become stable.
Here is the translation:
As for the fracture that occurs near the chest and the upper arm, and towards its back, it is treated by bandaging and compressing with a stick until it recovers. The rest of the treatment and medication are used until it heals. If it becomes exposed after the splint, it will be weak in the limb and slow in movement.
The patient should often use the warm bath treatment until the fracture is fully restored and returns to its original condition.
Chapter 27.
On the Treatment of Elbow Fractures.
The elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty, and it does not dislocate to all directions, neither forward nor backward, and its fracture is not hidden from you, because it is under observation and touch in any shape of dislocation.
And if you find the elbow joint dislocated with the forearm, it will be clear to you by the obvious deformity of the joint and that he cannot bend his arm or move it from its socket, and it is necessary to reduce and set the fracture immediately before it becomes complicated and leads to bad consequences.
For if it becomes complicated and leads to bad consequences, it is difficult to treat it and perhaps the patient may not recover, especially if the fracture is at the back, for it is the most severe of all types of fractures and painful, and often death occurs with it.
And if it is possible to reduce it, a servant should be ordered to stretch out his arm and forearm on the ground, while the doctor's hand is placed above the elbow and below it, and he pushes the joint with all his fingers or the base of his palm until it returns to its position.
And if the fracture is at the front, it can be reduced by bending the arm repeatedly until it is pressed with the base of the palm of the hand that is opposite it; and if the fracture does not return to its position, a strong and intense compression should be used, which is to stretch out the arm with a stick.
We also dissect the limb's tendons in a way that they follow the direction of the joint, then we bend them to each side after bending them on their convex or concave sides, and if the physician's fingers feel the dislocated joint, he should massage it with his fingers to ease its relocation.
Then he should push the joint with a strong push until it returns, and after its return, it is necessary to apply the compress that has a holding force and consolidation with white wax and tighten strongly, and fix the limb to the neck of the limb, and leave it for a while.
Then, if the joint is fixed in its position, remove the bandage from it and leave it. And if you find that the joint has not been corrected well, re-apply the compress and bandage and leave it for a while until it is corrected, then remove it. If pain occurs after the joint's return and removal, ...
And if there is difficulty in movement, do not use the scrubbing in the bath and gentle massage until it becomes soft or put a poultice of warm Kbatim on the joint, then bandage it and leave it for a day and night, then remove it and put it in the bath. If it becomes inflamed, rub the joint with moderate rubbing.
Then, re-apply the poultice to it once and twice and thrice, with entering the bath, until it becomes soft. And if you want to put on it a plaster of sweet cow's milk, mixed with warm wax and bandage it, do that repeatedly, for it will become soft and return to its original condition.
Chapter 28
On the treatment of a fractured collar bone
The collar bone is frequently fractured and its fracture is easy, unlike other joints, but it is necessary to hurry in reducing the fracture at the time of fracture before the area becomes swollen or an abscess appears.
Put the bandage of the forearm on the wrist and let the servant adjust it, and put the doctor's hand on the joint and bend it until it returns to its original position, for it is necessary that he should look if the forearm has returned to the palm of the hand.
So let him put the bandage on the outer wrist during flexion and extension, and if the forearm is prominent to the outer hand, then let him put the inner hand on the wrist so that the doctor's hand is in the same position as the joint; for when it returns from its distortion, he should bind it with a tight dressing to reduce the swelling.
Do not leave it without attention, for it will not heal and you cannot rely on its return after a few days, unless the joint remains in its original position and the bandage does not harm anything, except that you have over-stretched the hand and could not grasp anything.
So, when you learn that the nerve is cut or bruised, there is no remedy except to bind with a strong bandage; perhaps it will benefit and perhaps it will not benefit at all. So, if the bandage is returned, load it with the aforementioned dressing, then bind and leave for five days.
Then, it will heal and the hand will be trained, for you have restricted its movement and shown it something of the splint; so, let it be wrapped with lukewarm water and repeat this several times until it is healed.
Chapter 29.
On the Treatment of Fractures of the Fingers.
The fingers can be fractured in any direction, so when a finger is fractured to the outer or inner aspect of the palm, extend the finger and bend the fracture with your thumb until it returns, then bind the head of the finger and suspend it towards the direction from which it was fractured.
Leave it for two days, then release it and extend it until it becomes straight on that day. If it is at night, bind it according to the same description; do not cease to heal it during the day, train it with movement, and bind it at night, doing so every day until it is fully healed.
And you do it by bending it towards the palm of the hand, and then tying it to its own place, and doing with it your first action until it heals, and likewise do with it whenever you bend it towards the other places.
Chapter Thirty.
On treating a fracture of the vertebrae of the back.
When a fracture occurs in the vertebrae of the back or neck, either the fractured vertebrae becomes dislocated from its place, or many vertebrae slip out of their positions, there is no treatment for it because death quickly comes to the patient.
And the sign of that is that the patient's urine will come out without his control, and often some of his limbs will be paralyzed, either his legs or his arms or one of them, and if one vertebra slips out of its place, it will often become dislocated.
And its dislocation will be towards four directions, and the one that dislocates backwards is called a curvature, and as for its treatment, it is that you should consider that if the curvature has occurred due to a chronic condition, there is no treatment for it or for the resulting paralysis; and as for the one that occurs due to a fall or a blow and the like.
I have mentioned it as the ancients did, with a lengthy discussion that is of no benefit and only adds verbosity, so I have summarized what is sufficient to convey the meaning, and clarified it, unlike what they did.
I say that the curvature that occurs in the chest or abdomen has no treatment and no paralysis results from it, and likewise for the one that occurs on both sides; but I do treat the one that occurs in the back, specifically with what I have described, which is to extend the patient on his face.
On a mattress spread out near a wall, and a soft cloth is placed underneath, so that the patient's chest is not hurt, then a straight pole is put in a hole in the ground at the side of the mattress, near his head, and another pole at the other end of the mattress, near his legs.
The servant holds the rasp and another servant holds the other one in that position, then he wraps it around the patient's chest and under his armpit with a bandage, soft and tight, and extends the end of the bandage to the rasp at his head and ties it there.
Then he applies another bandage above his hip and above his knee and around his ankle, then he gathers all the bandages together and ties them to the other rasp at his leg, then each servant pulls their rasp towards him with the bandage, and the two rasps do not move from their marked positions.
Unless they are not fixed as we mentioned, and the doctor puts his palms on the rasp with force until it returns or he puts a wooden board on it, then he leans on the wooden board with his knee until it returns; if it does not return with this treatment, he takes a wooden board that is about three cubits in length.
And he makes an incision in the aforementioned place near the patient's chest, where one end of the wooden board enters, then he puts the middle of the wooden board on the prominence and places the doctor's leg on the other end, and he pulls strongly until the rasp is crushed.
And it returns to its place, and if you want to fix it with the wooden pillar that is fixed in the ground at the head of the patient's chest, at the end of the two prominences, being a cubit in length, and at his knee, at the end of the two prominences also, being a cubit.
And it will be, after what is between each rasp, a finger's breadth, and a hole has been made in each rasp through which the wooden pillar passes, and all the wood is fixed firmly in the ground, so that the thing does not move, and a straight rod enters, and it is the wooden pillar that winds around the bandage in the holes of the two rasps.
In its lateral aspect, there is a perforation that has been sutured with a thread as long as the width of the lancet, and in both posterior thighs, similarly. Then, you should tighten the ligature that was tightened at the navel on the roll at the head, and the ligatures that were tightened on his leg at the roll at the ankle.
Then, a servant boy should stand at each roll, holding the lancet with the thread that is passed through the roll, and the doctor should make an incision on what we have previously mentioned, and this is the picture of the roll, the patient, and the navel.
Then, after the ulcer has regressed and the site has been prepared, it is necessary to apply a dressing of lint, white lead ointment, and then a bandage, which should be placed on top of the dressing, making its width three fingers or thereabout, and its length should be according to the size of the incision.
And on some of the correct sutures, then he should be bandaged with the ligature that is necessary, and a gentle nourishing diet should be used until he recovers. If there remains some weakness in the site after recovery, it is necessary to use remedies that warm and soften, along with using the dressing we described at length earlier.
And a copper plate might be used for that, and weakness may appear in the posterior sutures of the spine, thinking it is a curvature and it being an extra bone that has grown, so do not neglect him with this treatment, lest death occur.
Chapter 31.
On the Treatment of Hernias.
Know that the joint of the groin and the joint of the shoulder are only dislocated, and they do not suffer what other joints suffer from, which is strain and bruising, and the joint of the groin becomes dislocated in four directions.
It should be bent inward, outward, forward, and backward; it bends more inward and less forward or backward. And the sign of its bending inward is that if you bring a healthy sound limb near the diseased one, it will become longer.
And the fractured limb is more bent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg at the hip, and the position that is nearest to the hip and the elbow is evident to us before the head of the thigh has reached it.
And the sign of its bending outward is that it resists these symptoms, and the sign of its bending forward is that it stretches out his leg on the cushion, but it does not bend without pain being in the fracture; and if he attempts to walk, he cannot do so forward.
And he feels heaviness in his hip and weakness in his thigh, and when walking, it is as if he walks on crutches; and the sign of its bending backward is that he cannot stretch out the fracture nor bend it before bending his thigh, and his leg will also be shorter than the other.
And the thigh is relaxed, and the head of the thigh is at the position of the gluteal region, obviously. As for the return of this bending, it is that you should examine; if the bending is old and has become chronic with its companion and he did not try to correct it, and it remained in its state, then there is no treatment for it.
It should not be presented to him, and as for the one who has recently bent and it was of any type among the four types of bending, then hurry to adjust the joint and move it inward and outward and rotate it gently and repeatedly.
If he did not respond to anything else from the treatment, then if he did not respond in this way, it should be that you set up a strong straightening device, either with his hand or with a strap that is tied around his leg above the fracture and another device that stretches it from above.
He should insert his hand from under his armpit, then grasp the patient's thigh with his fingers, and hold the end of the thigh with another servant's third hand, and it will be stretched either from the direction of the pubic area to the direction of the hip joint or from behind to the direction of the spine.
And they should stretch all of them at once until the patient's body is lifted from the ground and remains suspended, for this type of stretching is a common type shared by the four types, so return to what we mentioned earlier, otherwise each type has its own special treatment.
As for the special return, if the thigh is inwardly bent, it is necessary that the patient lies on his sound hip, then a bandage is tied around the root of the thigh between the head of the thigh and the place beneath the pubic area.
Then the bandage is extended from the direction of the pubic area upwards to the loins, towards the hip joint, then another servant takes hold strongly with his arms and grasps the thick part of the thigh near the groin, and stretches it outward strongly, so that it returns to its position.
And this type is easier than other types of treatment that involve returning this member, for it is troublesome to you and does not require entering into this type of painful treatment; rather, it is necessary to bind the patient's legs together with a strong bandage on the ankles and knees.
And each one should be at a distance of four fingers from its companion, and the affected leg should be stretched more than the other by two fingers; then the patient is suspended from a beam that is in the house, and it should be at a distance of two arms' length from the ground.
Then he orders a strong servant to grasp the head of the thigh and suspends the patient, another servant pushes the servant grasping the thigh with strength, so that the joint returns to its position quickly. As for the special return, if the thigh is outwardly bent.
The doctor should lie on the patient, as we have described for the one with a hump, and the bandage is applied to his bent knee, specifically to his chest, then the single splint is placed at his foot and the other at his head, then an extra splint is placed in the middle of the back, well-secured.
A soft, thin cloth should be wrapped around it to avoid hurting the patient, so that the splint is between his thighs, reaching down to the ankle, then each assistant holds it in place and the doctor adjusts the bandage with his hands, if necessary, to make it more comfortable.
And then the board is placed on it, and bound as we mentioned for the hump, except that it is necessary for the doctor to lie on his right side, and if the patient's paralysis is in front, it is necessary to extend the patient's leg while he is in this position, specifically on the back.
The doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's affected hip, then presses it with his other hand, and thus the pressure is extended down to the area of the knee, and if the paralysis is behind, it is not necessary to extend the patient's leg downwards.
He should be elevated from the ground, but it is necessary for him to be placed on a solid cushion, as it is necessary for his ankle to be turned outward according to what we mentioned about his position on the back, and the bandages are tightened.
As we mentioned earlier, it is necessary to use the cupping on the board also at the place where the joint was dislocated, so if the return of the hip joint occurs as it should, and its sign of return does not escape you, it is that you extend the patient's legs.
If you find them in a straight position and the patient bends their leg and straightens it without difficulty, then know that the limb has returned to its proper place, so at that point, release the thigh and remove the bandage, and tighten it with a strong tightening that does not allow the hip to move towards any direction.
Here is the translation:
Look and adjust and tighten according to the first tightening, and leave it for three days, then loosen it and reduce the compression on it every day until it strengthens, God willing.
The second and third sections.
On treating fracture of the vertebrae.
The vertebrae are fractured in three ways, fracture into the inside and out to the bottom, meaning towards the back, but not towards the front of the limb, and the sign of its fracture is that the patient cannot bend his leg to his thigh.
If he cannot bend his leg to his thigh, then know that the vertebrae are fractured, and all ways of its fracture will cause the patient to sit bent over, having stretched his legs on it, and sitting bent backwards a little, then sitting with his buttocks on his heels.
And stick your back to his face, and put your leg between his legs, then grasp his vertebrae with your palms, and interlace them between your fingers on the vertebrae, then press with your palms on both sides of the vertebrae with strength, and another servant stretches his leg until the vertebrae return to their position.
And the sign of its return is that the leg sticks to the thigh in a straight line without curvature, then press it and stick the leg to the thigh, then bind them together with a bandage for three or four days, then release them, and do not use except gentle massage every day until it strengthens.
If you have difficulty returning it with what we described, then use strong stretching with the bandages that are presented and described for treating the ribs until it returns.
The third and thirtieth section.
On treating fracture of the ankle.
The ankle may be dislocated, or it may fracture on the knee, and its fracture may be either inward or outward, and the sign of its fracture is that you see the ankle greatly swollen towards the side to which it was dislocated.
As for the treatment of a fracture in its early stages, it is to immobilize it with bandages and adjust it until it returns to its original position. And as for its treatment if it has settled on the pillow [of the patient] , it is necessary to sit comfortably and place something firm behind his back in its middle.
Then take his right hand and place it above his foot, and his left hand below his foot at the ankle joint. Then jerk his foot with your right hand, then with your left hand, twice, and then extend it with your left hand and push his toes with your right hand towards the shin without twisting.
Do that twice as we described, then push the toes towards the shin on the third attempt, and you jerk at the ankle joint. If it returns to its place after one or two attempts in this manner, and you see the foot is straight, otherwise, repeat the process until it is rectified.
If it does not return to its place as we described, then put the patient on his back on the ground and dig a trench in the earth, making sure it is very firm, so that it fits between his thighs, and wrap him tightly with a bandage so that he is not hurt. Then the servant will hold his thigh.
Then another servant will extend his hand or a strap to bind it on the patient's neck, then each servant will hold opposite to his companion, and the stick will stand upright between the patient's thighs, holding him so that he does not move downwards during the extension. Then the physician will adjust the fracture with his hands.
And another servant will hold the sound leg from below, so that the fracture returns quickly. If the fracture returns and you see its correctness, then apply the splint and bandage, and bind it with straps and thong, and tie the foot with a strap to below. And it is necessary to beware of the nerve that is above the ankle from behind.
The bandage should be tightened on it strongly, then left for two or three days; if the bandage relaxes, tighten it and release it on the third or fourth day, and the patient will be relieved of pain in forty days.
For if the pain precedes this period, it is feared that the fracture will collapse and be deformed, and it will not accept treatment afterwards. Therefore, it should be presented with a hot poultice, as we have mentioned and described in another chapter on treatment and reduction until it heals.
Chapter 34.
On the Treatment of Fractures of the Fingers.
It is necessary to straighten what has been fractured from it by a gentle extension, not with force, but rather with ease. If the fracture is in one of the toes, it is necessary to place the patient's foot on a level surface of the ground.
Or on a board, and standing like a masseur, then you put your foot on the joint that is dislocated, and press it with your foot strongly until it returns to its place and becomes straight, without appearing deviated.
Then place under the sole of his foot a board that takes the entire foot, having two pillows, and bind it tightly with strong and tight bandages for three days, then release it and protect it from pain for many days until it becomes strong and is safe from returning, God willing.
Chapter 35.
On the Types of Fractures that Occur with Wounds or with Dislocations or with Both.
When something like this happens, and its treatment is neglected, it often ends in death.
Therefore, it is not fitting to undertake the treatment of such a case except for one who has been skilled in the craft through long experience, gentle, compassionate, and thoughtful, not hasty or reckless; and he should use only the medicines that calm severe pain and relieve the patient.
The wound did not calm down with the slight fever and some of its inflammation, but it seemed to have calmed down for a while at the beginning of the condition before the severe inflammation occurred.
So, if the limb returns to its original state, then use the treatment that reduces severe inflammation and treat the wound with what is beneficial for it from the drying remedies. If it was a fracture with breakage and splinters occurred in the bone, then remove them. And follow in that what we mentioned about simple fractures, which we presented in their respective places.
And exert your effort, and free yourself from entering into the path of recklessness according to what you have presented and arranged for yourself. May that preserve your reputation and protect your presentation, if God wills.
