I have dedicated this book to you, my sons, for I have completed it for you, this part of the science of medicine, with its clarity and beauty. I saw that it was worthy of being completed for you in this treatise, which is a part of the work with the hand.
Because the work with the hand is noble in our country and in our time, it is abandoned, until it seems that its science is forgotten and its effects are cut off. And there remained of it only a few scattered drawings in the books of the ancients, which the ignoramuses and the charlatans had corrupted, until its meanings were obscured and its benefits disappeared.
I saw that I should revive it and compile this treatise on the path of clarification, explanation, and concision, and that I should bring forth the forms of the surgical instruments and other tools of work, for it is an increase in clarity and a fulfillment of what is needed.
And the reason why there is no skilled craftsman of surgical instruments in our time, is that the manufacture of medical equipment is long and requires its owner to be proficient beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen described. Until he understands the functions of the organs, their positions, connections, and disconnections, and knows the bones, nerves, muscles, their numbers, and their exits, as well as the pulsating arteries and their branches.
Therefore, Hippocrates said that many are called physicians by name, but few in deed, and none excel in the craft of surgery. We have mentioned this aspect in the introduction to this book.
Because he who is not knowledgeable in what we mentioned of anatomy will not be safe from falling into mistakes that kill people, as I have seen many who pretend to know this science without knowledge or understanding.
And that is because I saw a foolish doctor who made an incision on the varicose vein in a woman's neck, so he cut some of the neck's sinews, causing the woman's blood to gush out until she died between his hands.
A skilled surgeon had previously operated to remove a large hernia from a man who had been stabbed in the groin, and it was causing difficulty, so he removed it with a piece of the peritoneum. The man died after about three days, and I was called to remove it, so I saw the bone of the hernia and the condition of the affected area that had been inflicted on him.
I saw another surgeon who was performing a similar operation on some of our country's patients in the same way.
A black attendant had a fracture in his leg near the ankle with a wound, so the surgeon quickly applied the reduction to the wound using sutures and bandages, and tightened them severely, without leaving any space for the wound to become inflamed.
Then he bandaged his wounds and left him for a few days, instructing him not to move the splint until the swelling in his leg and foot subsided, and warning him about the danger.
I was called to him, so I quickly removed the splint and he felt relieved and his pains decreased, but the putrid matter had taken hold in the limb and I couldn't remove it.
The putrid matter did not cease to spread in the limb until he died.
I saw another surgeon who applied a poultice to a cancerous ulcer, and it suppurated after a few days until the patient's pain became severe, because if the cancer was pure black bile, then it was not suitable to treat it with iron instruments.
Unless it happens to be in a member that can be completely amputated.
For this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you to learn that surgical operations are divided into two categories: an operation that ensures safety and an operation that involves risk in most cases.
And I have pointed out in every place that comes from this book the operation that involves danger and fear, it is necessary for you to avoid them and refrain from them.
When the ignorant person does not find a way to the neck and the thorax, take it upon yourselves with compression and bandaging, and do not trust in the wrapping and the stiffening.
And use the best method that leads to safety and the praised direction, and avoid the dangerous and difficult complications.
And beware of what you fear that doubt may enter into your religion and your world, for it is a remainder of your ignorance and a diminishment in this life and the afterlife for your salvation.
For Galen has said in some of his instructions, "Do not treat a bad disease badly, lest you be called bad physicians.
And I have divided this chapter into three sections.
The First Section.
The incision with the nail and the incision with the sharp instrument, descending from the head to the heel, and the forms of the instruments and the necessities that are required for it in the operation with the hand.
And The Second Section.
The incision, the amputation, the phlebotomy, the cupping, and the surgeries, and extracting the projectiles, and all of that, descending in order, and forms of the instruments.
And The Third Section.
The fracture, the luxation, and the treatment of the gout, and all that, descending in order from the head to the heel, and forms of the instruments.
The First Section.
The Incision.
And before we mention the operation, it is necessary to mention its benefits and drawbacks, and in which circumstances it is used.
I say that the discussion of the benefits and drawbacks of the incision is a long speech, precise knowledge, and a hidden secret, and many of the wise have spoken about it.
And they disagreed about it, and I have summarized from their words the least, fearing verbosity.
I say that the fracture is benefited by gathering for every bad alignment, whether it be with material or without material, except for two alignments: the Harir alignment which is without material and the Yabs alignment which is without material.
As for the Yabs alignment with material, they have disagreed about it. Some of them said that the fracture is benefited in it, while others disagreed, saying that the fracture does not benefit from it when it is due to heat and inflammation, because the nature of fire is heat and inflammation.
And it is unlikely that one would treat a hot inflammatory disease with a hot inflammatory medicine, and he who disagrees with this says that fire has already been beneficial in treating hot inflammatory diseases that occur in people's bodies. Because when you apply heat to the human body and combine it with the alignment of fire, you affect the human body with cooling.
And I say, based on the experience that has repeatedly shown me that, although it is not proper to form an opinion about this matter unless one has thoroughly experienced and delved deeply into the science of surgery. And I have paused to consider the differences in people's alignments, the conditions of their diseases within themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration of time.
As for the other alignments, there is no fear of them, nor of the cold and wet diseases, for all physicians have agreed on their benefit from fire in treating them.
And know, my sons, that the secret of treating with fire is to use it with caution and to apply it carefully with the medicine that ignites it, because fire is a precious jewel that does not exceed its effect on the member that needs it, nor harms another connected member except for a slight harm.
And the fire with the igniting medicine may exceed its effect to what is beyond the members, and perhaps it may cause a disease in the member that makes its treatment difficult, and perhaps it kills; but the noble and generous jewel of fire does not do that except when it is misused.
We have tested it through experience over a long period of service and industry, and based on the facts of the matter.
So I have avoided lengthy discussion, and if it were not for the fact that it is not fitting to burden you with a confusing and ambiguous chapter in this book, which would be like a flaming firebrand inserted into the wounds of the patient, or an ineffective treatment which would only increase their suffering through an impractical and unproven method.
And know, my sons, that they have disagreed about the time in which it is suitable to perform the operation, and made the best time for it the spring season.
And I say that the operation is suitable at any time, because the harm that occurs from delaying it outweighs the benefit that is sought through the operation. And it is not proper to delay an operation that is urgently needed, for fear of a greater harm that may occur if it is postponed, which would be more severe than the internal harm that results from delaying it.
And do not be deceived, my sons, by the false hopes of the ignorant and foolish physicians who claim that an operation which cures a disease will not have any relapse afterwards, and thus make it a permanent cure.
And the ignorant people thought that the operation was like a medicine that changes the temperament and removes the noxious humors, which are the cause of the disease.
Rather, the operation surpasses medicine in speed of success, strength of effect, and severity of its dominion.
And it is possible for the disease to relapse at some time or other, depending on the temperament of the patient, and the strength of his constitution, and what he has accumulated in his body from the collection of superfluities, and his neglect of himself in acquiring them through diet and similar causes.
Rather, the disease for which the operation is performed should be a mild one, and in an organ with little superfluity and noxious humors. Like a broken bone about the joint and its dislocation, it is possible that the fracture may not return to its position, and this would be in the lesser joints.
And the common people also say that the last stage of the fracture is that it is a correct saying, not that they go to them because they think that there is no treatment that benefits with medicine or otherwise after the occurrence of the fracture and the pain, contrary to that.
And the meaning of 'the last stage of the fracture' is that when we have tried various treatments for a painful disease and they did not benefit, then we tried the last thing for the fracture, and it was only then that the fracture became set. Not according to the meaning that the common people have gone to, and many of the ignorant physicians.
And I have mentioned that the ancients said that a fracture set with gold is better than one set with iron, and they said that because of the balance of gold and the nobility of its essence, and they said it does not displace the site of the fracture, but that is not according to the rules.
Because I have tried it and found that it does not do that in some cases, without others, and the fracture is better and more excellent than iron, as they said, except that if you heated the mold in the fire with gold, it would not be apparent to you when you heat it to the extent that you want for the melting of the gold.
And because it hastens to cool and if you add to it in the heating, it melts in the fire and its maker will be aware of that in his work, so for that reason, setting a fracture with iron has become more rapid and closer to correctness for us, God willing.
And I have organized this chapter on fractures into sections, which I have arranged from head to foot, so as to make it easy for the student to find what he wants, God willing.
The First Chapter.
A fracture in the head is one thing.
This fracture is caused by the impact of humidity and cold on the brain, which are the reason for headaches and frequent yawning from the head to the area of the eyes and ears, and frequent sleepiness and ache in the teeth and pain in the throat. And with each collection for every disease that is displayed from cold, such as paralysis and numbness and stupor and the like of them from the illnesses.
The treatment of this fracture is to anoint the affected place with a pure, clean medicine for three or four days, according to the strength of the patient and their constitution.
Then treat him by bandaging his head with a compress, then sit behind him, placing your hands on his chest.
Then put the base of your palm on the base of his forehead between his eyes, so that your middle finger is at that point, and press that spot with your index finger.
Then apply the Zoitory cerate, which has this form.
Uncover as much of the bone as the size of a dirham or a carat, then lift your hand and return it to the same spot or another one if you are pleased. Until you see the bone that I mentioned to you, then take some salt and dissolve it in water and mix a cataplasm with it and apply it to the spot and leave it for three days.
Then apply a cataplasm mixed with rose oil and leave it on until the inflammation subsides, then treat it with the ointment of the fourth stage until he recovers, God willing.
And they said that if the wound remains open, it is better and more effective for suppuration.
And some of them mentioned that the skin should be cauterized to the bone, and the cerate should be applied until it adheres to some of the thickness of the bone, then it is scraped off after that what has adhered to the bone, then treated.
It is necessary to exert strong pressure until it has a strong effect on the bone, until it breaks off a piece of bone, whether it be a small fragment or a small flake, and one feels that it has been separated from that position. The head of the wound is left open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it grows, and I did not see these types of bone defects in some people except through the method of scraping and leaving it to its natural closure, as we have seen in other limbs.
And it is not necessary, when the head of the wound was weak by nature and the first type of bone is better with it, and it is used to work on it, God willing.
The Second Chapter.
Also, the fracture of the head.
If a fracture occurs in the head and it becomes chronic and prolonged, and treatment is used with bandages and splints and compresses and cauteries, but it does not benefit from any of that, so look. If the head of the wound was strong by nature and not weak, and it finds a severe cold, then apply another cautery above that, slightly. Then apply a cautery to each side of the head until the thickness of the skin is burned and the bone is exposed, as we have described. And apply a cautery at the back of the head in the place that is known by its hardness, and reduce your hand in this, but do not expose the bone, for the wound finds it has severe pain, unlike other wounds of the head, all of them. And I will mention this cautery in its place.
And it is necessary that the cautery iron which is used to cauterize the sides of the head and its back be more gentle than the cautery iron which is used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is its form.
The Third Chapter.
About the Non-Complicated Fracture.
If a fracture occurs in the skull and is accompanied by pain and the pain extends to the eye, then apply the medicinal treatment suitable for the head and use other treatments mentioned in the section on wounds; if that does not work, then perform surgery on it from two sides. Either by cauterizing with the sharp pointed instrument or by using the iron.
Or if you perform surgery with the sharp pointed instrument, it is by taking a single thread of Thoom, sharpening it and cutting its edges from both sides, then making an incision at the site of pain in the skull with a narrow scalpel until a space forms underneath the skin where the thread can be inserted.
Then insert it underneath the skin until it reaches, then tie it firmly with a tight bandage and leave it for fifteen hours, then loosen it and remove the thread and leave the wound for two or three days, then apply a dressing.
Apply a compress soaked in oil until the site heals, then treat it with ointments until it recovers, God willing. And if you wish, you can do that using some of the cauterizing medications I mentioned in the eighteenth chapter on cauterizing medications.
And if you perform surgery with the iron, it is in this manner: You heat the cautery iron which has this shape:.
And the cautery iron is called the Masmariyah because its head resembles a Masmara, containing some notches and having a small hole in its center.
Then you place it on the site of pain and hold your hand, and you move the iron slightly, slightly, and the amount that is burned from the thickness of the skin is like half of it. And you lift your hand so as not to burn the vein that is below, which would cause bleeding, then you soak a compress in salt water and apply it to the site and leave it for three days. Then apply the cataplasm with rose-water, then bandage it with a compress until it heals, God willing.
And if you need to amputate this limb with the straight knife, which is kept in the case, and avoid cutting the artery in this non-gangrenous limb especially.
Chapter Four.
Gangrenous Limbs.
If you treated the limb with the aforementioned advanced treatment and what we mentioned in the descriptions of the diseases, but the treatment did not benefit, and you saw from the symptoms what does not conform to what we mentioned as the first signs of gangrene, either by swelling or by burning. Then you should insert the straight knife, until it whitens after you have felt with your finger on the spot of the pain, a line along its length of half a finger or thereabouts, and you leave your hand a single time and you make an incision until you cut the artery and reach near the bone.
But you should beware of touching the joint that moves when chewing, lest you injure the nerve or the moving muscle, which would cause paralysis.
And be cautious and vigilant about the bleeding of the artery that you cut, for there is danger in its cutting. And do not trust one who does not know what he is doing and has not been trained by a skilled master, and leaves the work to chance.
And I will mention later the management of bleeding from the artery in its place in the book, God willing. If you see a symptom that does not conform to this method.
And if you find the diseased body affected, operate on it in the middle of the head as we described, and treat the wound until it heals, God willing.
And if you need to use the knife that we mentioned in the chapter on ligating the artery with the straight knife, then it is a better knife than this one and more effective.
The Fifth Section.
Treatment of Hemorrhoids of the Nose.
If a hemorrhoid occurs in the nose and is accompanied by cold and ulceration, and it is treated with ointments and other treatments mentioned in the chapter, but the pain does not subside, then cauterize the aforementioned spot.
Then touch it after warming it around the nose, all of it, as it rotates or revolves around both of them, if the pain is in both of them. And afterwards, with the cauterizing iron, from the root of the nose, a little after marking the spot with ink, and it will be about ten points on each nostril or thereabouts, then treat the spots until he recovers, God willing.
The Sixth Section.
Treatment of Hernia.
The hernia that is treated with cauterization, it is the type that occurs due to phlegm, as I mentioned in the chapter on diseases.
And avoid cauterizing the type that occurs due to fracture and nerve stretching.
When I treated this type of hernia with purges and rubefacients and gargles, it did not respond to my treatment, so it is necessary to strengthen the weakened area with three cauterizations. One at the root of the nose, and the second a little below its base, and the third at the meeting point of the lips.
And make your cauterization on the opposite side of the affected area, because relaxation only occurs on the side that appears healthy.
And the form of the cauterization is that you make a line on the upper side of the nose, below the horn of the head, a little, and another in the base, and its length will be according to the length of the fingers.
Lower the cauterizing iron with your hand until you burn to the extent of half the thickness of the skin, and this is the form of the branding, which is a type of scarring that I have described, except that it is slightly more superficial, as you see. It is desirable to let the suturing thread be slightly thick, then deal with the site as mentioned earlier until it heals, God willing.
The Seventh Chapter.
Treating Chronic Ulcers.
If you have treated the ulcer as we mentioned and the treatment did not benefit it, and it was not in a critical condition, then treat it with four kyats. On every head of the wound, one kyat and another in the middle of the head as we mentioned, and a kyat at the end of the head according to what has been presented.
The application of the makawi is as previously mentioned, and it may also be applied with a kyat on the orifice of the intestine, so it will be more effective, then deal with it according to what has been presented.
The Eighth Chapter.
Treating Abscesses.
That which is caused by phlegm, it is desirable to evacuate the critical condition first from the large arteries and the fine veins of the brain.
Then, he evacuates all of its contents and carries it to the back of the vertebrae, where the thick, congealed blood is stuck in the hollow of the vertebrae, carrying it many times, so that it hits with the kyat.
And do that on the same rank, as mentioned there, for it is emptied by that, and then treat it with three kyats at the back of its head, being a straight line from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
And let there be a thick finger's width between each kyat and another, then deal with the kyats as mentioned earlier; if you want to add more and the critical condition is inclined towards that, then treat it with the middle kyat.
If you want to add more, then treat it on the horns and deal with it until it heals, and the makawa will be in a zaituniyya form according to what has been presented.
The Ninth Chapter.
Relax the patient and loosen all the limbs.
It is necessary to advance in cleansing the head with the instruments we mentioned, then shave the patient's head, and place a kidney-shaped instrument at the middle of the head, and an instrument on each horn of the head, and an instrument at its back.
And three on the nape of the neck, if you needed to relax the limbs more than that and the patient was inclined to it and the disease was strong and confirmed, then place four instruments on the vertebrae of the back. And inform the patient until you reach the thicker part of the skin, and lift your hand, then adjust it according to what we mentioned earlier, until he recovers, God willing, and the abscess will be suppurating.
The Tenth Chapter.
Relax the patient.
That is, the patient who has a severe headache due to phlegm, it is necessary to cleanse his brain first with the large instruments and other treatments we mentioned in the previous section, if the disease was great and he was inclined to take the medications.
But if he was a young patient who could not take the medications, then let him be treated with the Ghiragh and Memludhah Menqiyah for cleansing the brain before that, for many days, along with improving his nutrition.
Then shave his head, then place a single instrument in the middle of the head, as we mentioned earlier in the chapter, and another at its back. And on each horn of his head an instrument, if the patient was strong and inclined, then place the instruments we mentioned in the owner of the falaj and relaxation of the limbs on the vertebrae of the neck and back, and the abscess will be suppurating on the aforementioned chapter.
If the disease was mild, then make the abscess slight in this manner.
The Eleventh Operation.
On the Excision of Malignant Ulcers.
If the cause of the malignant ulcer is a putrid and dense abscess, we should open it with the instruments mentioned in the chapter on abscesses.
If the cause of the malignant ulcer is a black humour and the body of the patient is phlegmatic, we should evacuate his blood according to what we have mentioned in the chapter on evacuations.
Then, bind the patient's head firmly, then make a tight bandage in a circular shape, then place it in the middle of his head, and let the patient sit in a bent position, holding himself from each side, then take a single razor of the finest and sharpest type.
Then, shave the area around the ulcer with a moderate shaving, as much as the finger can tolerate if you insert it, then wipe away what is in the middle of his head within the circle, and let it be until it cools down. Do that to the patient every week once, along with other good treatments, until he recovers, God willing.
And if you want to remove many small ulcers without touching the surrounding skin with your hand, but rather be cautious, because this type of ulceration is prone to spreading and affecting the brain.
Then, apply to it a cataplasm of powdered Simum or chicken fat.
The Twelfth Operation.
On the Excision of the Watery Humour in the Eye.
If you are certain of the presence of the watery humour in the eye through the signs mentioned in the chapter on evacuations, then hasten to evacuate the patient's head and remove it from all impurities and cleanse him in the bathhouse at the suitable time.
Then, bind his head firmly and open a vein in the middle of the head, then open two veins on the temples if the watery humour has affected both eyes, or one vein on one side if it has affected only one eye.
I cut with the scalpel all the vessels and sinews that are under the skin, and let the flaps be in the length of the incision, and beware of excessive bleeding.
If you see any of it, cut it at the syringe with a suitable treatment, and be careful not to dissect the sinews, and cut them and beware of bleeding.
And two ligatures are placed in the posterior part beneath the osseous convexities.
Chapter 13.
On treating chronic hemorrhages.
If the hemorrhages of the eye are chronic and permanent, and were from the vessels and sinews that are on the surface of the head, outside the head, and you think that it is because of a cold, moist, and gluey humor, then apply the treatment which I described specifically at the beginning of the descending vein. A ligature in the middle of the head, and two on the incision, and two at the posterior part beneath the osseous convexities. And if you need to add more, apply a ligature on each side of the eye's corner at the edge of the eyebrow with a small scalpel.
Chapter 14.
On treating nose fractures.
If you treated it with what we mentioned in the section and the treatment did not succeed, then try to straighten the nasal bone by pulling it three times, then shave his head and apply the middle ligature with the ivory scalpel. Then apply with the muscly scalpel, two ligatures above the eyebrows under the hair slightly, and beware of the artery lest you cut it. And this is a picture of the muscly (scalpel).
Chapter 15.
On relaxing the eye's eyelid.
If the eyelid of the eye is relaxed due to a disease or weakness, then apply one ligature to the eyelid with this Heller's scalpel.
If you dislike, place it above the eyebrows slightly, two fingers in each direction, and separate from the temples, and make the length of each finger along the length of the eyebrow.
And do not overextend your hand with the fingers, but according to what is needed for the third of the wound, and make the shape of the forceps on this manner.
Chapter Sixteen.
On the operation for cataract of the eye.
If you rotate them inward into the hollow of the eye, the operation on them is of two types. Either the operation with the needle or the operation with the sharp medicine, but as for the operation with the needle, you should caution beforehand that he should not leave the cataract if it was one that hurts him until it becomes settled and stable.
If you evacuate it at the time of its growth, it will congeal his eye with a poultice until it is quieted down, and if it has grown and stabilized, then put the head of the cataract in your knife, and then feel the operation on the cataract of the eye with the tip, marking it like the shape of a paper leaf.
And the beginning of the mark is near the cataract, then you put under the eyelid a twisted thread in the white of the egg or in the albumen of the gazelle, and then you shape the forceps according to this form.
Then you shape it on the form that you marked slightly, slightly, in many times, until the surface of the wound is like the shape of a paper leaf, all of which is clear and specific, and the sign of correct operation is that you see the cataract of the eye has become congealed and the hair has risen from the conjunctiva of the eye.
Then withdraw your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then apply a thread with wax until the conjunctiva is settled, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing. If something of the hair returns after a while and the eyelid relaxes.
Here is the translation:
Make a picture from the skull's shape, then take from the Sabbun's (Sabboun's) straightening instrument and from the Jeremiah's unobstructed (unimpeded) one, weighing each one dirham or its equivalent. Then, they should all be aligned and made into a single piece, and do that with the help of the pelvis, so it doesn't become disjointed. Then, stretch it over the skull's shape you made into a picture and put it on one or both eyelids, and place under the eye a layer of varnished cotton in the whiteness of the egg and the top of the poultice on your forehead.
And put your index finger over the medication and press it slightly, and you move it whenever you feel the poultice getting stuck to the medication, because it finds it stuck like a pomegranate. As long as it gets stuck, leave the medication and move it with your finger. If the sticking ceases, then remove the medication and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid has risen as it rises when anointed with a pomegranate or with a collyrium, and otherwise, then return to it with the medication on the spot that was not affected by the medication, and do not cease until you complete your task and anoint the eye, then put the cotton on it with sweet oil until the inflammation subsides.
Then, treat it with the salve or something else until it recovers. And it is necessary for you, when working, to be extremely cautious so that nothing from the medication falls into the eye. For if the eyelid relaxes after a few days and something from the hair gets into the eye.
So, return the medication to that spot where the eyelid relaxed, just as you did initially. Then, treat it until it recovers. And this is the picture of the shape of the skull.
And know that people's eyes may differ in smallness and largeness, so according to that, let your anointing be. And do not take the easy way of following those who have experience in this craft.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
On the excision of the pterygium that grows in the corner of the eye.
If you have treated the pterygium with what we mentioned in the chapters on diseases and it has not responded to your treatment, it is likely that it will recur in this form.
You should order your assistant to put his head on a stone and hold it firmly between your hands, without moving or trembling.
Then you should apply a cotton thread soaked in the white of an egg or the juice of the Barzakutona plant to his eyes, and then seal the eyelid with this preparation.
It is better that it be a tube made from the quill of a pen, taken from the end of the instrument which has the pterygium, and if you cannot get that, then it should be from the other end. Even if it were possible to make it from the reed, still this tube would be better for your operation, God willing.
Then you should dissect the pterygium, if it is open and the humor comes out of it, and you should remove its contents. If it were not open, you should open it and extract its contents. Then you should apply the preparation to it, and it will adhere strongly. You should hold it with your hand until you reach the bone.
And withdraw your hand slightly from the pterygium near the eye towards the side of the nose, lest your hand slips or the assistant's hand moves, and the preparation falls onto the conjunctiva of the eye, thus damaging it. If you have reached in the first attempt to the bone, well; otherwise, repeat the application a second time, if you need to do so.
Leave it for three days, then apply a cotton thread with rose water and treat it with the dry powder until he recovers. If forty days have passed and he has not recovered, then apply the strong and bitter medicine until the bone is exposed and adheres to what will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
Another method of dissecting the nasal bone, where some surgeons refer to, is to make an incision towards the location of the nasal bone and then place a thin spatula in this incision, which takes the form of this.
And pour into it a dram weight of melted lead, and hold your hand with the spatula, grasping it firmly, so that the liquid does not spread, and you should place on the eye of the patient a cooled cotton pad in the white of the eye or in the water.
For the lead will burn the location of the nasal bone and will penetrate it in a wonderful way, for if the nasal bone is penetrated as we have mentioned by incision and treatment, there is no alternative but to make a hole in the nose and return the nasal bone to its original passage, as it was originally.
The 18th Chapter.
On the incision of the lip.
Many times an incision occurs in the lip, which is called a fissure, and it often occurs in the lips of children. If you treat this incision with what we mentioned in the section, but the treatment does not work, then take a small, thin scalpel of this shape.
Make its edge on the flatness of the scalpel, then place it in a straight line with the incision until the incision reaches the depth of the lip, and treat it with a dressing until it heals, God willing.
The 19th Chapter.
On the incision of the nasal bone in the nose.
If there is a wound in the root of the teeth or in the gums or in the roots of the canines and it becomes infected and ulcerated, and the nasal bone becomes separated from its joint, then treat it, but if the treatment does not work, it is necessary to hold a scalpel according to what fits in the nasal bone.
Then insert it into the nasal passage and hold your hand until you reach the obstructed turbinate bone and its end, and do that one or two times. Then treat it afterwards with the mentioned treatment so that he recovers, God willing.
If the matter is cut off and he recovers, but if not, then it is necessary to examine the place and extract the rotten bone according to what will be in its mouth, God willing.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
Removal of the nasal polyps and the loose teeth.
If you extract the teeth beforehand due to decay and moved the polyps and treated them with medicines but did not succeed, then put the head of the file on your finger, then hold the forceps that comes in this shape after placing the tube on the tooth.
And insert the forceps gently with the file and hold your hand a little until you feel the file touching the root of the tooth, then lift your hand, then return the forceps repeatedly as needed, and the file fills its mouth with salty water.
And leave it for an hour, and then throw it away, so the mobile tooth is fixed, and the loose gum is strengthened, and the rotten decayed part is cleared.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
Removal of the tooth and the gum.
If the gum and tooth were decayed due to cold or had worms and did not respond to treatment with medicines, then remove them in two ways: either removal by silverpoint or removal by fire.
As for removal by silverpoint, it is that you take silverpoint of Boqri, then heat it in an iron spoon or in a crucible, then take a cotton swab and wrap it on the end of the instrument, then dip it into the heated silverpoint and apply it to the aching tooth with the file, and hold it until it cools.
Then, return to the area several times until the power of the cautery reaches the bottom of the wound, and if you wish, you can apply a dressing or a pad in the cold balm and place it on the painful spot, making an elevated compress above it until the cautery reaches the bottom of the painful spot.
And if you cauterize it with fire, it is that you direct the nozzle of copper or iron tube, and there will be some density in its body so that the heat of the fire reaches the mouth of the canal. Then, hold the makuwah that has taken its shape and place it on the same wound, and hold your hand until the makuwah cools down, doing that several times.
For the pain will subside on that very day or the next, and it is necessary afterwards to fill the canal of the wound with good balm, and to hold it for an hour, then to pour it out, and this is the form of the makuwah.
Make it on whichever side you wish, and according to what is possible, and this is the shape of the tube.
The 22nd Chapter.
On cauterizing the hemorrhoids.
If the hemorrhoids are due to phlegmatic and cold humidities and have not been treated with medications and you want to treat them quickly, then use the empty makuwah that has this shape, perforated at both ends.
To make the pus come out during cauterization from one end, place it closed on the same tumor, once and twice, if you need to do so until you reach the depth of the tumor. If the tumor is small, then make the makuwah according to the size of the tumor.
Then, leave it for three days and apply a dressing soaked in balm until what is burnt by the cautery disappears, then treat it with ointments and bandages until it heals, God willing.
The Twenty-Third Section.
On the treatment of wounds in the neck and constricting of the breath.
If the ulcers dominate the trachea and it is not possible to cough, especially if it happens with a cold temperament, it may be necessary to evacuate the mucus or to use gentle medicines, then to cauterize the spot in the hollow of the neck at the base of the larynx in the lowest position.
Be careful not to touch the trachea with the cauterization, and do not burn more than half of the skin; then make another incision at the joint of the neck at the end of its vertebrae, gently, and the cauterization should be in a curved shape according to what is needed.
Then treat it with what has been mentioned until it recovers, God willing.
The Twenty-Fourth Section.
On the treatment of lung disease and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold ulcers and it is not possible to expel the mucus, and the disease is chronic, then make two incisions above the ribs in the lowest empty positions, and another incision in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And the cauterization should be in a curved shape according to what is needed, and if you wish, let it be a small puncture with the cauterization that is called "the dot", and its shape has been described in the book on punctures and burning of the ears, and the dots are from thirty or so.
Then treat it with what has been mentioned until it recovers, and a cauterization instrument with three branches can be made according to this shape, and it is hurried with because you can make three incisions at one time, and this is the shape of the cauterization instrument.
The Twenty-Fifth Section.
On the treatment of abscesses.
If the head of the joint becomes dislocated due to a fall or does not settle into place when it is returned, until it becomes a habit for it to dislocate and then dislocates with the slightest movement, as we have observed in those who are accustomed to reducing it. Then the physician leans on his chest or on the sound side, and raises the skin that is inside the joint with the fingers of his left hand if the joint dislocates inward.
Then he applies the cupping glasses that have suction cups on them.
Then he cups the skin until it is drawn to the other side, and its shape becomes four cuppings. It may also be cupped with a cupping glass having three suction cups, in which case the shape of the cupping would be six cuppings, and the suction cups would be on the ridge of the joint.
And this is the picture of the cupping glass with three suction cups.
And one more may be added to this number, making the cuppings eight. Then he applies the cooled cups with salt and bandages, and the physician does not move the limb at all until it becomes strong, and if the dislocation is upwards, it will be easier to do so.
He places above the shoulder a single cupping, good and sufficient, or several cuppings that are beneficial, for the joint becomes relaxed, the swelling disappears, and the physician is relieved.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On Cupping for Gastrointestinal Disorders.
If a disorder occurs in the stomach, with many putrid and corrupt matters, until they are expelled from their proper place, and the evacuations are directed towards it, and treated with the usual treatments, but do not benefit, it is likely that the physician should lean on his chest and stretch out his legs and hand, then apply three cuppings. A flap under the sternum is made with a semicircular incision, and two flaps are created below the single flap until it takes the shape of a trident, and then they are separated by a ligature, so that when they are brought together, the shape of the trident is formed, and its thickness is like three fingers' breadth.
According to this diagram and to this measure, without excess.
And if you want to make a single large flap in the middle of the belly, according to this diagram.
The incision with which you make this single flap is circular in shape, according to this diagram.
You may make an incision in the belly by making a mark on it according to the measure you want, then make the incision with a pointed instrument, and then treat it with the treatment that is presented until it heals.
Chapter 27.
On the surgical treatment of cold abscesses of the liver.
If an abscess appears on the liver, either due to cold and moistness or to a corrosive bile, until it deviates from its natural position, making a suppurating ulcer, and if you treat the patient with what we mentioned in the section, he will not be cured. It is necessary for the patient to be positioned on his back, and three incisions are made according to this shape and this measure on the liver below the ribs where the arm of the man ends.
And after each incision, a thickness of a finger is maintained, and the incision on the length of the body is straight, and do not incline your hand with the instrument, yes.
And let the amount you remove from the thickness of the skin be half of it, without excess. And the patient should be sitting on his feet, if he is not sitting, then he should be reclining, having stretched out his legs and raised his arms, and this is the picture of the incision.
You may dissect these veins with the Sakkiniyah scalpel, if you have a skilled assistant and precision in your craft, and take care not to damage the surrounding tissue, so that you cut through the skin only, and then cut through the belly and reach the intestines; for the skin there is delicate, so be careful.
Chapter 28.
In the belly and the liver, with a painful swelling.
If you find in the liver a tumor or abscess and want to know if that swelling is in the flesh of the liver or in its membranes, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, it will be found to have a soft and painful border without limit.
And if it is in the membranes of the liver, it will be with a severe and painful border, and you will find that the physicians have abandoned its treatment, so it is necessary to widen the lesion on its sides, then to explore the affected area with the director.
Then heat the scalpel in the fire, and it is the scalpel that resembles a file, and this is its shape. And dissect with it a single vein until you cut through the entire skin and end at the membranes, until you bring out the entire director, then treat it with the treatment of abscesses until it heals.
And this type of scalpel should not be used except by one who has mastered its craft in the manufacture of medicine and has experimented with his hands on these diseases many times, so then he will be able to perform such a task and leave it to the best.
Chapter 29.
On the incision of the spleen.
I mentioned that the masters of surgery have specified the roots of the saporound for the cold spleen incision in this fashion, and it is that you take from the roots of the long, straight, and thin saprouround a single root, as long as you can find, and make its tip like the fingernail, then dip it in oil and heat it in the fire. A single incision in the area between the connection of the trachea and the larynx, and two small ones slightly tilted towards the underneath side of the beard, and two large ones above the breasts, between the third and fourth ribs.
And two more between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly tilted towards the back, and another in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach, and three incisions from behind, one between the shoulders, and two beside the outer vertebrae below the navel which is between the palms.
And it is not proper to insert your hand into the incision, but rather it should be on the surface of the skin, making a slight touch. Some of the authorities have mentioned that some people used to use an iron instrument similar to a fillet, and they would insert it between the ribs until it reached the tumor itself.
And the pus comes out, as we mentioned in the case of liver abscess, and in this cavity of the ribs, either the patient dies from the severity of the time or he is exposed to a prolonged illness with no recovery.
Chapter 30.
Surgery for spleen.
If you treated the spleen disease with what we mentioned of treatment in the previous section and it did not respond to your treatment, then surgical incision is necessary, which has three correct approaches, one of which is to make three or four incisions along the length of the spleen.
Similar to the incisions of the liver, which we previously described in shape and size, with a distance between each incision and the next of about the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the direction of the instrument is as we mentioned in the incision of the liver, and do not insert your hand into the incision, and the patient's abdomen should be exposed on his back.
And the other approach is at the curvature, and the skin that is in front of the spleen is lifted, where the curvature of the patient's left side ends, and the lifting of the skin should be on the width of the abdomen so that the incisions fall along the length of the abdomen.
Then, you insert the suture needles with great care until they pass through the flesh from the other side, then you bring out the threads and make them four, and if you wish to pass by the other thread with the three sutures.
Then, you treat the place of the threads after you leave it for a period of time, until the pus forms, which is a sign that the treatment has succeeded better than what was previously done.
Chapter 31.
On Suturing of Wounds.
The suture is beneficial in suturing a wound that is suitable for it, if you treat the wound with the types of treatment that we mentioned in the previous section, and your treatment does not benefit, it is necessary to pass four threads around the wound and one thread on the umbilicus.
And another thread on the liver and a thread on the spleen, and two behind the ribs, one opposite his chest and another opposite his umbilicus, and the depth of the suture should be close to the thickness of the flesh, then you leave the suture open until pus forms for a long time.
And do not neglect the patient's treatment after the suture, with what is necessary to bring together the two edges of the wound quickly, and the shape of the thread that is used to suture the back is serrated according to its previous shape, and the one that is used to suture the back is zigzagged.
Chapter 32.
On Suturing of Legs and Thighs.
If you find that the wound has become inflamed and yellow pus has collected, it is necessary to suture on the back of the foot at the joint between the ankle and the toes.
And place your hand on the thread and do not twist it, then raise your hand and do not press it down, for it attracts the yellow pus and the suture is on this shape.
Here is the translation:
The vein that is opened without treatment for a long time becomes inflamed, and the water collects in it, then it is treated with the aforementioned method.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On the vein of forgetfulness.
If the forgetfulness is due to cold and moist humors, which weaken the retaining and attracting powers in the stomach and intestines, and it was treated with various treatments but did not improve, and I saw that the patient's vein was obstructed and its power was greatly diminished on his stomach. As mentioned previously, on the stomach vein with a circular bandage and four veins around the navel, gently applying the smooth Musk-scented bandage, and a vein on the abdomen above the hip, large or two veins.
For I saw that the moist humors and obstructions were considerable, so I applied a vein on the liver and a vein on each flank, and perhaps added two small veins on the stomach near the large one; it is a successful treatment that does not miss its benefit, God willing.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
On the vein of haemorrhoids.
If there were many chronic haemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and it was due to cold, dry, or moist humors, and it was treated with what we mentioned in the chapter, but the treatment did not benefit, then I applied three veins at the bottom of the spine under the buttocks, a little triangle-shaped.
And a vein under the navel like two fingers, and I thought that his stomach was cold and its digestion did not take place, and I saw his face pale, so I applied a large vein on the stomach as mentioned previously, and a vein on his liver. And another on his spleen with a Musk-scented bandage, and I left the vein opened for a long time, then treated it until he recovered, God willing.
The 35th Section.
On the dissection of the veins.
After cutting them, if you cut the vein, beware of the mouth that resembles a nerve, then insert the cannula into the vein itself and move your hand until you reach the mouth of the artery from which the blood flows, do it once or twice.
If there were many veins, treat each one according to what we have described, then apply the corresponding ointments until it heals; and if the vein was large on the side of the thigh, it would be more effective in the treatment.
The 36th Section.
On the excision of the nasal polyp that is in the nostrils and their surroundings.
If the vein did not retract to the suture and the operation that we described in its place, and you were unable to do that, perhaps it was because of the nasal polyp; so if one of the nasal polyps grew and obstructed the passage, first you should try to remove it with a thin scalpel.
Then feel the size of the polyp with the scalpel, then beware of the cannula that resembles a nerve, and insert it gently into the nasal polyp itself, on the straightness of the polyp's base and the size that the scalpel entered, and apply the vein to it until you remove all those obstructing bodies once or twice or thrice according to your need.
And beware of damaging a nerve if there was one, or a large artery, and if the polyp was attached to the bone of the forehead or to the bone of the temple.
Be cautious of these places all together, and do not do that unless the polyp was in a fleshy place and you were certain it was not harmful, then treat the area until it heals; if the area became inflamed and the matter was cut off from it and remained so for some time, know that it has healed completely.
If the materials do not separate from it, then know that it is either a nerve or a blood vessel in a bad bone or something similar to that which comes to his mind in his situation.
Chapter 37.
On the Wounds of the Abdomen.
If a wound occurs in the abdomen and it is due to a fall or a blow from a hard object, and for that reason the intestines are torn, it is necessary to sew them on the abdominal wall like the aforementioned stitches, and perhaps a third stitch is needed in the same row, so three rows of stitches will be completed, which will be more effective in the healing.
Chapter 38.
On the Wounds of the Nose.
If a wound occurs in the nose, due to weakness and relaxation from a fall or blows, until the urethra is not able to hold the urine, it is necessary to make a stitch at the bottom of the nasal bridge on the nose, where the hair of the nostrils begins, and a stitch on the right side of the nasal bridge and another on its left.
And after the stitches, on each side, according to the size of the thumb, and make a stitch at the bottom of the back, or two stitches if needed, and the suture will be smooth as mentioned before.
Chapter 39.
On the Wounds of the Uterus.
If a wound occurs in the uterus due to a fall or blows, it is likely to be torn away from the ligament and its connections are severed, and it causes pain or becomes inflamed when menstruating, and it is necessary to make three stitches around the cervix, as we mentioned in the wounds of the nose. And a stitch on the perineum below the back, or two stitches, and the suture will be smooth.
Chapter 40.
The treatment of varicose vein.
You should apply compresses that adhere to the varicose vein, so it becomes an obstacle for its return to its original place, and a sign of that is when the leg is bent on the other, if you press some of them together, and you find the spot of the varix in it, it seems that the compress should be placed on the varicose vein itself like a circle.
After you apply the compress around the varicose vein, as it revolves to make the varicose vein itself in the middle of the circle, and the compress that you present its shape in a circular fashion. If you did not prepare this compress, you should use three circular compresses from the large zinc compresses.
You should bandage the varicose vein tightly to the extent of the thickness of the entire skin, then leave it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter 44.
On the varicose vein of the nose.
If a varicose vein occurs and becomes inflamed, and its cause is cold or phlegmatic compresses, and you treated it with the mentioned treatments in the chapter, but the treatment did not succeed, and it was delayed, it seems that the treatment should be facilitated by evacuating the bilious or sanguineous matter, or by using a gentle purging medicine.
Then, you should apply it and direct the varicose vein to two channels, either a varicose vein with caustic medicine or a varicose vein with fire, and the varicose vein with fire has many faces, one of which is that you apply three circular compresses on the varicose vein itself in this manner.
And you make a suitable bandage for it, and it is after what is between each compress and compress, to the extent of the thickness of the finger, and the zinc compress should be applied, and it may be applied as four circular compresses on the head of the varicose vein itself. If you desire, you apply it with the circular bandage that we mentioned in the treatment of varicose veins, as one circle.
The circle surrounds all the veins and perforates the entire skin, this is a sign of apoplexy in the blood vessels if the injury was internal to the veins themselves and did not extend to the thigh and leg.
For if it extends to the thigh and leg, it will form two swellings on the thigh at the spot which indicates the place of the injury, and a swelling above the veins by four fingers towards the lateral side slightly, and the swelling will be sinewy, and the depth of the swelling will be equal to the thickness of the skin only.
And if it indicates that the injury extends to the direction of the toes, it will form where it indicates by a swelling at three or four points or more if needed, and if it indicates the injury below the knee towards the leg, it will form one sinewy swelling there.
And beware of all swellings from reaching the skin to the point where it perforates a nerve or a large artery, lest you cause by that a severe injury or a chronic condition.
I have seen one and two men whose veins were above the swelling and they were afflicted by it in their swellings, until it reached the gout of the foot and it split all of it, and it corrupted the entire leg, then it caused paralysis and death afterwards; for if the injury was on both sides, it would be on this sign with its corresponding signs.
And some of the wise men from among the physicians have mentioned that in the case of veins, this sign is made like a cautery of iron, and its head is half a finger's breadth, and it is at the mouth of the artery or slightly less, and inside that cautery there are another two cauteries.
And it is after what is between each of the two cauteries, to the extent of a finger's joint, and the cauteries are open from both sides, and their height is about a finger's joint or two joints, and they take a holder made of iron which has been fashioned in the cauteries, and this is its form.
Here is the translation:
Then he should be treated with the ointment until he recovers, and this is what I have written in this book about this type of wound that we have not employed for its treatment, except for those who are patient with it, unless it is one of the wounds that affect a joint, and most of them are those which cause harm to him.
And as for the wound with the cauterized spot, it is like creating a similar cavity to the ring-shaped one that descends into it, either from a nail or from iron.
It will be at the edge of the two wounds, an elevation of about a finger's width or a little more, and it will be after what is between them, with the thickness of a finger, and it will be open at the bottom and open at the top, and some of it will be connected to each other in this manner.
Then you should bring it down to the level of the knee and the patient should lean on his sound side, and you should hold your hand firmly, then pour between the two cups of hot water, which is heated by the narqiliyya, and hold it for about an hour, and the patient should be patient with its heat and burning, so that he feels a burning like the nar.
Until the burning sensation subsides, then you should lift your hand with the instrument and pour cold water on the knee entirely, then leave it for three days and apply cerate until the redness of the burn disappears, and leave it for a few days until the pus is drained from it, so that it will be more effective in healing.
Then you should treat it with ointments until he recovers, for if the pain reaches the thigh or the leg, you should make a poultice for him as you did on the knee, and this is the description of the hot water, which I have established in my chapter on wound treatment.
Take a part of the salty clay and a part of the unbroken gypsum, crush them and mix them together, then put them in a new vessel that has been perforated at its bottom with one small hole, as much as can be entered by the medicine, and place under it another perforated vessel.
Put the suture on the wound and the surrounding skin with a thread after you have cleaned them thoroughly with your hands, making sure to leave no excess threads. Then wait until the watery discharge collects at the bottom of the wound and gather it all together. Then apply it to another wound and surrounding skin, also cleansing them thoroughly.
For it will then be a strong remedy, very effective in many medical treatments and for other organs as well, since it acts like fire on them. And among the medications that can be prepared with it are also Thapsia and honey of Baladhur, along with the sap of the Sabun Murakhin plant.
Galenos reported a story about an old man who treated his varicose vein and paralysis, and he was very pleased with the result, and he claimed that he did not need any other treatment and that he was cured in one session.
Until he perhaps entered the bath, and came out of it cured, for he took from the green vitriol, and if the green was not found, he would take the recent Yemenite, and mix it with some axle grease, and apply it to the varicose vein, where the pain is, or in the leg, or in the thigh.
And he should be made to stand and left for three hours, or as long as the patient feels the warmth of the medication, then he should enter the bath. If his body is cleansed, he should enter the tub, and if the pain goes away, he will recover with God's permission. If he does not recover, the dressing should be repeated after ten days, another time.
For he will recover, God willing. And be aware that it is not proper to use any of these medications unless the body has been purged first, and Dioscorides mentioned that if the sap of the Ma'z tree is used to treat paralysis, it will benefit from it.
And the treatment should be done in this manner: take a handful of ivy and boil it in old oil, then apply it to the numb place, which is between the elbow and the hand, and closer to the wrist, then take the sap of a dry Ma'z tree.
Here is the translation:
The 42nd Section.
On the wound of the back.
The wound on the back may occur due to many reasons, either from a fall or a blow or a severe bruise and the like, and it happens when a cold and moist substance accumulates, and the wound occurs in this type only.
That which occurs due to the accumulation of a cold substance, after a severe bruise, should be treated by applying a gentle pressing on the affected area with three rows of five or more wounds, according to the severity of the bruise and its strength.
And the wound should be with a circular point, and if it is necessary, three or four wounds with a moderate circular motion, in this form.
The 23rd Section.
On the wound at the beginning of the curvature.
Many times this ailment affects young children, and its sign at the beginning in the child is that he feels short of breath when standing or moving, and you find, on examining his back, a prominence that has risen above the other prominences.
If you see this and want to treat it, then apply a circular motion with a treatment that is in the shape of a circle, like this form. Take the wound on each side of the curvature with gentleness, and if necessary, make three or two rows around the curvature with a circular point, and let the points be close to each other, then treat the area until it heals as we mentioned.
And beware of using the wound on the curvature that is caused by nerve inflammation.
The 44th Section.
On the wounds of gout and joint pains.
If the joint pains were due to cold moistures that accumulated in any member of the body, then if the pain occurred in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call it a specific case of gout.
If you treat the cold abscess caused by a cold humor with the treatment we mentioned in the section on wound cleaning, and the pains do not subside, then the doctor should make an incision around the joint of the two bones, making many small cuts, and the incision should be zigzag-shaped, as illustrated.
And if you need to make an incision on the face of the joint, then do so with a puncture incision, for if the pains ascend to the knees or to other joints, which often happens, then make three or four small cuts on each side with this zigzag-shaped incision.
If you need to make more incisions than this, then do so, but do not deepen your hand with the incision, rather it should be about the thickness of the skin only; if the pains ascend to the loins or to the back, then use what we mentioned from the incisions in its beginning.
If the pains are in the hands only, then make an incision around the wrist joints as you would make a circular motion, if the pains remain in the fingers, then make an incision at each joint and on the back of the hand; if the pains ascend after some days to the elbows or to the shoulders.
Then make incisions on each side, and do not neglect the good management and taking of medicine; for if he follows the best diet and evacuates the phlegm, then he will recover with this incision, God willing.
Chapter 45.
On Incisions for Gout.
If a patient with gout presents with numbness and weakness in the legs, and some of the skin and flesh are paralyzed near the thigh, and this has started recently, it is advisable to order the patient to avoid eating on that day and to use laxatives that will help evacuate the putrid material from his belly.
Then you should make him lie on his back between your hands, and order him to hold himself still until the numbness or weakness appears, then you touch it with your fingers, and you feel with the pulse underneath the gouty swelling on the bone of the hip, a sign resembling half a circle, its edges towards the upper part of the thigh.
The description of this surgical procedure.
When it reaches the white tendon, he should cut the vein and then cut the artery or the nerve to its hollow, then he puts his servant's hand on the spot so that he does not press on the artery. And you have made a separation between the two legs of the patient and placed underneath a pillow and another servant holds onto his leg.
And another one on his chest, holding his hands, then the surgical scalpel is lowered onto the marked spot itself and you hold it upright and steady until it reaches the bone or you make a second incision if it did not reach the bone at first.
And be careful not to press on the artery while you are making an incision, lest you harm it and cause either death or great injury. And know that if you do not reach the bone with your incision, your operation will not be successful. It is necessary for the surgical scalpel to be gentle on the sides of the young and rough on the sides of the old.
Then treat the site of the incision after three days with rose oil until it becomes soft and flexible, then treat it with sweet medications until he recovers. And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound heals.
And it is necessary to make his diet light during the period of treatment, so that he does not press on the artery when coughing or sneezing. Then, if he wants to stand up after forty days, you should use a strong bandage and keep it for another forty days, and reduce the fatigue and the fullness from food, drink, and severe exertion.
For if he uses this treatment, he will recover fully, God willing. And I will mention the treatment of hernia by pushing it back in its place, God willing. As for the hernia that occurs in other parts of the abdomen and is protruding, I want to make clear that you should not increase the protrusion from it, but rather push it back in its place according to its size. Do not cauterize the wound like a triple cauterization, then elevate it as we have mentioned, for it will not increase, God willing. Some of those who have preceded us have said that one should open the abscess with a triple-opening instrument on this pattern.
After you have applied the dressing to the abscess and made a straight line along the width at the upper side of the abscess, and another line downwards, and you place your hand in the middle with one gentle movement, and this first method is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter 46.
On the Anal Fissure.
If a fracture occurs in some of the limbs due to a fall or blow, and pain and swelling occur, and that pain persists for a long time, and treatment with medicines does not help, it is necessary to open with an instrument at the point of the injury, and each limb will be treated according to its size, smallness, and strength.
And if the pain and swelling are severe, and the patient is free from the first operation, or else you will repeat the operation on him, because it is usual for these pains to transfer from one limb to its neighbor, so it is necessary to follow them with the instrument until the patient recovers.
Chapter 47.
On the Surgical Removal of Stones.
Those who perform surgical removals have indeed benefited greatly from the instrument, and it is not just a type of surgical removal that occurs before the suppuration of phlegm and pus.
If you want to make an incision, look carefully, for if the stone is obstructing and you treat it as we have mentioned in the section, and it does not move and does not stop, and the patient's condition worsens, and the putrid matter flows onto the head, five incisions. One at the middle of the head, at the curved part, and the second below it, towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the temples, and one from behind at the nape of the neck. And direct your hand with the instrument gently until it affects the bone slightly.
Here is the translation: A suture on the side of the nose and two on the cheeks and two on the lateral aspects of the neck and six on the lateral aspects of the back and one large one at the junction of the shoulder blade when the clavicle is broken, and another above it on the same pillow, and two on the ribs, one on each rib. And two on the kneecaps, one on each knee, and two on the shoulders, and two on the elbows, and two on the sides of the chest, and a stitch on each joint of his fingers and toes, and one on each ankle and wrist.
And be cautious of the nerve that is at the back of the ankles, lest it be injured, and a suture may be placed on the bone of the temple and another on the mouth of the stomach and another on the liver; and know that each time you add a suture, it will be more beneficial and effective.
And know that the wounded person does not feel the pain of the suture as the healthy person does, because his body has become weak, and it is necessary that the sutures be from the large to the small according to the limbs and joints, as it is mentioned in the characteristics of the wounds.
Then treat the suture with precise dressing and honey, and other treatments until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter 38.
On the suture of a crippled limb, when a limb is crippled and treated with medications and bandages but does not recover, then it is necessary to perform a suture on the same limb according to its worth, whether it is a major or minor bone, and let the suture be gentle and slight in the thickness of the skin.
Then treat it with the proper treatment until he recovers, and sometimes a crippled limb that is exposed to the hand or foot in the lateral aspects of the back near the exit of the nerve that moves that limb may be treated, and the crippling will disappear.
It does not present itself except to one who is skilled in dissecting the members and tracing the pathways of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter 49.
On Ulcers of the Nose.
If the ulcer is chronic and no remedy from the remedies of medicine has been of benefit to it, then cauterize it slightly according to the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with a fine powder of rose-water and orpiment, and the milk of the pregnant woman, and the blood of the hamam, or the blood of the khutami, each one part, and mix them all together and apply it to the ulcer, and bind the place until it heals.
Chapter 50.
On Cancer.
If the cancer is beginning and you want to stop it, apply a circular cautery around it as it is described, and some wise men have mentioned that a blister should be raised in its center, but I did not see that because I think it would become worse, and I have seen that many times.
The correct thing is to cauterize around it in a circle as we mentioned, or with multiple blisters.
Chapter 52.
On Elephantiasis.
If elephantiasis occurs in someone and it has progressed slowly, either due to the weakness of the faculties affecting it, or due to the slowness of the natural heat, if he is an old man with little blood, or due to the length of time, and you want to hasten the healing of the elephantiasis, then apply many small blisters around it, removing them.
Then leave it, for it will hasten the healing; if you want to remove the swelling with the cautery, then apply the circular cautery in this form.
And insert it in the middle of the elephantiasis until the skin is perforated and the blister is formed from what is below, so that the pus may flow out easily, then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
The Fifty-Second Chapter.
On the Ulcer of the Lip.
The ulcer, it is a putrid sore that forms on the lip, just as fire burns the dry wood. If you see an ulcer in a place where the lip meets the teeth with fire, then apply many small and large dressing pads according to what is suitable for that place where the ulcer is.
Then cauterize it from every direction until all the putrid matter is removed and none of it remains, then leave it for three days and apply the burnt alum powder mixed with oil until all the ugliness and all the putrid matter are cleared.
Then treat it with ointments that promote healthy growth, for if you see after three days that the flesh grows a sound growth without putridity in it, then do not return to the ulcerous places. You have treated the ulcer with sharp medicines.
For it takes the place of fire in quickly providing benefit, and I have mentioned its treatment with sharp medicines in the previous section, so take it from there whenever you need it.
The Fifty-Third Chapter.
On the Ulcer of the Contracted and Non-Contracted Eyelids.
This ulcer often occurs in the soles of the feet, and it is a rough thing that troubles the foot, and the ulcer therein has two aspects: either an ulcer caused by fire or an ulcer caused by sharp water.
As for the ulcer caused by fire, it is that you should apply a heated iron instrument shaped like an eagle's beak to the extent that it surrounds the ulcer from every direction, and its edge is thin, then you lower it gently onto the ulcer and move your hand with the instrument around the ulcer until the instrument reaches the depth of the ulcer.
Here is the translation:
Many things happen on the surface of the body, and it is not surprising that an instrument made from a copper tube or iron tube or a tube of Nile papyrus should be inserted into the wound or the abscess, and then the doctor should pour into the tube some of the sharp medicine.
And you hold your hand and move it slightly with the tip of your hand, so that the edge of the tube affects the base of the wound, and the sharp medicine flows into the wound, and you wait for a little while, until the effect of the sharp medicine is apparent.
Then you leave it, and the wound begins to suppurate at its roots, thus you do with each one until you reach all of them in the body, then you treat their places after the pus has been drained from the abscesses.
Chapter 54.
On the Suction of the Lip.
If a lip suffers from paralysis due to coldness or rheumatism or something else, it is necessary to cauterize four or five points on the vertebrae of the back, with one point between each vertebra and another at its base. And on his stomach, a point with the zoetary cautery, for the lip becomes numb and is relieved of the cold disease.
Chapter 55.
On the Suction of the Ulcer that Occurs in the Body.
Ulcers may occur in the body, which are caused by cold, thick, and stagnant matters, so it is necessary that at first appearance, a point should be cauterized on top of each ulcer, with a gentle touch, as if you had touched it with the edge of a nail or with a long cautery instrument or with an adhesive plaster.
And you should cauterize the pustules at their first eruption, in this manner, so that they do not increase and spread out, and their benefit is not wasted on them, unless it is necessary to do so after the pus has been drained through the incision.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
On the Treatment of Haemorrhage Occurring When an Artery is Cut.
It often happens that bleeding occurs from an artery that has been cut when a wound is exposed externally, or when a fracture or a broken bone and the like occur, making it difficult to congeal.
If any of that happens to someone, hasten to place your finger on the mouth of the artery and press it with your middle finger, and hold it firmly until the blood is constricted underneath your finger and does not come out. Then place upon it a few small and large cotton pads, and bind them on it until it becomes very tight.
Then take one, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery was cut, and lower the cotton pad onto the same vein after you have withdrawn your finger suddenly, and hold the cotton pad until the bleeding stops.
If the bleeding recurs when you lift your finger from the mouth of the artery and the cotton pad becomes soaked, take another cotton pad quickly from the prepared ones in the fire, and do not cease doing that one after another until the bleeding stops.
And be cautious not to burn the cotton pad, for there may be a need for another; and know that if blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stopped at all, unless one of four approaches is taken: either by congealing as we mentioned, or by cauterizing if it has not been ligated. For if it is ligated, its sides will be constricted and the bleeding will stop; or it may be bound with threads, a tight binding; or medicine that stops the blood and congeals it may be applied, with a strong and firm compression.
And whoever tries to stop it with a bandage or by constricting with a rope or applying burning things and the like, it will not be stopped at all except in rare cases; so if someone attempts that and does not find a doctor or medicine, let him hasten to place his middle finger on the mouth of the wound itself as we described.
Here is the translation:
The Second Gate.
In the incision, and the suturing, and the stitching, and the surgical procedures, and their like.
He said: We have previously mentioned in the first gate, every disease that can be treated with cauterization and burning, and their instruments, and pictures of the makkawi, and we made that a separate section from the head to the foot.
And I have arranged in this gate what is specific to each disease, so it is easy for the student to find what he needs.
Before I start with that, it is necessary for you to learn, my sons, that this gate contains things that are more refined than what is in the first gate concerning the diseases.
And for that reason, it is necessary for the warning to be stronger because the work in this gate is great and often involves the spilling of blood which contains the vital spirit when an artery is opened or a vein is cut, or a tumor is removed, or a surgical procedure is performed, or a limb is amputated, or an incision is made on a sensitive area, and similar things that bring about the greatest fear and danger, and often lead to death.
And I advise you about the danger of falling into what is similar to it, for it may happen to you in this profession, and some people may deceive you with various types of illnesses, so that one who has despaired of his illness and death has become certain.
The one who finds his pain severe, and his patience wears thin, and the disease reaches its final stages, which indicates death; and among them is one who conceals from you his money and deceives you with the hope of health and recovery, so it is not suitable for you to trust those who have this wicked character.
And I warn you more strongly than I encourage you and caution you, and do not proceed with anything of that unless after certain knowledge that confirms what is correct for you, and brings about the desired outcome. And employ in all your treatments a sense of awareness and warning, so that it leads to safety.
For you, in that, there is a way to acquire praise, majesty, remembrance, and commendation. May God bless you, O sons of Rashd, and may He not deprive you of goodness and success, for it is His hand; there is no god but Him.
You have fixed this chapter on what you have presented in the previous chapter from the knee to the foot, so that it may be easier for you to find what you want from it, God willing.
The First Chapter.
On the treatment of the water that gathers in the heads of babies.
This symptom often appears in babies at birth, if the womb presses on the baby's head without mercy, and it may also appear due to a hidden cause that is not recognized.
I have not seen this symptom in anyone except babies, and all those I saw among them quickly died. Therefore, I abandoned working on it, but I did see a baby whose head was full of water, and the head would swell every day. Until the baby could not bear it, his head would swell and the corruption would increase until he died.
And this corruption is either when it gathers between the skin and the bone, or when it gathers beneath the bone on the scalp. The operation for this is that if the corruption was between the skin and the bone, and the tumor was small, it would be necessary to make a single incision in the middle of the head, about a finger's width, and its length would be around two fingers, until the corruption would drain, and this is the picture of the operation.
If the corruption was more and the tumor was larger, then make two intersecting incisions in this shape:
And if the corruption was beneath the bone, and its sign was that the sutures of the head were open on every side, and the water would flow down if you pressed it with your hand inside, but do not hide that from yourself; then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head, like this shape.
After the incision, the entire abscess is evacuated, then the wounds are tightened with compresses and bandages, and the area is washed from above with soap and oil until the fifth day, then the dressing is changed and the wound is treated with ointments and medicines, without leaving the head constricted or suffocating the patient with insufficient nourishment.
Until the member is strengthened and healed, and another incision from the wound is examined to see where the bone of the tumor appears and the gathering of pus, because it may be in the back of the head, or in its front, or on the right side, or on the left.
You should direct the incision where the tumor appears to you and the pus accumulates, so you cut as much as possible while being cautious not to sever a vein, lest you cause bleeding that would kill the patient due to that hemorrhage, along with the emission of the abscess.
Chapter Two.
Cut the two arteries that are behind the known ear veins, called the temporal arteries.
When a person is afflicted with acute diseases of the eyes or chest, and that did not respond to medicinal treatment, then the treatment is to cut these two arteries.
It is necessary, if you intend to cut them, to shave the patient's head with a razor, then to wipe the area with a rough cloth to make the arteries appear, and to tighten the patient's neck with a good bandage, then to examine where the artery pulsates and its hidden position behind the ears, which is not visible except in some people.
Then, you make an incision on them with a scalpel, and cut them with a curved scissors to the bone, making that at the width of the head; if you wish, you insert the scissors from underneath the artery and cut upwards, and the length of the cut is about two fingers.
If the artery is cut off and the blood flows abundantly, it will flow to the front and pour out excessively. If it does not appear in the senses of the skin, it is necessary to feel from the sides with three fingers' width and then explore with a probe and dissect to the bone, which needs to be explored.
You extract from the blood vessels whatever is on the middle line and sometimes you extract more or less, all of that according to what appears to you from the strength of the pulse and the fullness of its arteries. Then you look at the wound if there remains something on the bone from the spongy tissue, so cut it off.
For a while, he should be treated with warm remedies, then the wound is tightened with a bandage of two pieces of cloth, and it is covered with a poultice until he recovers.
The Third Chapter.
The ligature of the two arteries in the temples.
If a person has a chronic or acute inflammation from before, due to excessive warmth and heat in the muscles of the temples, or severe chronic headache, and it was treated with various medical treatments but did not improve, we have tried in these cases to ligate the arteries from the temples or cauterize them as we described.
The method of work in ligating them is to shave the hair from the temples and intend for the visible artery in the temple, so it becomes clear to you from its pulsation, and little of what is hidden except in some people.
Or when the cold is intense, it becomes hidden from you, so stretch the skin over its place with the tip of your finger, then palpate the spot with a gentle touch or moisten the spot with warm water until the artery appears clearly and distinctly. Then take the ligature that is suitable for it. Then pass it under the skin gently until you reach the artery, then insert a cannula into it and pull it up until you extract it from the skin, and free it from the ligaments that are underneath from every side. If the artery is fine, then wrap it with the edge of the cannula. Then, cut off a part of it to the extent that its edges are separated and contracted, and do not cause any bleeding; for if you did not sever it and did not constrict it, the blood would not flow freely. Then, pour out the blood from six or seven outlets.
If the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong thread, either from a linen suture or from the tendons of the bow, so that the suppuration does not hasten to the wound before it heals, and bleeding occurs.
Then, cut the excess between the ligatures, doing that at that hour or after another time, and if you wish to fasten it to the bone with a suture of silk, until its edges are conjoined, so that this action is performed by itself or better, as we have said.
However, if the patient has a fever or a bad temperament, because the doctor's skill is necessary to prevent the putrefaction of the tissues, and it is necessary after ligating the arteries to cleanse the area with rose water and to apply the dressing that prevents putrefaction, and after the abscess forms, to treat it with poultices that soften the flesh, and by bandaging until he recovers, God willing.
If bleeding occurs during your operation from the artery, hasten to cut it off, either with a ligature or by compressing the area with a dressing and constricting your hand until the blood is stanched; for if you are not prepared for that, put your finger on it until the blood is stopped.
And compress the area with cold water until the hemorrhage is stopped and constricted as necessary, and it is easier to fasten the vein with this suture of two silk threads after you have cleaned the area with a dressing.
And insert it deeply until it reaches the bone, and constrict the vein in two places, so that its edges are separated; for it does not adhere to this ligature. And this is a picture of the suture.
The sharp scissors resemble the small forceps except that they are less sharp than the scissors, for if they were as sharp as the scissors, the flesh would be cut quickly and bleeding would not stop. But if there is some stiffness in them, it holds the vein firmly.
The flesh is cut quickly, and this action is better than any other action, and it is easier and lighter. Let the distance between the scissors be equal to the stiffness of the finger.
Chapter Four.
Treatment of a continuous flow of bloody tears from the eyes.
If the bloody tears are continuous and their flow is from the veins that are on the surface of the head from the outside, and nothing benefits them from medical treatment with medicines, and you see the face of the patient has become yellow. And he feels a numbness in his forehead like the numbness of a wasp's sting, and his eyes are troubled, having become weak and their pupils have constricted from the severity of the bloody tears, so the physicians were forced to resort to this treatment, and they called it the "Treatment by Cauterization", which is to cauterize the patient with the hair that is on his forehead.
Then, make three parallel incisions on the forehead, each incision being about two fingers long, one corresponding to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second slightly away from the movement of the muscle in the temple, and the third on the other side.
And beware of cutting the two arteries in the cheeks, and keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws, and after each incision, make a compression of three fingers together, and have with you a prepared lint or a piece of cloth to stop the bleeding.
Then, insert the sharp pointed instrument whose shape is like this. From the incision that reaches the first suture to the middle incision, and you dissect all the tissue that is between the two incisions with the periosteum that is on the bone. Then, you do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, then you exit this pocket. And you enter into the first incision also another instrument called a sharp scalpel from one side and a non-sharp scraper from the other side, and this is its shape.
And you direct the sharp side upwards towards the flesh attached to the tissue, and the non-sharp side towards the bone, and you push it until it reaches the middle incision, and with it you cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without the cutting reaching the outer surface of the tissue.
Then you do the same from the middle incision to the other incision, and after the blood flow has stopped, you compress the places where the bleeding occurred, then you put a dressing on each incision, with a compress that is wrapped in a bandage or a zinc ointment or vinegar ointment.
Perhaps a severe inflammation may occur, and on the third day, you remove the dressing and use many compresses with cold water, then you treat it with the basilic ointment and other things until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter Five.
On treating hemorrhages and fluxes to the eyes from the interior of the head.
When many severe, sharp, and constant fluxes occur to someone, and he finds his eyes diminished into small weak ones, and his sight is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated, and the eyelashes fall out. And it is in the depth of the head, and a sharp pain is felt, and a succession of feverish fits, so I knew from these symptoms that those fluxes and hemorrhages are coming from many deep roots, and the best treatment for them is this treatment, which is to order the patient to lie down on his back, then make an incision in the middle of the forehead.
And it is in the depth of the head, and a sharp pain is felt, and a succession of feverish fits, so I knew from these symptoms that those fluxes and hemorrhages are coming from many deep roots, and the best treatment for them is this treatment, which is to order the patient to lie down on his back, then make an incision in the middle of the forehead. And slightly elevate the periosteum with the elevator, separating it from the spongy bone on the left side to the spongy bone on the right side, and make the separation down to the bone, and keep your hand away from the moving tendons of the jaw when biting, until you expose the bone and suck out all the blood with the sponge.
Separate the edges of the incision with a blunt instrument or a flat scalpel, then tighten from above with the compressors, and squeeze the compressors with the bandage and the oil, so that no hemorrhage occurs, and when you have finished it and seen that the hemorrhaging tumor has stopped, it is likely that you will be able to scrape the bone until new flesh begins to grow.
Then treat it with the medicated dressing that promotes flesh growth, such as taking from the powder of roselline two parts and from the plaster four parts, and mixing them together to form a paste, which is used to promote flesh growth in wounds like these.
Chapter Six.
Treatment of what falls into the nostrils.
All that falls into the nostrils is of four types: either a mineral stone like iron and glass, or a plant-like substance like gum and lotus, and so on; or a serous fluid like water and vinegar, and their likes.
Or an animal, for when something falls into the nostrils, a fly or its kind, which does not settle in the nostrils, then incline the nostrils towards the sun's heat, and if you saw the fly moving inside, try to expel it by shaking the head or sniffing with the nose. And stop the nostrils when the asperity comes, after you have put around the nostrils a ring of silk or wool, and direct the nostrils upwards; if much comes out with this treatment, and if not, then try to expel it with a soft tube, which is like a pipe.
If you fail to remove it with a gentle and slight traction, try to extract it with a fine forceps. If it does not come out with that, make a tube from a thin wire and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the nostril.
And compress the area around the tube with a soft and greasy material so that it does not become a passage for air except through the tube, then pull strongly and repeatedly until it comes out. If it does not come out by what we have described, take one of the curved forceps or one of the straight forceps that are used to extract something from the nostrils, and insert it into the nasal passages.
After wrapping it with a tight bandage, then insert it into the nostril gently after drying the nostrils from moisture. If it does not come out by all that we have described, hasten to make an incision before inflammation or abscess occurs.
The method of incision is to make a small incision on the lateral aspect of the nose, and let out the blood according to its abundance. Then, place your fingers on the nose and bend it downwards, making a small incision at the base of the nostril in the depressed area.
And the incision should be crescent-shaped until you reach the bone, then extract it with whatever instruments are available to you. Then, quickly suture the incision from time to time, and treat it until it heals.
And if the broken thing is in the nose from one of the cavities that have grown and become inflamed, try to extract it by what we have mentioned. If it does not respond to extraction, take a thin and fine instrument of this shape.
And try to cut that type of broken cavities in the nose, and only do that if you are certain that the cavity has adhered to the nasal bone until it becomes a small cut, then extract it with a fine forceps or a gentle traction or with a scraper.
As we have mentioned, it is easy to extract it, and regarding the water inside the ear canal, it is necessary to use the curved instrument with the thin edge or a cotton swab which has been smeared with rose oil, and it is applied to those ear canals that contain the water, so it comes out with that.
And then he takes many thin fragments along the length of the fingers, and wraps them with a little fire, and inserts one of the curved instruments into the ear hole, and rotates it on the single finger from that side, and strikes with another stone against the stone that is in the ear.
He does not stop doing that with a fragment until all the water comes out, and the water may come out by taking it from the papyrus or from one of the reeds, and inserting one end into the ear, and holding the other end over the fire until it becomes red-hot, then another reed is used.
He does that repeatedly until all the water comes out, or he extracts it with a tube according to what was mentioned in the fragmentation, and regarding extracting the living thing inside it, if it is small in size like a grain of barley and its likes, he deals with it as I mentioned in the sectioning.
If its body is large and appears to the sense, he tries to extract it with the forceps and the scissors, and orders him to ease all that is stuck in the ear, and regarding extracting the generated worms in the ear, if you treat them with what we mentioned in the sectioning in the chapter on worms, and your treatment will not fail.
It is necessary to look at the ear in the sunlight, for if something of the worms appears to you, extract it with the forceps or the gentle scissors; and if nothing appears to you from them, take a tube of this shape.
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and insert the thin end into the ear to the extent that the curved instrument can tolerate, then press strongly; do that repeatedly until all the worms come out; if they do not come out for you, block around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you in the fragmentation.
If it does not come out as we mentioned, use the surgical instruments I described, which the ancients tried in killing the worms, and you will find that in the chapter on surgical instruments. It becomes a substitute for the fingers and the medications in the anus with this device, and this is its shape.
As you see, it is manufactured from a copper or tin tube with a small hole at the bottom and a wider one at the top. And if you wish, let the nozzle that is in the hollow of the tube be made of tin, firmly fixed, and if you wish, take a rod and wrap it with a tightly fitting band at its end.
Then, you insert the fingers or the scoop or whatever medications you want into the tube, and it is in the anus. Then, you insert the rod with the band from above and press with your hand, pressing moderately, until the medication reaches the bottom of the rectum and is felt.
Look, internally, and do not let what you inject into the anus be cold or hot, lest the thing that is inserted there be extremely cold or extremely hot, for the anus cannot tolerate that.
Chapter Seven.
Treatment of Obstructive Hemorrhoids in the Anus.
Some children may emerge from their mothers' wombs with their anuses not perforated.
And it may also happen to some people that an obstruction occurs in the passage of the anus due to a wound or a strong inflammation that has developed there, and this obstruction may be at the depth of the anus' hole, which is not visible to the eye.
And it may protrude slightly outside the hole and be visible to the eye, but what is inside the anus and not visible to the eye is usually more painful, and what is visible to the eye is often easier to treat by exposing the anus to sunlight. And look at it, if you saw the obstruction clearly, open it with a gentle push, and this is its shape.
Some of the symptoms are slightly limited, some of them are more severe, and some of the abscesses are hidden between the two lobes, so they do not hurt the nose; if the swelling was in the channel of the nose and had become swollen, it would be treated with a gentle press and a strong pull until all the flesh is extracted.
If the swelling was in the depth of the nose, take a gentle scalpel and gently insert it into the nostril a little, then place it in the channel of the nose; if you feel the swelling with what the patient feels from the heaviness of the smell, then cut it out with a strong pull.
And beware of injuring the nasal bone, then make an incision in the nose according to the size of the opening that has been pierced in the Egyptian method; do it whenever you are certain of avoiding the danger of the wound or take out the nasal polyp and put it in water and sprinkle sugar on it.
And use it, if you saw that the nose had become swollen and the polyp was obstructing, it is necessary to remove the polyp and replace it with another one that has been treated with rose water, until the painful swelling subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If a bleeding occurred, stop it with a cold compress or a piece of ice in cold water and apply it to the nose, and use other treatments that stop the mentioned bleeding, as explained in the chapter on stopping bleedings.
Chapter Eight.
On the treatment of ulcers that occur on the eyelids.
These ulcers that occur on the eyelids may be moist and soft, so it is necessary to treat them with a poultice or a gentle press, and to excise them from their roots, then apply sugar dust on the affected area.
If bleeding occurs from them, stop it with a gentle, lukewarm compress, and treat them better after the excision, for many times they recur if something remains of their roots, and if you cauterize with fire, those roots are eliminated and do not return.
The Ninth Section.
On the treatment of cataracts in the pupils of the eyes.
Many things appear in the pupils that resemble cataracts in their intensity and clarity.
And for this reason, it was named cataract, which is the gathering of a thick humor in the upper and lower pupils; and the operation for it is to look, and if the cataract appears obvious on the surface of the pupil, you move it away from every direction, and make it easy to split open with a lateral incision.
Then, you extract it from every side with a gentle touch until it is freed, then you lift it up with the forceps and cut it off. If you are unable to cut it off except after making an incision in the pupil, do not worry about harming the sight, for if the incision was large, you would close it with a suture until it heals.
And if it was small, do not worry about it, for the membrane will constrict it and surround it. If the cataract was inclined towards the inner surface of the pupil, you would turn over the pupil and lift up the cataract with forceps without needing to make an incision or extract it from every side.
For if you made an incision in the pupil, it would not harm anything. Then, wash the eye with salt water after cutting off the cataract, and treat the site with something that soothes until the sight is restored.
The Tenth Section.
On the treatment of pterygium that appears in the pupil of the eye.
Pterygium is a fleshy growth that occurs in the upper layers of the pupil, and it mostly affects young people, weighing down their eyes and causing them to suffer from flashes in their vision, so they are unable to gaze at the sunlight. Because the tears flow quickly to them.
And for this reason, you see them always bowing their heads and sleeping with their eyes half-closed, and their pupils are under the eyelids, moist and inflated, and the pterygium appears obvious to the observer. And when you press on the site with your fingers, you feel the pterygium between them. The method of operation is to place the patient's head in your lap.
Here is the translation:
Make a incision in the middle of that tumor at the site of the prominent nerve, an incision across and not making the incision larger than the one made for the abscess, and also deep enough so as to cut through the entire skin until it reaches the muscle.
In most cases, the muscle appears from the incision like a white fatty piece, so you grasp it with a hook that you have placed between your fingers and extract it outward, moving your hand to the right and left until it is exposed, and beware of increasing the incision lest the prominent nerve be injured by the eye.
If the muscle does not appear to you at first incision, it is necessary to increase the incision slightly with gentleness until the muscle appears, then grasp it as we have mentioned, and then insert a compress in the cavity and water, and place it on the site and bandage it firmly, and some people apply a salt poultice.
And put it in the cavity of the incision to dissolve what remains of that tumor, then treat it until it heals; if there is a suppurating wound at the site, apply the cooling compresses and bandages continuously until it heals.
The 12th Operation.
On the excision of a cataract of the eye.
If a growth appears on the eyelid, an additional layer grows over the natural one underneath, and it becomes thick, then it harms the eye and causes many diseases such as constant tearing, relaxation of the eyelids, whiteness, and opacity until it becomes a cause for blindness.
And the cataract of the eye has four aspects: either it is due to a defect in the visual spirit, or it is due to a strong disease as mentioned earlier in the chapter on spirits, or it may be that the cataract is caused by a blow or a severe impact, or by a fall, which I have mentioned.
Place the patient's head on a stone, then tilt the eyelid with your left hand. If it is tilted and not lifted, insert a thread from the lower eyelid and pass the needle through the thread from above, making it close to the eyebrow itself, and pull the thread upwards over the eyelid.
And tilt it with the roller, then make an incision in the inner canthus of the eyelid, avoiding the excess hair at the outer angle from the larger to the smaller angle. Then pass the thread and place a small pad under the eyelid made of cotton or lint, and apply pressure on the eyelid with the bandage.
Like the shape of a paper, but it is necessary that the shape be according to how much you want to lift the eyelid, because people may differ in this, and some may need to cut from the eyelid an amount suitable for how much the eyelid relaxes.
And some may need to cut less, all of that according to the relaxation of the eyelid. Then make an incision at the outer angle along the two lines you marked, and start from the larger angle to the smaller angle, and the single incision is close to the natural hairline, like the thickness of the roller.
Then insert the needle into one of the eyelid's corners, and extract it completely. Then gather the edges with a suture using a fine silk thread, and stop the bleeding, and attach what remains of the threads to the eyebrows with some adhering substances.
You should do that and not neglect it, then the suture and threads will remain for about three or four days. Then you will remove them, and if you leave the wound without a suture and remove what gathers and constricts, the eyelid will rise at the time of healing and gathering, and the suture is better.
This method from the operation I mentioned earlier, except that there is a difficulty on the eyelid, and it is one of the best works with no danger in it. And another method in the operation is to apply pressure on the eyelid in a shape like a paper, as we described. The flap is elevated with three sutures, which are either dispersed or gathered in this manner:
Then the excess of the flap is cut off with a small scissors according to this figure, cutting with precision.
If you cannot hold the sutures and do not have someone to assist you, take a needle with a thread and insert it in the middle of the shape, then insert another thread near the larger wound and a third thread near the smaller wound, and gather the threads between your fingers with precision, then lift them with your hand, lifting with precision.
And elevate the entire flap as we have described, then gather the edges of the wound with sutures and adhere them until it heals. If a sanguineous or yellowish tumor appears during your cutting or incision, apply a cooling medicine to that tumor, and remove it from the cicatrizing medicines.
And it may happen that the lower flap also needs to be reversed, so you should use what we have mentioned about cutting and suturing and trimming with the nail or with the sharp medicine, and warning about the severity of cutting and suturing, and reducing the damage from cutting and suturing in both of them.
Trimming with a scalpel is done in this manner: you reverse the flap and make an incision from the inside according to what we have described, then create two fine sutures or two thin threads along the length of the flap and their width is less than the width of the incision.
And you cut at their edges from both sides, where the threads are gathered, then gather them gently on what remains of the eye's flap, and tighten the sutures from both sides with firmness and tightness, and leave it for a while, for the tightened flap will congeal, become black, and fall out.
Until it falls out by itself, then apply a compress with the compressor, and adhere to it until it heals. If the flap rises and does not adhere to the eye's edges, this is an image of the sutures made in this shape and this size in length and width specifically:
The Twelfth Section.
On removing the ingrown nail from the eye with a needle.
If it is a hair or two hairs, the work in that is to take a fine needle and insert into it a thread of fine silk, then gather its ends and tie them with a very delicate knot, and let the length of the thread be about a finger.
Then, you fix another fine thread beneath the first one in the tongs and tie its ends if possible, then you place the patient's head on a stone and let it be near the sun so that the work is visible, for it is a delicate task. Then, you insert the needle into the tongs at the base of the excess hair.
And you extract it with the tongs by force until you remove it from above the natural hair, then you pull the thread up to above the tongs and insert into the tongs that hair, if it was one or two or three, no more.
Then, you pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the tongs in the forceps along with the natural hair. If you pulled the tongs and the hair did not come out with it, you pulled the tongs down to the bottom by the thread that you had fixed in it until the tongs came out of the upper hole.
Then, you return the hair to its place and pull it out, doing that until it is elevated in the upper hole and you see it in the eye. Then, you release the tongs and the thread and take them out, and bandage the eye and leave it for two or three days until the hair settles in its place and the flesh grows over it.
If the hair is short, then you can add to it a long hair from the natural hair, so that it rises with it. Alternatively, you leave it until it grows longer after a period of time, and then you raise it.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
On the treatment of the laceration that occurs in the upper eyelid.
The laceration that is exposed to this kind of injury is called "arnubiya" and this laceration is either natural or traumatic, and the traumatic one occurs due to a blow, a fall, or something similar.
The method of treatment is to split the blow, separate the edges, and place a piece of cloth between them, which is attached with a bandage until it heals. It is not advisable to use constricting devices in its treatment.
If you do that, the laceration will worsen, but if you use relaxing remedies such as a poultice and a dressing with rose water in which has been added a few threads of cotton, and apply it gently, it will be treated.
And the key to its treatment is to use every trick so that it does not adhere to the original shape it was in, and this method we mentioned is only for repairing the laceration, not for restoring the place to its original condition.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
On the treatment of the lacerations that occur in the lower eyelid.
These lacerations that occur from accidents are truly called "lacerations" and are either natural or traumatic, and the traumatic ones occur due to a blow, a fall, or something similar.
The method of treatment is to take a needle with a thread and insert it into the flesh, then pass it from one edge to the other, until the thread becomes embedded in both sides of the flesh, then you stretch the flesh over the needle and cut it with a thin scalpel.
If the shape of the eyelid does not return to what is desired, then take a instrument and place it on the site of the laceration, and rotate the eyelid with it, and make two incisions in the inner aspect of the eyelid, and the edges of the incisions will be at an angle from the cutting edge that was cut, until they meet, forming an angle. When they gathered together to resemble its shape in this form:
It is the Greek letter Lambda. Then, you dissect the muscle to the extent that the sharp edge of the wound is below where the splint is applied. Then, gather the scattered parts with two sutures, sutured with a soft suture, and treat it with the mentioned medications until he recovers.
If the wound was exposed from a crack or a suture or a stitch, it is necessary to make a simple incision without shaving the hair of the surrounding area, as previously mentioned, and then separate between the lips with a splint as mentioned.
The method of treatment for the wound, whether it is from above or from below, should be carried out according to what is apparent to you from the appearance of the wound, as it may have many differences in form, and the clever craftsman will manage the trick in any way possible.
So that it returns to its natural shape or approaches it, and the same disease guides you on what is suitable for it from the work and the instrument in most cases.
Chapter Fifteen
On the adhesion of the eye splint with the collyrium or with the salve.
This adhesion may appear to many people that the upper splint adheres to the whiteness of the eye, preventing it from easy movement and obstructing its natural functions, so it is necessary to insert a smooth side under the splint.
And raise it upwards or extend it with a thin plate, then cut the adhesion with a gentle touch that is not a severe cut, but rather a slight one, so that you do not irritate the eye when working, and the cutting should be as if you were dissolving that adhesion.
And stop until the splint returns to its natural shape and the adhesion is completely healed, then instill in the eye a milky liquid that is cooled with it or poured into it from the tube of the silver irrigator, then separate between the splint and the eye with a clean cloth.
Here is the translation:
The Sixteenth Chapter.
On the incision of the nail and the treatment of the nails' humors.
The nail may be of two types, either it is nervy, resembling a thin, rough, solid white skin, or it is not nervy, resembling a hard, white, compact pustule; if the iron touches it or the scalpel cuts it, it becomes separated.
And it is not fixed with a scalpel, and both types, they only start from the larger vein to the point where they become very thin, until the sight is obscured and the light of the eye is blocked, and the purpose of the work in cutting it is that the doctor places his finger on the stone.
Then he opens his eyes and raises the eyelid with his hand, then he takes the nail with a small scalpel, bending it, and extends it upwards, then he takes a needle and inserts a hair from the horse's or cow's tail, and threads it strongly, and bends the tip of the needle slightly, and implants it in the middle of the nail.
And he pierces it with the needle, and ties the nail with the thread, and extends it upwards, and pulls it out by the hair towards the side of the nail that is near the vein, as if you are pulling it out with the hair to its end, then he cuts the remainder at the base of the vein with a small lancet or a small scissors, and leaves the natural humor of the vein.
Perhaps he will be shown to remove the persistent bloody discharge, and has extended the nail with the scalpel alone or with the thread as we have mentioned, then he pulls it out with a smooth lancet at the tip of the nail, this is its form.
And he should avoid touching the lancet to the corneal membrane, lest it causes a perforation and damages the vein; then, after the incision, he applies to the eye something from rose water or from zinc ointment, and leaves it until another day, then treats it with what is suitable until it heals.
If the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert a needle into it or fasten a suture, it is often necessary to treat this type of nail with medicaments as described in the section on surgical operations. And if you want to amputate it, open the eye of the scalpel.
Take a curvedscalpel, slightly blunt at the point, like this shape. Scrape the nail from above with a gentle scrape, and if you see that it becomes loose and separates, and only the scraping remains in your eye from the scalpel of the needle-like instrument or the red scalpel or a polished and sharpened one, and fix your eye until the last day.
Then, return to working on it until all of it goes away. But if you encounter a stubborn resistance in the eye and a painful swelling occurs, leave it and treat the painful swelling until it heals. Then, return to working on it with the scalpel until it heals, and do not neglect to cure the surrounding tissue.
If the surrounding tissue harms the eye, make a ligation on that tissue with a suture and cut off some of it, but do not make a deep incision lest it cause bleeding, then cauterize the bleeding with the red scalpel or the needle-like instrument until it heals.
Chapter Seventeen.
On excision of the pterygium and what grows from the superfluous flesh in the eye.
It may grow in the eyes of some people a red, fleshy tissue that overgrows until it covers the pupil or approaches it or presses on the eyelids, and perhaps the eyelids are turned outward and resemble a cluster of grapes.
The operation for it is to place the scalpel's head on a stone, then open his eyes and grasp that entire red flesh with suitable forceps.
Or hold it with a hook or a small forceps, then cut the first flesh, and continue cutting until you have removed all of it by cutting, and be cautious not to harm the eye during the operation. Your cutting should be either with the curved scalpel we described in the section on nail cutting, or with a small scissors. The thread is cut according to the shape it takes on the wound in this gate.
If you have cut and the bleeding has stopped, then apply a gentle pressure with a clean cloth or a compress of rose water and a little of the cooling medications, and place it on the eye from the outside with a white cloth to prevent the hot swelling.
If there remains some bleeding and the blood overflows and the hot swelling increases, then leave the eye alone and treat it with what calms the swelling, then return to it with the operation until it recovers. And likewise, remove the excess flesh that appears in the eye from this type.
It is necessary for you to avoid treating every weak eye by cauterization or by exposing it to operation with iron, and do not insert your hand in any of these actions until you see that the member is capable of enduring that work.
Chapter Eighteen
The removal of the cataract from the eye.
The cataract is a blood vessel that grows on the eye, obstructing the sight and weakening the eye over time. It is necessary for you to consider first if the eye in which there is a cataract is strong and does not have another disease besides the cataract.
So, the removal is that you order the assistant to place his head on a stone, then tie those vessels with one ligature or two, according to your skill, and make the ligatures gentle and smooth in this manner.
Or they are two ligatures joined together in one body, like this shape:
Then, you remove with a gentle scissors those vessels with gentleness and wipe away the blood until you see that the eye has cleared of those vessels and the blood has been evacuated. And be cautious not to harm the eye with the edges of the scissors, and let your work be at noon, avoiding the sun.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
The surgeon should place his hand on the abdomen and palpate gently until he feels the liver, without pressing hard or making a sudden movement, so that the patient does not feel pain or discomfort.
Then cut with the forceps what exceeds on the eyelid from above and below until none of it remains except in the canthus, so that you may be able to lift it from the canthus, and then you will find it easier. It is better, and some people may even prefer it.
If you have cut it, let the place of the cut be clean, and apply a dressing, and bandage it to prevent the flow of pus, then return to work on it.
Chapter 19
On the reduction of the fracture of the nose.
The physicians call the fracture of the nose 'naso-ra', if you treat it with a compress or with a strong and harsh medicine, according to what has been mentioned and described, and it does not heal, there is no trick in it except to make an incision on the abscess when it becomes ripe, and to extract all the pus that is in it.
Until the bone is exposed, and if you expose the bone and see a defect or a depression in it, then scrape it with an instrument of this shape:
And they call the instrument 'al-khashnah' for scraping the head, made from Indian iron, and its head is curved like a polo stick, with a fine engraving on it, like that of a file or a rasp. You place it on the site of the defect in the bone, then move it between your fingers, and you hold your hand firmly until you feel that the defect has been smoothed out.
And do that repeatedly, then bind the site with a drying and constricting medication. If you do that, the site will heal, and flesh will grow in it, and the wound will close, and forty days will pass without any change, nor suppuration, nor any incident happening to it.
It is already known that if it is not possible, then there is no way except to return the nasal bone to its hole in this manner, and that is to expose the second bone with the iron or the sharp medicine. If you expose the bone, take a scalpel in this form.
Make the edge of the instrument triangular and its tip conical, directed to the side as you see, then place it on the bone itself, and make that near the joint and a little further from the eye. Then insert your hand with the scalpel until it reaches the bone and feels the smoothness.
So that the air comes out of it, when you hold your hand on his nose, then press the spot with the absorbent medicine as I taught you. If the flesh grows and the place becomes solid, then the matter that was protruding outside returns to its nose, and that will be easier on the patient, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
Removing the Eye.
If you remove the eye with its whole socket and no damage occurs in the optic nerve, it is hoped that the patient will be relieved, then you should bandage the hollow of the orbit, and put a dressing in the cavity without any pressure or tightness.
Then you should put on the eye a dressing made of borax, rose water, and lavender oil, and then fasten the eye from above on the compress with many benefits. The benefit of the compress is that it takes away the pain and inflammation, and each piece of it should be divided into four parts, making many of them.
Then you should put one on top of another according to the need of the eye, then fasten them with a strong compress, and repeat the dressing with the ointment without pressure, then remove the dressing and leave the eye bandaged for a day and a night.
If the conjunctiva has relaxed during that, it is hoped that it will be well-fastened. Then remove the compress after a day and a night, as we said. If you see that the eye has returned to its normal state, then repeat the compress, dressing, fastening, and bandaging until it recovers.
The Section on Hernias and Ruptures.
On the Excision of the Tonsils.
If a hernia appears in the tonsil area and it swells and protrudes outside the jawbone, resembling a tonsil, and it disturbs the human appearance, I have decided to excise it, and I will describe the operation for it.
And it is that you insert a needle at the base of the tonsil from below upwards, then you insert another needle with a thread like a loop from the side of the jaw and pull it through, leaving the first needle in its place.
Then you cut the place of the looped thread and tie some of the tonsil around the needle, and pull it strongly, then you remove the needle and apply a compress with egg white and sugar on the eye, and leave it until the threads come out with the tonsil, then you treat the eye with what soothes it.
Until the wound heals, and you fasten the tonsil from every side with a circle of sutures until the eye is well, then you apply a gentle compress that reaches to the edge of the eye, so the egg white discharge flows out and the eye subsides, and you bandage it on the cheek, and fasten it until it heals.
The Second Section on Ruptures.
On the Treatment of Varices.
This disease, which is called a varix, is a vein that accumulates in the eye, resembling a descending water, but it is not so; and the method of operation for this is to sit on a chair, upright, then take its head with your hands from both sides.
And you shake it until you see the vein descending to the bottom of your eye, then you steady yourself and do not move, and the light is released and the patient sees things as he used to, and if it does not descend to the bottom, we know that it is water, for it did not flow down with what we mentioned.
Then, sit the patient between your hands, and take a thin scalpel, and make a small incision above the corneal membrane at the point where the conjunctiva connects to the corneal membrane in the corner of the eye, until the material comes out.
Then, if only a small amount of humor comes out of the eye, either a humor that has been mixed with vitellus or one that has been thickened with albumen and vitellus, then treat it with gentle treatment until it recovers.
Chapter 23.
We have mentioned the types of humor in the division, and which one is suitable for descent with a clear and explanatory speech, so take it from there and consider it as correct. Then, you should sit the patient between your hands, facing the light near the sun.
And grasp his healthy eye firmly, then raise the eyelid of that eye with your left hand if the eye containing the humor is the left eye, or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then, place the point of the scalpel near the corner of the eye, at the weakest point of the white of the eye, and push the scalpel with force, and you direct it with your hand until it reaches into the white of the eye, and you feel with the scalpel that it has reached a empty space.
And it is necessary to direct the scalpel's movement according to the depth of its penetration, which is from the superficial part to the end of the blackness, that is, the corner of the eye, for the doctor sees in himself the gaze of the eye looking at the clarity of the corneal membrane. Then, you direct the scalpel upwards to the spot where the humor is.
Then, you press it downwards little by little, and if the humor flows out of its container, then the patient sees what has been opened for him from his container and the scalpel in his eye, and he feels a little relieved. If the humor flows upwards, then you settle it back again without withdrawing the scalpel.
If the cataract has settled and does not rise, then extract it gently with your hand, little by little, and dip it in water mixed with a small amount of salt and rose water, and wash it from the inside of the eye, then place something cool or soothing outside the eye.
Take a white wax and melt it, and bind it with the healthy eye, and we and our contemporaries used to put on it a melted wax with the white of an egg, for if the cataract does not allow entrance into the eye because of its hardness, as some people's eyes are very hard. You should take the instrument which is called the elevator, whose shape is this:.
Pierce through the conjunctiva only and do not look at the piercing, but rather make a slight incision for the cataract, then introduce the cataract as we mentioned, and when you finish your operation, lie down in a dark room on your back with your eyes bandaged.
And abstain from all movements and sneezing, and make his diet what is easy for him by nature, and do not let him move his head to the right or left, and keep the dressing in place until the third day, then remove it in that dark room and examine his vision.
And then remove the dressing on the seventh day, and it is not fitting to do that at the time of treatment or after the operation, but rather it is fitting to avoid that before the water rises quickly with severe inflammation.
If there appears a severe inflammation, it is fitting to remove the dressing before the seventh day and treat it with what alleviates the inflammation until it subsides, then you examine his vision and put on a bandage that protects his eye from below, while he is in that dark room.
He leaves the room gradually and takes care of himself, and know that the operation is not to be neglected by the practitioner regarding frequent visits, then he presents himself for work, and I have been informed by some Iraqi physicians that they mentioned that they perform the operation in Iraq with a tube that absorbs the water.
I have not seen anyone in our land do that, nor have I found it in a book from the ancient writings. It is possible that it may be an innovation, and this is an image of various types of surgical instruments to rely on in its clarification.
It is made from special copper and its end is of this shape, with an edge like a sharp pointed tip.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of abscesses in the nostrils.
There can be various abscesses in the nostrils, including one that resembles a scorpion's tail with many legs, and among them are carcinomatous ones that penetrate to the bone and others that are not carcinomatous but do not penetrate to the bone.
If one of these abscesses is not carcinomatous and not painful, it should be treated by sitting in the sun with your hands opposite it, and opening its orifice and inserting a scalpel into those abscesses, then extracting them to the outside, and cutting what is adhering from it with a fine, sharp, one-edged instrument.
Until you learn that the entire abscess has gone, but if some of it remains and you cannot cut it out completely, then scrape it with a fine instrument, being careful not to leave any of it behind, lest you be overcome by bleeding or inflammation or severe pain.
Then deal with it as is necessary, or if it was one of the malignant tumors, then hasten to remove it until the bleeding stops and all the abscesses disappear, then insert a tube into the nostril after the incision, whether an irrigator or a syringe, so that you open up the nostrils and drain out the pus to the throat.
But if you find that it has not healed, and the pus is not draining as it should, then know that there is a hidden abscess in the upper part of the bone that the instrument did not reach with the incision, so then it is necessary to take a thread from a probe that has some thickness.
He forms in it many knots and makes between each knot a finger or less, and he leaves the end of the thread at the tip of his nose with a subtle touch or what is possible for him after he has formed it like a ring and pulls it gently until he reaches the bone.
And he brings out the loop and often does like this action, which is a simple thing in the books, and it is an easy matter for whoever wants it. Then he gathers the two ends of the thread, one that came out of the mouth and the other that remained in the nose.
Then he uses to spread the flesh with the knots that are in the thread, doing that until he learns that the flesh has been cut by the knot of the thread. Then he brings out the thread and presses on the nose after wiping away the blood, and he does that for three days or more.
Until he eats away all that remains of the flesh, then he presses finally on the nose, a tube of silver or ivory, until he recovers. If he needs treatment, he should use it.
And this is an image of the instrument that injects the medications and drugs into the nose:.
He puts a small, open, silver or copper funnel-shaped instrument, with its end curved similarly.
And if you want to make the tube polished like a reed and the instrument's surface is smooth.
It has a ring at its end, as you see, to hold it if you want to pour the medication or what you want of the liquids or oils.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On the nasal polyps at the end of the nose.
Many times, a growth forms at the end of the nose, a bone-like thing that increases with the days until it obstructs the vision.
And therefore, it is necessary to remove it at its first appearance and to extract its entirety, then to apply to the site either cauterization or the dissolving medicine that takes the place of cauterization. If you neglect to remove it until it becomes hard, then look, for it was a hard, solid, blackish thing with little sensation.
If you do not excise it with the iron, it will be a malignant tumor and I have seen many cases of this type of tumor that have caused great suffering to their owners, and although the tumor is soft and fleshy, I have found that excision can be done in its entirety. You should hasten to remove the limb and cut it off without hesitation or delay, and treat the stump with what will dry it and constrict it until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On the surgical treatment of the nose, lip, and ears. If you separate the connections from a wound or something similar, know that when separation of connections occurs in one of these joints, it reduces what can be done to work on it, except in some people.
When you find that something like this has been shown, look and see if the wound is fresh with its blood; then bring the edges of the wound together with sutures and treat it until it heals. And if the separation of connections has separated them and each part is in its correct position, it is necessary to sew up each part with a visible suture on the surface until it is concealed.
Then bring the edges together with sutures and tighten them, and apply compresses and bandages, securing them with adhesive plaster or other types of sticky plasters, and leave it constricted for two or three days, then remove it.
And change the medication and leave it until the sutures drop off by themselves, then treat it with ointment until it heals. The method of suturing is to bring together the separated connections either with a needle as we described in suturing the abdomen, or with thread as I have shown you there.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the extraction of knots that form on the sutures.
Many people have small, hard tumors inside their lips that resemble a grain of barley, some of which are smaller and others larger; it is necessary to split the lip and dissect each node, and to ligate them with a thread.
And cut them from every direction, then pack the area after cutting with a pledget of lint until the bleeding stops, and apply compresses and treat the areas with what is needed to prevent the wounds from becoming infected.
Chapter 28.
On excising redundant flesh in the gums.
Many times, redundant flesh grows on the gums, which is called "ulcers" by Abulcasis; it is necessary to ligate it with a thread or to grasp it with a forceps and to cut it at its base, then to leave the area for a time until the discharge or blood stops, and then to apply a pledget of lint to the area.
Or one of the constricting medications that dry out the flesh, for if you return to treating that flesh after it has grown back, it often returns again, and that is why it does not come back after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
On extracting teeth with iron instruments.
It may happen that rough, tartar-like deposits gather on the surfaces of teeth, from the inside and outside, between the gums, which can turn black, yellow, or green, until they cause corruption to the gums and spoil the teeth, for that reason.
It is necessary to scrape the tartar with your fingers and a stone, and to extract the tooth that appears to you to have deposits and stains resembling clay, until nothing of it remains, and likewise you should do with black, green, yellow, and other (deposits) until it becomes clean.
For if the deposits that were on it from the first extraction remain, then you should repeat the extraction on another day and a third, until you reach your goal in what you want. And know that the tooth requires different instruments of various shapes according to what is needed for the work.
For the vein that is stripped from the inside, unlike the one that is stripped from the outside, and the one that is stripped between the branches, in another way, and these are several types of stripping that you will encounter.
Chapter Thirty.
The Extraction of Teeth.
You should treat the vein with all skill and caution, and avoid breaking it, for if you break it, it will not be behind, since it is a noble and precious thing, until it does not become bad unless its breaking is necessary.
You should be cautious if the patient insists on extracting it, to reassure him until he feels comfortable about the painful vein. Many times the patient is deceived and thinks that the painful vein is the correct one to be extracted, then the pain does not go away until the diseased vein is extracted; we have seen that happen many times with the actions of the surgeons.
If the painful vein is sound in itself, then it is necessary to make an incision around the tooth with a small amount of strength until you free the gum from every side, and then move it with your fingers or the fine forceps, little by little, until you expose it.
Then you grasp it at that point, firmly holding the large forceps, and the patient's head is between your thighs, having been secured so as not to move, then you pull the vein in a straight line, lest you break it; if it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it underneath from every side with gentleness and movement, as you did previously.
And if the vein is curved or twisted, it is necessary to fill that hole with a compress and tighten it tightly with a thin, smooth-edged instrument, lest it slips away when you grasp it with the forceps, and it is necessary to make an incision around the gum from every side, nicely.
Preserve your effort to avoid breaking it, and leave some of it to return to the weak spot, for it is greater than the first encounter. And beware that you do not create what the wound creators do in their profession, and be cautious in their use, lest they employ what we have described.
They often happen to people with great harm, which is that the vein is cut and its roots are completely or partially severed. And if the bone of the jaw is fractured, as we have seen many times, and then becomes fixed with a dressing or with vinegar and salt, if bleeding occurs from that place, it often happens, so apply something from the bandage and attach it to the spot.
And if the bandage does not benefit you, make for yourself a gentle, smooth, and short splint with a soft grip, so that it does not hurt when you apply it to the vein. And this is the picture of the major splints.
It should be as you see, soft in its grip, so that when you apply it, it does not hurt itself or become short in its extremities. And let it be made of Indian iron or of forged steel, with smooth extremities and at its end a hook that enters into another, so that it grips firmly and tightly.
And the extremities should be made like the file's teeth, so that they are also strong in their grip.
The Sharp and the Blunt.
In the extraction of roots of teeth and in pulling out fractured jawbones.
If the root of the tooth remains when it is cut, it is necessary to apply a dressing with wax for a day or two until the area becomes relaxed, then you can insert the splint or the forceps. Those that resemble the bird's beak, which is called the Pelican, and this is the picture of the forceps.
You have made it like a scalpel from the inside or like an elevator, so you should not be forced to exit with these instruments. It is necessary that you perforate on the origin and expose all the flesh with the incision, then insert the instrument that resembles a small needle, which is its shape.
The short instrument is slightly curved and not straight, so it does not bend, but rather exits the origin with that, and otherwise you rely on these other instruments, which are their shape. The first is a triangle-shaped instrument, having some curvature in it.
A figure of another triangular instrument:.
And we also rely on this instrument with two claws, which is also its shape.
And besides these instruments and the tools that we mentioned earlier in the section on sutures, we also rely on this instrument that resembles a large forceps, which is its shape.
The triangular instrument with a curved tip, slightly curved so it does not bend, and is not straight. And know that the instruments of sutures are numerous, as well as other instruments that cannot be enumerated, and the clever craftsman who makes them according to what his work and diseases themselves guide him to invent instruments.
Because among the diseases, there are those that did not mention their instruments earlier due to the variation of their types, so if a bone is broken in the jaw or one of the facial bones, or it is dislocated, you should open on it in its position with what is suitable for it from these instruments and the instruments mentioned earlier in extracting the origins.
And we rely on a scoop with this shape:.
It has some curvature slightly to adjust to the bone so it does not slip until the bone is extracted, and we dress the location with suitable medications for that. If there is a rotten bone, we cleanse it from its rot and dirt until it becomes pure, then we treat it until it heals.
The 32nd Chapter.
On the treatment of fresh and recent wounds.
Wounds, if they are not on their natural site, are deformed by that, and it is even more so if it occurs in women and children, for it is necessary to consider, since a wound may be situated behind another wound.
And it is not possible to treat it, nor can its border be seen, and if it adjoins another wound, it should be treated with this method which has been described.
It resembles a small scissors and is made of sharp Indian steel, its edge being very sharp, and it should be used to cut on many days for the purpose of scraping the wound, and it will not tremble or hesitate with other wounds; and if it is necessary to treat a wound that has become putrid, it is broadened by a file from India, and this is its shape.
It is entirely made of Indian steel, and its edge is very sharp, being like the file with which the needles are made; it is used to treat the wound little by little on many days, gradually, so that the wound does not tremble, then it is cleansed thoroughly and dressed with some of the medicaments.
And if a wound has become bent and some of it has become crooked, it hurts the tongue when speaking, so it is necessary to treat it also until the curvature of that bend is corrected and it becomes straight, and it does not hurt the tongue and does not disturb speech.
The 33rd Chapter.
On the stitching of movable wounds with silver or golden threads.
If the wound is of a tender nature, it trembles and moves away from the blow or fall, and the doctor cannot apply pressure on something that can be eaten, so that it may not suppurate, and it should be treated with astringent medicines, for it will not benefit from treatment.
The trick in it is to use a thread of gold or silver, and gold is better because silver becomes tarnished and decays after a few days, while gold remains as it is forever, without being affected by that, and the thread should be moderate in the wound and tightened according to what fits between the edges.
The method of stitching is to take the thread and pass it between the sound edges, then sew with the ends of the thread between the moving edges, one or more, until you reach the sound edge on the other side.
Then you return the stitching to the side from which you started, and tighten your hand with gentleness and precision until the wound does not open, and your tightening of the thread is at the roots of the edges so that it does not come loose. Then you cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors, and gather them together, and tie them with a knot, and hide them between the sound edge and the moving edge.
So that the tongue does not get in, then you leave it like this, bound as it is, for if it comes loose or gets cut, you can tighten it with another thread, and so it remains like this for a long time. And this is the picture of the edges and the form of the stitching on two sound edges and two moving edges, as you see.
And sometimes one or two edges, after they have fallen into their place, are stitched as we described and remain. And it is the skilled craftsman who does that, perhaps he will carve a piece of bone from the bones of an animal, making it in the form of the edge, and placing it in the position from which the edge went. And he tightens as we said, and it remains, and he enjoys that.
Chapter 34.
On cutting the ligament that appears under the tongue, which hinders speech.
This ligament that appears under the tongue may be either a natural one, born with the human being, or an acquired one resulting from a wound that has healed.
Operate by making an incision in the upper arm and dissecting down to the bone, then cut through the neural cord transversely until the tongue is freed from its constraint. If there is some stiffness or complexity and that is due to the plication of a wound, apply a compress and incise transversely until the neural cord is cut and the knot is released.
Beware that the incision is not in the depth of the flesh, lest you cut a blood vessel there and bleeding occurs. Then, apply compression with rose water or vinegar and cold water, then put under the tongue a piece of cloth soaked in rose water, which is to be held by the upper arm every night.
If the bleeding recurs, apply a zinc oxide paste to the site, and if the blood overflows, stop it with a cotton pad and tighten the site with a compressive bandage. Then, treat him with gentle treatment until he recovers.
Chapter 35.
On extracting the tonsils that have developed under the tongue.
It may happen that under the tongue a swelling occurs, similar to small tonsils, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, and perhaps it becomes so large that it fills the mouth. The operation involves making an incision in the upper arm at the level of the swollen area and examining it.
If you find it to be a black, hard, and unyielding swelling that the upper arm does not sense, do not touch it, for it is a malignant tumor. If it inclines towards whiteness and has moisture in it, apply a compress and incise it with a delicate scalpel, and free it from all sides.
If blood overflows during the operation, apply a zinc oxide paste to stop the bleeding, then return to the operation until you complete it successfully, and finally, apply compression with vinegar and salt.
Then, we should choose the treatment that is most suitable for it until he recovers.
Chapter 36.
On the Treatment of Cancer of the Breast.
And what grows in the throat from other tumors that may appear inside the throat, glands resembling the glands that appear outside, called luzzetin. If it is treated with what I mentioned in the section, it does not recover.
So, if the tumor is hard like a stone with little sensation, do not touch it with the iron. And if it is red in color and has a dense consistency, do not touch it with the iron as well, lest the blood flows out. Rather, leave it until it ripens, either to be opened or to burst by itself.
And if it is white in color, protruding, and has a thin consistency, this is the one that should be cut off. The operation for it is that you should examine before operating whether the tumor has penetrated to the surrounding tissue completely or partially.
So, sit the patient in a sunny place, and position him on a stone or a chair, and open his mouth and take a small knife between your fingers, and insert it into his throat in this shape.
Make it from silver or copper, thin like a scalpel. If you insert it between the tongue and show the tumor to your gaze, and it falls under your gaze, take a scraper and insert it into the affected part, and pull it out to the outside as much as possible without pulling out any of the surrounding tissues with it.
Then, cut it with an instrument in this shape, resembling scissors, but its two ends are curved, each one opposite the other, sharp and pointed. Make it from Indian steel or Damascene iron.
If you do not have this instrument, then cut with a single-edged knife in this shape.
A fracture on one side and not sharp on the other, so after cutting one of the clavicles, cut the other in this type of cutting, then after cutting, inject the affected area with cold water or vinegar and water.
If the patient has a severe hemorrhage, inject cold water to congeal it, or use rose water, pomegranate skin, or other astringents until the bleeding stops, and then treat it until he recovers. And if there are other tumors in the throat besides the clavicle, cut them as I mentioned earlier for cutting the clavicle.
And I treated a woman who had a tumor that grew inside her throat, which touched the trachea, little sensation, and nearly blocked the throat. The woman was panting from a narrow passage and was unable to eat or drink.
And she was on the brink of death, if she had stayed like that for a day or two, and the tumor had risen from it until it touched the nostrils of her nose. So I hastened to perform the surgery, then I inserted a scalpel into one of them, and pulled it out, extracting a sound piece.
Then I cut it where I reached it through the nostril, then I did the same with what appeared from the other nostril. Then I opened her mouth and held her tongue back, then I inserted the scalpel into the tumor itself and cut some of it, and only a little blood flowed.
The woman's throat was cleared, and she hastened to drink water from that hour, then she regained her appetite. We did not cease to cut that tumor for a long period of time, until it eventually disappeared, and the tumor would recur in place of what was cut, until it finally subsided, and that was it.
I treated the tumor inside the throat with great difficulty, until I stopped the growth. Then I was relieved from the task and did not know what God did to it afterwards.
Chapter 37.
On incising and draining of abscesses.
When an abscess points to a certain place and has made its way to the surface, and was white, flat and broad, it is called a "pillar". If it was hard, round and projecting, it is called a "kernel". If you treat it with what we have mentioned in the section on incision, the treatment will not be successful.
I have seen a hot abscess that has settled in it, and was thin, so it is feared to incise it, and there was no rounded gathering in it, nor was it long, and it was red or black or had no sensation, so it is feared to cut into it.
It is necessary to make an incision on the affected part, and it is feared that if you see it in the condition I mentioned earlier, from its whiteness and length, you should seat the patient with his back to the sun, and bind his finger with a ligature, then describe the abscess, and then insert the scalpel into the kernel.
And pull it downwards and incise it with one of the two instruments I mentioned in cutting the aposteme, and it is necessary not to cut more than what exceeds the natural condition without excess, for if you cut more, you will harm the sound and the speech.
Then, after the incision, use what we have described in cutting the aposteme, and treat it until it heals. If the patient is afraid of the incision, it is necessary to use cunning in encouraging him without fear or caution, and direct his attention to the fact that it is a minor operation, and it is only by placing the patient's head on your thigh.
Then, bind his finger with the ligature I mentioned, then take from the sharp water that I mentioned in the chapter on encouragement, and mix it with a non-desiccating poultice, and make it neither thick nor thin, and fill it with this instrument, and its shape is like this.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Take your hand with the medicine and rub it on the affected area for about half an hour until you see it has turned black, and if you wish to take a piece of cloth, wrap it around the tip of the instrument and dip the cloth into the medicine.
And insert the instrument with the cloth into a tube from above until the cloth adheres to the affected area, do that repeatedly until you achieve what you want from the abscess. Then leave it, and it will suppurate and rupture after three or four days. If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it.
And after the abscess, rub around it with a cloth soaked in rose-water and remove what is around it from the medicine. Then, apply cold water compresses and treat it from the outside with bandages and from the inside with gargling, until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than surgical incision and farther from danger.
And the affected area can also be treated with what is milder than the abscess and surgical incision, treating it with fumigation in this manner: take lavender, rose, vitriol, and borax, and other similar things from the medicines, and gather all or some of them in a container and immerse them in vinegar.
And boil the container, sealing it with a tin of wisdom, and place in the middle of the covering a tube attached to the receiver, made from silver or copper.
And insert the end with the pipe into the mouth of the receiver until the vapor rises to the affected area through the tube, so that it reaches the affected area well. Then repeat it several times until it suppurates, and be careful to apply this treatment at the beginning of the tumor's occurrence.
For it often increases in the tumor, and it is better to do that when the tumor is still soft. If you don't have this instrument, take a copper tube and attach a silver or gold capsule to its end, so that it does not touch the mouth of the receiver.
Because the membrane of the egg is too delicate to bear the vapor that evaporates from the mouth, and this is one of the good treatments with its safety.
Chapter 38.
On extracting the shafts and what is implanted in the throat from other than that.
Many things become implanted in the throat, a bone or a fish shaft or something else, and it is necessary to extract from it what was apparent, which falls under the gaze after the tongue is pressed with the instrument at sunrise.
Let it be clear to you what is in the throat, and what has not appeared to you, and it becomes disordered in the throat, it is necessary to relieve the pain before its flavor settles in his stomach, for perhaps the ascending matter will come out through the mouth or the pain will be alleviated by a piece of food or an original remedy.
Or it alleviates a morsel of dry bread or takes a piece of soft sea sponge, and then binds it with a thread, then inserts it, and if it reaches the place of the fish bone, quickly pull the thread to do that repeatedly.
For many fish bones or bones stick in it and come out, if they do not come out by what we mentioned, then use an instrument made of bronze, shaped like this.
It is slightly thicker than the rods, and at its end there is a curved part that enters the patient's throat with gentleness, while he raises his head above it, and takes care not to touch his uvula, lest it happens to him as a convulsion, or the doctor inserts it with his hand.
And the patient's insertion of it is better for his knowledge of the ascending matter's position, and he pushes to the bottom or pulls it out with the instrument above all that, according to what is appropriate for him until it comes out.
Chapter 39.
On extracting the ascending flesh in the throat.
If you treated the tonsils with what we mentioned in the chapter on surgical treatments and it did not heal, then look at that time for a abscess in the neck when the sun is shining after he has been cupped with the cupping instrument that was described to you.
If your glance fell on the tonsils, then grasp them with a small forceps or with a thin, well-fastened probe. If you cannot do so, take a curved cannula and insert it into the neck up to the area of the tonsils, then insert a sharp, protected stylet through the cannula.
Do that repeatedly and the patient will be kept away from water for a whole day, then he takes a full bowl of cold water and opens his mouth in it and gargles with it, and not a single drop of water should come out of his mouth, and he should shake the water around in it after an hour.
If the tonsils fall onto the gums when they come into contact with water, and if they do not come out as we described, then fumigate the throat with a poultice and with an instrument that was described in the fumigation of the throat. Do that repeatedly, for they will fall out.
And direct the work in the fumigation to take a quantity of it, a hot cupping instrument, and a covering cloth with a small hole in its middle. Then, fix the instrument's end in that hole, then apply the fumigation and put the patient's mouth on the end of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not come out until he feels that the fumigation has reached his throat.
If the tonsils fall onto the gums, and if they do not fall out, then the fumigation is repeated repeatedly, and the patient is kept away from acidic foods and does not drink water, for it is inevitable that they will come out with this treatment. And this is a picture of an instrument used to grasp the tonsils from the throat if your glance falls on them.
This resembles the caliper, but it has this curved part that enters the cavity and its ends resemble a bird's beak, with a roughness like that of a file, so if you place it on something, it does not let go.
And another instrument is the one that grasps the tongue, and it is a wide iron ring, of a size that the mouth can open over the tongue, entering into the mouth, resting on its sides, keeping the mouth open without the tongue's movement, and the patient cannot dislodge it until it is removed.
The description of the instrument that opens the mouth to this size by itself.
The Forty Sections.
It is used to extract fragments of speech from the cavities of the wounds and to split them.
Wounds have many types, varied and classified according to what will be mentioned one by one in this book, and they differ in their cavities and splitting from two aspects: one of them is the type of wound itself and what it contains of ruptures.
And the second type is according to the locations in which they occur on the body, because a wound that occurs on the head is not like a wound that occurs on the belly, and a wound that occurs on a fleshy part is not like a wound that occurs on a joint, each one of them has a rule for the operation.
And among the wounds, there are those that should not be split until after the pus has matured in them and its quantity is complete, and among them are those that should be split while they are still fresh and have not yet reached their limit, like the wounds that are close to the joints.
Because if a wound occurs near a joint and its matter reaches it, it may affect the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing lameness in that limb or being close to a principal organ.
For if you delay splitting it until it matures, you may harm the principal organ or it may be near the belly, so you should split it while it is still fresh and not fully mature, which is near the belly, lest the pus flows into the belly and becomes a deadly abscess.
It is necessary to wait until the time when the tumor has matured on the skin, and it is at rest, and the humor has receded, and the inflammation has subsided, and the throbbing has ceased, and the head of the tumor has settled, and other signs have appeared.
It is necessary to make the incision at the lowest part of the tumor, if possible, so that it will be easier to dissect to the bottom or to a more superficial part of the tumor, and not to let the incision be deep in length, especially when the tumors are on the hands and feet.
And it is necessary to take into account the muscles, tendons, nerves, and blood vessels, and altogether in all flat places that do not have a curvature, and as for those that are curved, it is necessary to make the incision according to that place, and if the tumor is in fleshy areas, it is better to leave the incision untilled.
Until the tumor has matured as we mentioned earlier, it is not wise to make an incision before that, for it would be a futile and difficult task, and might lead to severe damage and putrefaction, and sometimes the edges of the wound would not unite. And some tumors may necessitate an incision on the surface of the body at the time of necessity or according to what the affected limb requires.
It is necessary to use a single incision for small tumors, and for large tumors, a wide incision or multiple superficial ones according to the size of the tumor. And there may be some tumors that require scraping the skin and cutting if it has become like a crust.
And it is necessary to be careful in what has died, as it appears in many ulcers and apostemata, and among them are those that have a triangular incision, and among them are those that are cut in the shape of a paper leaf, like the Arab's cyst.
And among them are those that use the circular incision, the crescent-shaped incision, and similar ones among the incisions. And what does not have a head, such as the flat, smooth tumors, it is necessary to make a simple incision only. And if the tumor is large and has collected much matter, and its incision is deep, it is necessary not to hasten, so that all the pus comes out at that time.
I extracted some of it, then I pressed the abscess firmly until another day, then I extracted some of the pus as well. I did that repeatedly on a gradual basis until I extracted all of it.
And beware, for if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person, then the vital spirit often collapses with the sudden evacuation of pus, so the patient may die and you will not perceive it. Be cautious of this chapter, beware greatly.
And after you have evacuated the pus, it is necessary to massage the wound and examine it. If the abscess was small or the incision was single and simple, then use a dressing of cotton or soft bandage. And if the abscess was large and there were many sutures.
It is necessary to insert a dressing into each suture until some of them reach others. And if the abscess had cut through the skin or had turned inward, it is necessary to bandage it with soft bandages or gentle cotton without moisture and tighten it until the third day.
Then remove the dressing and treat it with what is necessary from the medicines until he recovers. If a bleeding appeared during your operation, use cold water and vinegar after you have sprinkled a piece of cotton in them and apply it to the place of the bleeding repeatedly.
If the bleeding persisted, it is necessary to use the treatment and remedies that we described in many places of this book of ours and from the section. If you were in winter time and the place of the abscess was very sensitive, it is necessary to apply a warm poultice with rose water and hot oil.
And apply it to the place. And if you were in summer and the places were humid, it is necessary to apply a cold poultice with water and oil or rose water and oil, all of that being cool, until on the third day as we mentioned earlier, it is necessary to evacuate the abscess and massage it.
It is used in the treatment of what ails him until he recovers, and this is what is needed from knowledge of treating tumors on the body and how to dissect them; I have mentioned each tumor and the way to treat it, making it clear.
The Ninety-Sixth Chapter
On the incision for tumors that appear on the scalp of the head.
There appear on the scalp of the head small tumors, and they are among the types of swellings that have thin skin coverings, which have appearances like a hen's egg and their kinds are many, including scabby ones and those that contain moisture resembling a pustule.
And among them are those that contain moisture resembling a blister and the like, and among them are those that are hard and solid, and all of them are not dangerous in incising and extracting them, as long as you do not encounter a vein when incising.
And the operation in incising them is to open them first with the instrument that has this shape, which is called the dilator, until you learn what they contain; if it contains moisture, then incise it lengthwise, a simple incision on this pattern:
And start the incision from line ~b~ to line ~j~, and if you encounter moisture, then evacuate the cyst that was containing it and remove all of it, without leaving anything behind, for many are the cases where it recurs if something remains.
Then, insert a dressing into the wound with a salty solution and fill it with water, and leave it until the next day, for it will dissolve what remains of the cyst. Then, reapply the dressing with the salty solution a second and third time if you need to.
Until you are certain that nothing remains of the cyst, then treat the wound with ointments until it recovers. And if the tumor contains scabby matter, incise it in this pattern:
Make a longitudinal incision in the wound and dissect it from every direction, and exert effort in extracting the underlying fascia that contains it. If you encounter a blood vessel, do as I have described to you previously, and similarly do with the abscess if it is attached to the suture.
The treatment is specific to what I mentioned, and the incision on an attached abscess is easier because it has little blood and pus. Some of these abscesses that are in the head in some people have no pus with them at all, which is why I made an incision on an abscess.
I treated an elderly woman who had a hard, white, stony abscess on her head, which did not respond to medication and if one of the surgeons had touched it, it would have been in vain. And there was no other accidental abscess in the head like these that appear on the heads of children.
And when it comes to the roots of the abscesses, dissect them all with a simple incision and make their base from their lowest parts so that the matter can flow out easily, then treat them with suitable treatment.
Chapter 42
Concerning the incision on the abscesses that appear frequently in the neck, many of these abscesses appear in the neck and under the armpits and in the axillae. They may also appear elsewhere in the body, and what appears in the neck is sometimes one and sometimes multiple, and some of them are connected to each other.
And each of these abscesses has a specific underlying fascia, just like the ones in the back and the abscesses of the head, as we have described. And there are many types of these abscesses, some of which are attached, some contain pus, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
And I have seen some of them with a good appearance on palpation, and their surface was nearly the same color as the skin, movable in every direction, not adhering to the neck vein or artery or nerve, and not depressed. You should make a simple incision from top to bottom of the abdomen in this shape, from line ~j~ to line ~b~.
And dissect it from every direction and extend the edges of the skin with one or two hooks, or many forceps, if you need to, as we mentioned in the tumors of the head, and extract it little by little, being careful not to cut an artery or a nerve, and let the incision not be too deep.
So that your hand is not excessive in cutting, or the instrument does not slip, and you cut only what you need to cut, for if you cut an artery or a vein, and it obstructs your work, place on the wound a compress or some of the sutures that constrict the blood.
And tighten the wound and leave it until the limits of the tumor are settled, and the wound is cleansed, and it is prepared for dressing; for then the blood will stop, and return to your work until you are finished. Then, feel with your finger if there remains any small remnants, and cut them off and extract them.
If there is a large artery at the base of the tumor, it is not suitable to cut that tumor from its base, but rather it is suitable to ligate it with a strong thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm, then fill the wound with cotton rose water, which has been perfumed with Egyptian balsam, and then bandage it.
And if you cut the entire tumor, it is suitable to gather the edges of the wound and suture them from time to time, after you have ascertained that no pus remains, for you saw that a remnant of the bony tumor remained.
It is suitable to direct the incision to its base and dissect it, and use the suturing method we mentioned, and if there were any remnants of the tumor that contained fluids, you should drain them with a simple drainage tube where you see the location of the abscess, and make the drainage tube below the level of the abscess, as we mentioned.
After the removal of the abscess, I usually use the Egyptian ointment and its likes to eat what remains of the pus until, if I see the wound has begun to heal with the help of the applied ointments, it will recover.
Chapter 43.
A tumor that occurs inside the throat.
I have mentioned this tumor in the throat, and I did not see anyone in our country who treated it, and this is their method of speech. However, those who have a cut in their throat should avoid this tumor, as they do not benefit from it.
So that all the veins and lung are healthy, and those who have a tumor in their mouth or throat or larynx, if there is no ulceration in the trachea, it is necessary to use the throat ointment to protect from the harm caused by constriction.
It is necessary, if we want to do that, to make the incision of the throat under three rings of the trachea or four small incisions in width between two rings, as much as the incision is in the membrane and not in the cartilage, and this position is suitable for the incision.
Because it is far from the flesh and the blood vessels are distant, if the surgeon was cautious, it is necessary to dissect the throat with a scraper, then to incise the skin until, when he reaches the trachea, near the blood vessels, if he sees something there.
Then he incises the membrane we described, and relies on the incision of the trachea from the mucus that comes out with what is expectorated and the interruption of the voice, and leaves the wound open for a while. If the time passes during which the constriction was feared, he gathers the edges of the wound from the skin.
And he sutures it by himself, excluding the cartilage, then uses medications that help the flesh to heal. He said: 'I have written this book, explaining the sentence of this speech which we mentioned, namely, if they saw a patient whose throat was obstructed by one of these tumors we mentioned.'
The surgeon should be cautious of death and intend to dissect the throat vein to let out the blood from the site of the wound, and he should be careful not to die, but rather recover from the wound by leaving it open until the soreness of the disease subsides and its soreness lasts for three days.
Then he should be treated with a poultice on the wound until he recovers, and I have seen with my own eyes that a slave girl was bitten by a poisonous creature, so I sent her to treat it just by applying a poultice on the affected part of the lung, and I found it to be cured as if it were an abscess, so I opened up the wound.
I found that the blood which flowed from the wound was slight, so I realized that she had not severed an artery or a vein, and the pus was coming out of the wound, so I cauterized it and treated it until she recovered, and nothing appeared to the slave girl except for a slight hoarseness in her voice, without any residue.
And she regained her best condition after a few days, so from this we say that dissecting the throat vein is not dangerous.
Chapter 44.
Incision on the tumor that appears on the throat from outside, and it is called the pharyngeal abscess.
This tumor, which is called a pharyngeal abscess, is a large swelling on the surface of the body, and it is common in women, and it has two types.
It is of two types: either natural or symptomatic. As for the natural one, there is no remedy for it, and as for the symptomatic one, it has two forms: one resembles a suppurating abscess, and the other resembles a tumor that occurs from the thickening of the artery, and its incision is dangerous. It is not advisable to touch it with a sharp instrument unless it was small, for if you had touched it and pressed on it with the director, I would have found it to resemble a suppurating abscess, and it would not be related to any of the arteries, so I would incise it as one would incise an abscess. Extract it from the cyst if it is in a cyst, and if not, then drain everything and treat the area with suitable treatment.
Chapter 45.
On wounds of various kinds.
Wounds have many kinds, and I mentioned all their kinds in the classification. It is necessary to distinguish here between a wound and an abscess, as it is confusing. So, I say that an abscess has heat, redness, and painful throbbing until it points to the weakness of the body. The abscess is complete when it causes redness and hardness, whereas a wound does not have heat, nor redness, nor throbbing pain, and it has a cyst-like capsule which is its own special covering, and it is on the surface of the body, and its beginning is like an inflammation, and it becomes like a tumor, bigger or smaller.
It is of two types, either serous or containing humidity, and the types of humidity are many, as I mentioned in the classification. It is necessary that if you proceed to treat a wound, you should clean it first with the instrument called a probe, according to its shape, which will be explained in the following chapter.
Feel the bone of the tumor, then insert the probe and look at what comes out after it. If a serous fluid comes out, or any color that was in it, drain it with a simple drainage as I mentioned in other tumors. And if no fluid comes out after inserting the probe, know that it is serous.
Drain it with a drainage like this, as I taught you, and fasten it with bandages and release the skin from every side gently and take care of the cyst if you are able to extract it correctly with the wound.
If the cyst breaks apart during operation and you are not able to extract it correctly, this often happens, so extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it. For if some of it remains, whether little or much, the wound will likely become chronic.
If the wound has overcome you and only a little of it remains, then wash the wound with some of the sharp, pungent medications during your fasting period, and apply to it what will calm down the inflammation, and treat it with what will bring it together until it heals. If the ulcer is large, then cut its lips and treat it with what will bring it together.
If a bleeding artery or vein has been injured, and the blood is pouring out, then quickly wash the area with astringent medicine and leave it compressed for two or three days until the wound stops its discharge and the blood flow subsides, then return to cutting what remains of the ulcer.
Chapter 46.
Figures of the Instruments.
The ones that are inserted into the wound and their images, which are splints, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small.
Figure of a Large Splint:.
Figure of a Medium Splint:.
Figure of a Small Splint:.
It is made of iron, forged, with rounded edges, tight and smooth, to facilitate entry into the tumors, and these are images of the probes, called the rod, and it is of three types also: large, medium, and small. Figure of a Large Probe:.
Figure of a Medium Probe:.
Figure of a Small Probe:.
It is suitable for scraping the tumors, wounds, and abscesses, and extracting what is inside them from bones and others. It is made curved, polished, and smooth, like the scrapers, from Indian steel or Spanish steel, or from copper, or iron, or silver, and the best of which is made from Spanish steel.
And it is also possible to make probes from black lead, and they are suitable for exploring the abscesses that have twisting canals within them, and they are also of three types: long, medium, and short.
According to the need of it, every surgeon should make its thickness according to the width of the nasal bone and its narrowness, a picture of a comb-like instrument from a large rasp.
A picture of a comb-like instrument from a medium rasp.
A picture of a comb-like instrument from a small rasp.
Pictures of forceps, and they are many kinds, because among them are simple ones, meaning those with a single grasping unit, and there are three types: large, medium, and small. And among them are the forceps with multiple grasping units, and there are three types. And among them are the forceps with pivoting grasping units, and there are three types. And there are three types, and among them are the forceps with three grasping units, and there are three types. All of these types are needed, each one in its place. A picture of a large simple forceps. A picture of a medium simple forceps. A picture of a small simple forceps.
A picture of a large compound forceps. A picture of a medium compound forceps.
A picture of a small compound forceps.
A picture of a large forceps with pivoting grasping units. A picture of a medium forceps with pivoting grasping units. A picture of a small forceps with pivoting grasping units.
A picture of a large forceps with three grasping units.
A picture of a medium forceps with three grasping units. A picture of a small forceps with three grasping units.
And these are the pictures of the scissors that cut and dissect with them the vessels and tumors, and they are three types because among them are large ones, and among them are medium ones, and among them are small ones. A picture of a large scissor.
A picture of a medium scissor.
A small sharp scalpel.
Its edges are limited, divided into restricted and unrestricted parts. It was made thus to be used in dissecting the flesh when there is fear of cutting an artery or nerve, so that one may be cautious with it and find some comfort from the anxiety that comes with dissecting a tumor.
And these are the pictures of the retractors, and there are three types: large, medium, and small. Picture of a large retractor:
It is made from a curved iron, similar to the shape of a file, and at one end it has a wide, flat spoon-like head, consisting of two layers, with a hidden sharp edge that resembles a bird's tongue, going in and out as you wish.
Pictures of the elevators that are placed between the fingers when operating on tumors, which the patient does not feel, and there are three types: large, medium, and small. Picture of a large elevator:
Pictures of the forceps that are used to stop the flow of blood, and there are three types: large, medium, and small. Picture of the large forceps:
It is made from iron or steel, curved slightly in length as you see, and it has a handle. It is necessary to have these types of forceps with you, large and small, to stop the blood flow quickly when needed and when you do not have a medication ready.
But it is not used to stop blood flow at every location in the body, rather it is used in fleshy areas such as the thigh muscle, calf muscle, arm muscle, chest, abdomen, and other fleshy and wet organs.
And you should make from it instruments smaller in resemblance to the peels of the pistachio nut in this shape.
It is cut with it, the blood, if it flows from the site of the hemorrhage or when cutting a vein or artery, and you should make from it a compressor in this shape:
Chapter 47.
A treatment for a fracture of the thigh bone.
That which resembles a fracture of the thigh bone in women, some people may confuse it with a real fracture at the time of severity until it resembles a fracture of the thigh bone in women, and whoever dislikes that should make an incision on the thigh in an elliptical shape like this.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~. Then scrape the wound completely, then fill the wound with medicated cotton, then bring the edges of the wound together with sutures and bandage until it heals. If the thigh is bent downwards and relaxed, just as it appears in women.
It is necessary to make two incisions on the upper part of the thigh, resembling elliptical shapes, each connected to the other at their ends, until the larger line encompasses the smaller one in this shape: From line ~b~ to line ~j~, then scrape the skin that is between the two incisions, and remove the pus, and use what we have mentioned of sutures and bandages, and whatever treatment it requires until it heals.
If you cannot stop the bleeding, it is necessary to cut what is required of the vein, either because of the severity of the lesion or due to the flow of blood. It is necessary to stuff the wound with cotton soaked in vinegar and leave it until it eats away what remains of the pus, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter 48.
A treatment for the tumors that appear under the armpits.
These abscesses that occur beneath the armpit are of the type of hard, swollen lumps that have a capsule, and some of them have pus. If there is pus in them, it is necessary to make an elliptical incision on this pattern.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~, if you have evacuated all the contents of the abscess from the period, then dress it with a cotton pad and leave it until the next day, then remove the dressing.
And treat with the suitable medication until it heals. If the abscess is of the type of hard, swollen lumps, then make an incision on it as we mentioned in the incision on hard, swollen lumps. Even if the wound reaches a point where it discharges pus, use the cotton pad on it according to what we mentioned earlier.
Chapter 49.
On incising the abscess that arises from a vein or an artery, and it is called aneurisma.
If the artery is wounded and the skin above it is torn, often an abscess appears as a result, and similarly, aneurisma can appear in the vein, with swelling and abscess.
And the signs by which it is known that the abscess and aneurisma are from an artery or a vein, are that if the abscess is from an artery, it will be a gathering of blood in the depth of the body, and if you press on the abscess with your finger, you feel as if it has a pulse.
And that which is from a vein will be an abscess protruding on the surface of the body. Making an incision on these abscesses is dangerous, and it is not suitable for those in the armpit, elbow, neck, and many other places on the body, and it was very great, so it is necessary to avoid treating them with iron.
And those that are also in the extremities or in the head, it is necessary to avoid. But if it is from a rupture of an artery, then make a longitudinal incision on the skin, and open the incision with a director, and ligate the artery and release it from its adhesions.
You should expose the vein and then insert a needle and pass it to the other side, constricting the artery with a double ligature in two places as you have been taught in the section on constricting the arteries in the temples. Then you should press on the spot between the ribs until all the blood comes out.
And you should treat the tumor, then use the treatment that generates pus until the abscesses rupture, then apply suitable remedies to it until it heals.
If the tumor was located before the incision of the vein, you should grasp with your hand what you can of the tumor along with the skin, then insert a needle below the spot where you grasped with your hand and pass it through, with a double ligature, until you bring it out on the other side. Then you should ligate the tumor with a strong ligation, as I mentioned to you in ligating the artery from both sides at the end of the thread. If you fear that the threads will be cut, then you should insert another needle with another thread underneath the entire tumor where the first needle intersects.
And constrict your threads in four places, then incise the tumor in its middle until what is in it comes out, and cut the excess skin and leave what was attached to it, then apply a dressing that has been soaked in wine and oil. Then you should use the treatment with ointments and remedies until it heals.
The Fifty- Fifth Chapter.
On the tumor that arises from the twisting of the nerve.
As the tumor appears in the artery and vein, so also does the tumor appear in the nerve if it suffers a blow or excessive strain or something similar, and this is more likely to occur in the constricted areas and joints.
And in every place where the joints move, it is a hidden tumor that resembles the color of the rest of the body and is usually more painful than others, and if you press on it strongly, you feel numbness resembling paralysis, but the tumor does not collect in the depths of the body.
It is beneath the scalp and moves to every direction, neither advancing nor retreating, and what is in the joints does not allow it to be touched by the iron, for it might cause a severe reaction at some time, and what is in the head or in the forehead.
Split the scalp at the site of the tumor, if the tumor is small, then excise it with a scalpel and remove it from its base; and if it is large, then ligate it with a thread and pull it out, then wash the wound with a dressing and cover it until it heals.
The sharp instrument and the forceps.
For cutting the extra growths that appear on the abdomen.
Many people have growths that appear on their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, called "fungus-like" because they resemble a fungus, with a delicate base and a thick head; sometimes they become multiple and sometimes they grow very large.
I have seen a man who had two growths on his abdomen, which resembled fungus-like things, with white delicate bases; they had become multiple and divided, and the discharge would issue from them constantly; I excised them and weighed each one, one weighing around 18 ounces and the other around 6 ounces.
And the operation to excise them is that you should look carefully, for if the growth was soft and its color was white with a delicate base, then excise it with a sharp scalpel, and be cautious not to touch the surrounding area with your fingers, for when cutting, a lot of blood may flow out.
If you are overpowered by the bleeding, then stop it; if you see the growth is hard and you fear cutting with iron, take a thread of strong twist and tighten it around the growth, having this characteristic, and leave it for two days, then increase the tightening of the twist, and do not stop tightening until it stops.
When a wound affects the spleen to the point of separation and detachment from its original site without any inflammation, if the spleen is thick in its origin, then there will be some fear and anxiety, but it will not show what was in the abdomen; however, it may be possible to separate half of it or part of it.
Then treat it gently, then handle it until the wound heals, and beware that you do not expose the spleen to a cut that is like a slight sensation of a pricking pain, for it will become a cancerous tumor and will be remembered as a cancer after this.
The 52nd Chapter.
On the treatment of wounds of the nose.
The wounds of the nose occur due to many reasons, either from a rupture of the peritoneum that is above the abdomen, and it emerges with a turbid or cloudy discharge, as is seen in other fractures, or from blood that flows from a vein or artery, as is previously mentioned, or from a blow that is received underneath.
If it is due to a rupture of the peritoneum and emergence of turbid discharge, then it will have the appearance of a tumor similar to the color of the body, and it will be soft without pain, and its various conditions will appear. And if it is due to emergence of cloudy discharge, its condition will be as we have described, with a severe difference; if you press on it with your fingers, it will recede and then return, and perhaps there will be a crunching sound, and it will become very painful when entering the bath or experiencing extreme fatigue; but if it is due to humidity, it will be soft.
It does not recede if you press on it with your hand, nor does it increase or decrease; if it is due to blood, then it will appear as a tumor with these signs, turning black; but if it is due to a swollen abscess, the tumor will be hard and solid, and it will settle at a single level.
If the reason was before the pulse, and the work in that is to consider if it was a fracture from before the blood of the arteries or veins or pulse, it is necessary to beware of its treatment lest there be fear and anxiety as I informed you in the chapter that I mentioned about the tumors that occur due to the arteries and veins.
If it was a fracture from before the anus or buttocks, it is necessary to instruct the patient that he should sit in a elevated position and stand upright, then teach him to move around the fracture gently. Then instruct him to lie down between your hands on his back, then make a tight bandage around the fracture at the place you taught him to move gently, then extend it to the middle of the tumor upwards with a large compress, then tie the place of the bandage with a strong thread, and fasten it tightly.
And make the bandage a knot, then open in the middle of the tumor that is constricted above the bandage and insert your finger into it, and ask for the anus; if you find that the bandage has taken hold, loosen the knot and push the anus inside the belly; and if you find a buttock, support it with a compress.
And cut its excess, if an artery or vein opposes you, constrict it strongly and return to your work; take two needles and insert two strong threads into them, then insert the needles into the bandage that you made around the tumor, which are tightly fixed, then tighten the tumor at four places on the needles.
And if you see the needles come out, leave the place until the constricted flesh putrefies and falls off by itself or is cut off when it becomes rotten, then treat it with what is necessary of ointments until it heals; for it was a fracture from a growing flesh.
And you should cut into the varicose vein as we have mentioned, and let out the blood or the matter that you find in it, then treat it with what will soothe the affected area.
Chapter 53.
On the Treatment of Cancer.
We have mentioned in the section on classification the types of cancer and how to treat it with medications and caution against treating it with iron, lest it worsen, and we mentioned the cancer that develops in the uterus and cautioned against its treatment.
And we mentioned to the predecessors that if cancer is in a place where it can be completely excised, such as cancer in the breast or in the thigh and similar organs that can be easily removed, it is not necessary to treat it. But if it has spread and become large, then it cannot be treated.
For I did not find that anyone was able to cure it, and I did not see any of my predecessors who reached that point. And the work in it, if it is a solid mass as we said, begins with easing the pain from the black bile, then separating it if it is in the veins or manifesting clearly.
Then you should direct the treatment to the solid mass, and work on it. Then you examine the cancerous tumor that is suitable for it, then you excise it from every direction with the skin, until nothing of its roots remains, and let the blood flow without cutting it off quickly.
But you should ligate the places and let out all the thick blood with your hands or with the available instruments, for if you encounter a large bleeding during the operation from cutting an artery or vein, stop the bleeding first, then treat it with cauterization until the bleeding stops, and then apply the treatment until he is cured.
Chapter 54.
On the Treatment of Hernia.
We have informed you in the chapter on wounds about types of suture, how to bring the edges together, and the signs of each type, and its treatment with medicine. What is treated with iron is the serrated type only, and it is not treated with iron, neither the flat type nor the fleshy type of wound.
For it is killing, if you have treated this type of serrated wound with medicine and your treatment did not benefit, then look, perhaps the patient's weakness has overcome him or he had another disease besides the wound, such as having a fever.
It is a cough or diarrhea, and so on. Be cautious that you do not treat it with iron, for it is a risk. If you saw the patient's strength was abundant, and he had no disease besides the wound alone, and he was neither young nor old, then begin the work on him, standing between your hands. And a servant stands behind him, squeezing his abdomen with his hands and pushing the edges to the bottom towards the direction of the pubic area, then takes a needle in this manner.
The edges are limited to the two sides, limited as the needle, except that there is some slight flexibility so it does not slip away during the work on the intestine, then it is inserted, and then you observe if the wound has grown from the direction of the intestines.
Then it is necessary to make an incision with the scalpel from the navel, a distance of three fingers downwards, above the pubic area. If the wound has grown from a disease of the liver, then let your incision be three fingers from the navel on the left side. If it has grown from a disease of the spleen, then let the incision be three fingers on the right side.
And it is also not necessary for the incision to be on the side that the patient wants to lean on, lest the intestines protrude to that weak spot. Then you pierce with the scalpel all of it, then you insert the instrument in that incision and raise your hand.
In the section between the abdomen and the thigh, as if you were to release it and make the incision in the way of the nail or similar, then you pierce the thigh until you reach the empty space which is the place of the water, then you extract it and insert the instrument with this shape.
It is a tube-like instrument, made from a thin rod of silver or copper or tin alloy, manufactured with a small hole at its lower end and three holes on each side, two near the end and one on the other side, as you see.
And he puts its sharp point in the form of a pen nib, on this shape:
On its upper end is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it descends from its handle onto the instrument, and you extract from the water at a moderate pace, because if you extract more than what is needed at the time, the patient may die due to the disruption of his natural spirit.
Or he may present with a condition close to death, but you extract from him according to his strength and what is apparent to you of the patient's conditions, from the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his complexion, then you remove the instrument and stop the water, because it is stopped by its handle.
Due to the abdomen that holds the hole on the thigh, which I mentioned to you to bandage in that fashion, then you return the instrument another day if you see the patient is prepared for it.
And you also extract a small amount from the water, doing that gradually and carefully, and beware of the error, until there remains only a little of the water, for if you were to hurry upon the patient and leave much of the water, it would be buried in the hot sand.
And many repetitions in the bath and sun, and applying to the affected area with drying medications until it heals, and taking care of the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water as I previously described.
The Fifty-Fifth Section.
On treating children who are born with meconium in their urine, which is not evacuated or when the anus is narrow or is not in its proper position.
Some babies may be born with a portion of their intestines hanging outside their mother's womb and not evacuated, and it is necessary to rush to open their anus from the hour they are born.
With a very fine scalpel in this manner:.
Then you place in the anus a thin probe made of lead and tie it and leave it for three or four days, so when the urine wants to flow out, you remove it and wash it, and if you don't make the lead fine, it is possible that the urine that flows onto the spot will not be able to pass.
And as for one whose anus is narrow, you treat it with lead probes as we mentioned, many times until it widens, and those who have their anus in an abnormal position, that is, some of them are born with the anus at the end of the womb, so they cannot urinate normally.
Until the foreskin is lifted with his hand upwards and it is not born from the front because the semen cannot reach the womb on a straight path, and this is a very severe defect, and the way to work on that is to lay the child on his back.
Then you stretch his thighs with your left hand, stretching strongly, and you separate the head of the foreskin with a scalpel or a sharp pointed instrument, as if you were carving something to make an opening like the anus, and the hole should be in the middle, as is necessary.
And beware during your operation of excessive bleeding, for it often happens, so stop the blood with what stops the bleeding and treat the wound until it heals.
The Sixty-Fifth Section.
On the wounds that occur in the penis, testicles, groin, and scrotum, and the adhesion of the penis to the scrotum.
Many cases of this kind are presented in the phlebotomy, which is a bloody surgery and consists of good and bad, so the bad ones need to be treated with a gentle touch.
And cut it off until the bleeding stops, then apply a compress wrapped in a bandage of Egyptian linen, and afterwards treat it with Nabul's bandage until it heals. But if the case is bad, and the blood does not stop, it is necessary to use cauterization after cutting and scraping.
If the case is in a cavity of the limb and does not heal, and some of the case is from inside the cavity and some of it is from outside, it is necessary to extract the case that is from inside first until it is clean, then afterwards treat it from outside.
Because if you treated them both together, the cavity would not be safe from perforation. And also, there may be swelling and corruption in the cavities and in the limbs, so it is necessary to evacuate all that has become corrupt and to suspect that it might become corrupt or has become corrupt.
Then apply to it afterwards honey with the powdered shells of the pomegranate, and the ceruse, then treat it with other treatments until it heals. If there is a flow of blood, use cauterization with a helical movement on this pattern:.
For cauterization is beneficial for both conditions, namely the flow of blood and the wound, if it has become corrupt. For the cauterization will congeal the blood and stop its flow at a certain time, so it is necessary to insert into the channel of the artery a pipe of silver or tin, and also to stick the cavity with the cauterization.
And this sticking together only happens in one whose cavity is sound and did not require cutting, and it may be stuck due to a wound or an abscess, so it is necessary to release it with a sharp scalpel until the ligament is freed and the cauterization is released from every direction.
If it is difficult to distinguish between the skin and the peritoneum, it is advisable to dissect a part of the abdomen and the omentum, since the omentum is delicate and may be easily torn; then, separate the omentum from the abdomen with a fine thread that has been soaked in cold water so that it does not stick together.
Then, he should be treated with a compress which is moderately tight until the swelling subsides.
Chapter 57.
On the treatment of wounds in children and the management of the injuries that occur to them.
The suturing is not something to be taken lightly, as it requires a precise connection of the surgical incisions, unless one has been accustomed to doing so with deliberation and using it specifically in children, and it is necessary that we perform the best work in this.
And the easiest path leading to safety, I say that the ancients did not mention suturing in any of their books because it was not used in their surgical practices, and it is what we have acquired.
Through experience, I found that most of the surgeons and barbers use catgut for suturing, and they use the thread and the needle, and they cut with the razor, and I have tried all these methods.
And I did not find better than suturing with the scissors and the thread with the needle, because suturing with catgut often causes the tissue to slip away, since the omentum has two layers; perhaps the upper layer of the tissue is cut off and the lower layer remains.
It is necessary to resort to another cut and a new suture, and suturing with the needle does not guarantee against cutting through the edge of the wound, for it may enter its hole; as for suturing with the razor, perhaps it will split the tissue and ruin your work, or the child's tissue may be short by nature.
Many things are born in this way and do not require cleansing, and I have seen that. As for cleansing with a scalpel and a bandage with a thread, experience has shown me the benefit of it, because the scalpel is suitable for cutting to make the suture above like the suture below.
When you have made the two sutures in proportion to each other, cutting them to one measurement and at one time, then the thread will become like a solid wall, preventing the outflow of humoral discharge from all directions, so that no mistake occurs during the operation, and the work is first to be done with caution.
And it is not suitable for one who understands a little that you merely tie the thread in his wound only and leave it until another day, then untie it and wash it from every direction as much as possible, and what is left of it will be removed by its end, then hold it between your hands, standing upright.
And do not sit and hide the scalpel in your lap or under your foot, lest it falls on the boy's wound or on any of the instruments, then insert your hand into the wound and inflate the humoral discharge and pull it upwards until the head of the humoral discharge emerges.
Then clean what gathers in it of pus, then tie the marked place with a thread, then tie below it a little, a second tie. Then grasp with your thumb and finger the place of the lower tie, grasping firmly, and cut between the two ties. Then lift the humoral discharge upwards quickly and bring out the head of the humoral discharge, then let the blood flow a little, for it is better and less irritating to the wound. Then wash it with a moist cloth, and sprinkle on it some powder of burnt ceruse, for it is the best I have tried or the fine powdered aloes, for it is also excellent.
Then lift the humoral discharge upwards quickly and bring out the head of the humoral discharge, then let the blood flow a little, for it is better and less irritating to the wound. Then wash it with a moist cloth, and sprinkle on it some powder of burnt ceruse, for it is the best I have tried or the fine powdered aloes, for it is also excellent. Here is the translation:
This is a picture of the instrument suitable for tonsillectomy.
It should be a straight cutting instrument without a curve, and its length is like the length of the fingers, and as for the bloody vessel that occurs during tonsillectomy, it is better to compress it with your finger before it swells, so you can control it quickly.
And cut it while it is still, if you cannot control it with your finger, then grasp it with a compressing forceps and cut it. If it has passed three days and the swelling under the jaw has decreased and the fever has gone, then leave it until the painful swelling subsides and the throat becomes clear.
And cut it according to what is convenient for you, and be cautious of the tonsils' base, for if you cut something from the tonsils' base, it does not harm that. Rather, focus on cleansing the wound from the purulent discharge that we described in the chapter on purulent discharges.
And if you cut from the gland above the uvula and it recedes to above, it does not harm that either. Rather, focus on what we mentioned until he recovers.
Chapter 58.
On the treatment of a blocked urine in the urinary bladder.
A blocked urine in the urinary bladder is due to an obstruction from a stone or congealed blood or pus or a growing tumor and the like, so if you treat that with what we mentioned of the described methods of treatment in the categorization.
And the urine did not flow and you saw that its blockage was due to a stone that had settled at the neck of the bladder, so it is necessary to position the patient on his back with his knees bent upwards, then one person should sit on his chest and press his abdomen towards his back, and hold the patient himself as much as possible.
Then, push the neck of the bladder to expel the stone backwards, so the urine flows. If it does not flow as we mentioned and the condition worsens for the patient, it is necessary to use an instrument called a catheter, which has this shape:.
Make a tube from a thin, smooth, and polished material, like a bird's quill in the shape of an elongated crescent with a length of about one and a half inches and a small opening at its head, and its end is prepared to take a twisted thread which is tied securely at its tip.
And you insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the catheter and press it with a ligature, so that only a small amount of the thread enters the tube to stop up the hole, then you grease the catheter with oil or fat or egg white and slide it onto the rod.
And you smooth its tip and lubricate it with melted oil or fat and warm water, then you insert the catheter into the urethra gently until it reaches the base of the urethra, then you bend the urethra upwards towards the navel, then you push the catheter inside.
Until, when the urethra is bent, then you push the catheter inside until it reaches near the bladder, and the penis inclines downwards and the catheter is inside, then you push it until it reaches the bladder and you feel with the rod that it has reached a vacant space.
And it is done on this level because the passage through which the urine flows has a curvature, then you stretch the thread with the material strongly a little, so that the urine follows the material, then you pull it out and make the urine flow, and you return the catheter.
You repeat doing that until the bladder is evacuated and the rod feels light.
Chapter 59.
How to evacuate the bladder with a syringe.
And the instruments that are suitable for that, made from metal or ivory, polished and having a long tube on a crescent shape, and you intend to inject water and medicine into it, so it is called a syringe, and this is its form:.
Make a hollow tube from silver or ivory, with a narrow opening at the end of the malleolus, which is bent inwards and has three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And the hollow position which has the pads, according to what is sufficient to block it without excess, until when you insert something of the sutures, it inserts, and if you press on it, it presses further, just like the device that is thrown with the naphtha in the wars at sea.
So if you want to put the sutures in the anus, insert the end of the sound into the anus and push it upwards with the pad, then the anus will open inside the sound, and its end will enter the rectum as we described in the Catheters, then push the anus with the pad.
For that anus reaches the rectum at the intended location, until it feels the rectal contents, and this is a picture of a curved cannula which also curves to enter the rectum.
Make a silver or tin instrument, its upper end resembling a small hook, and having a groove where the ligature is placed. Then take a rectal cannula and put in it the anus that you want to enter the rectum with, then tie it between the two grooves with a strong thread.
And push that anus a little onto the fire, then insert the end of the cannula into the rectum, and then grasp your hand on the rectum with the anus firmly, until you feel the rectal contents, that this anus has reached the rectum.
If you do not have a rectal cannula, take a piece of metal and make a circle from it, then pierce it from all its sides, then insert a strong thread through those holes as you rotate, then gather the circle like gathering a scroll after you put in it what you want of sutures, adhesives, and waters.
Then you should hold it in the instrument and shape it as you shaped the splint from the stick of your hand until the fracture reaches the splint.
The Sixty-Second Section.
On extracting the arrowhead.
We have mentioned in the section on wounds the types of arrowheads and their treatment with medications, and we have explained the difference between an arrowhead that lodges in the kidney and one that lodges in the bladder, and all its signs, and we have mentioned the arrowhead where the operation is performed by hand and scalpel.
It is a special type of arrowhead that lodges in the bladder, and which gets stuck in the urethra, and I have described it with clear explanation and concise detail.
So I say that the arrowhead that lodges in the bladder is more likely to occur in children, and among its signs is that the urine comes out of the bladder like water in its clarity.
And gravel appears in it, and its mention is made, and it is painful for him, and often it becomes severe, then it subsides, and the symptoms appear with it, and many of them are troubled by it until they reach fourteen years, and it is more difficult for the old, while for the young, it is moderate between that.
And that which is a major arrowhead, its treatment is more difficult, and the small one is opposite to that. So if we turn to treatment, it is necessary first to make an incision in the perineum to extract all the gravel that is in its vicinity, for it may prevent the existence of the arrowhead when examining.
Then the perineum is taken with forceps, and it is pulled down to make the arrowhead descend to the neck of the bladder or to a raised position several times, then it is placed between your hands in a standing position, and its edges are under your thighs to incline the entire bladder downwards, then it is examined.
If you feel a sensation of numbness in the space, quickly move your finger over it. If it does not fall under your fingertips, it is likely that you will touch the inner finger with the edge of your left hand, if the patient is a young boy or the middle finger.
If it is a boy, insert it into his hip and feel for the numbness until it falls under your finger. Move it slightly towards the joint of the thigh, then grasp it with your finger and push it outwards towards the place you want to make an incision.
And order one of the attendants to hold the thigh with his hand, and order another attendant to stretch out his right hand above and his other hand to stretch the skin that is below the groin area near the place where the incision will be. Then take the scalpel, which has this shape.
And make the incision between the hip and the groin, not in the middle but towards the left side of the ailment, and let the incision be on the same numbness, with your finger in the hip, and you press it outwards, making the incision from outside wide and from inside as narrow as possible to allow the numbness to exit from it.
Do not make the incision too wide, lest you press the finger that is in the hip on the numbness during the incision, so it comes out with difficulty. And be aware that there may be numbnesses that have corners and hooks that make their exit difficult.
And among them is a numbness that resembles a bladder and is adherent, making its exit easy. But if it has corners and hooks, you increase the incision slightly, and if it does not come out thus, it is likely that you will need to dissect around it, or grasp it with a forceps that has a curved end like a Mibrad.
Grasp the numbness firmly so you do not drop it, or insert a delicate instrument with a curved end under it. If you cannot control it, widen the incision slightly, and if you have collected some blood, stop it with a dressing.
If there is more than one, then push the larger one towards the opening of the anus, and make an incision in it, then push the smaller one afterwards. And do likewise if there are more than two. If it is very large, then it is not possible to make a large incision in it, because it may cause damage to the surrounding area.
Either he dies or he will have a persistent urinary incontinence, because the passage will not adhere to its original place. But try to push it out until it emerges or is diverted into the perineum until it is completely emptied.
When you have finished your operation, sprinkle the wound with kost, and apply a compress, and bandage it firmly, and place over it a dressing soaked in oil or vinegar and rose-water. The patient should not move or bend for three days, and the bandage should not be removed until the third day.
If the wound has been washed with water and a great deal of oil, and treated with sweet aromatics and basil, until it heals, but if there is an appearance of inflammation in the wound, or burning pain, and such like, as if blood had clotted in the anus and urine was retained, and it is recognized by the emergence of blood with the urine.
So insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will cause putrefaction of the anus and its destruction. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply all kinds of treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary, during the treatment periods, to bind the thighs together and constrict them so that the medicines can be applied to the affected area. For if the hernia is small and has entered into the canal of the penis and has obstructed the urine from exiting, treat it with what I have described before, until it becomes ripe for incision.
Many times I have avoided making an incision because of this treatment, for it is more beneficial. It involves taking a scalpel made from the iron of a file, which has this shape:
Like a sharp-pointed instrument in the vein, then take a thread and tie it beneath the rib to prevent it from slipping back into the artery, then insert the cannula into the vessel through the incision until it reaches the said rib.
And insert the cannula into the rib slowly, slowly, and you pierce it until it reaches the other side, then the urine starts to flow from its orifice. Then, place your hand on what remains of the rib from outside the vein, for it will be severed and come out with the urine, and the patient will recover.
If this treatment does not work for you, and the stricture obstructs you from that, then tie a thread beneath the rib and another above the rib, then make an incision on the rib in the same vein between the two ligatures, then remove it.
Then release the ligature and clean the stagnant blood that has accumulated in the wound. And it is necessary to tie the thread beneath the rib so that it does not return to the artery, and the other ligature from above, so that when the thread is released after the removal of the rib, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
Therefore, it is necessary for you, when you tie the upper thread, to elevate the skin above so that it returns to its place and covers the wound as we mentioned.
The Sharp Instrument and the Stomacher.
For the removal of the rib in women.
It is rare for the rib to be inflamed in women, because if one of them suffers from a rib injury, it is difficult to treat her and many obstacles arise, one of which is that the woman may be modest and another is that you do not find a woman who would allow herself to be examined by a doctor.
If she is shy or one of those who are mahram (unmarriageable kin), and thirdly that you do not find a woman who is skilled in this craft, nor does she have the dexterity to perform it with her hand, and fourthly that the location of the incision on the rib in women is far from the location of the rib, so it requires a deeper incision.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
When you operate on it with the scalpel, if it is not a perforation and was a swelling, then order the nurse to insert her finger in the opening of the wound and feel around the area after she places her left hand on the abdomen and presses gently.
If you find it, you should explore it from the mouth of the wound to its lower limit as far as its strength reaches, until it ends at the root of the thigh; then make an incision on it at the middle of the perineum near the root of the thigh, from whichever side it is related to, and feel around the area in that region.
And insert your finger, not deviating from the area, pressing underneath it; let the incision be small at first, then enter the probe through that small incision; if you feel around the area, increase the incision according to what you learn, that is, as much as you understand that the abscess will exit from it; and know that there are many types of abscesses.
Some are small and some are large, and there are smooth and rough ones, long and curved ones, and those with branches; so recognize their types to guide yourself on what you want, for if the blood overflows, let it flow in the elevated position, and squeeze it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the abscess is discharged, and know that you should prepare yourself with the instruments I mentioned for discharging the abscess in men, so you can use them in your work; if the bleeding overflows and you learn to control the bleeding, knowing that it is from a severed artery, then apply the cautery to the spot.
And treat it with a compress, treating it firmly and leaving it alone, and leave the abscess alone and do not discharge it, for perhaps you have harmed the wound; then treat the incision, and if the bleeding stops after some days and the area heals, return to your work until the abscess is discharged.
The Second and Sixth Operations.
On the incisions on the watery glands.
The watery glands are where moisture collects in the white fascia beneath the skin of the testicle surrounding the epididymis, and it is called the spermatic cord, which has a special membrane with a natural tendency towards one side of the testicle.
It may be thought that it is another testicle and it is between the skin of the testicle and the white fascia, which we have mentioned, but that is not so except in the case of a hernia, and these glands are generated from weakness that occurs in the anthelia, so this material collects in them, and they may be affected by a blow on the anthelia.
And this moisture has many colors, either it is yellowish, or it is reddish and bloody, or it is dark and blackish, or it is whitish and watery, which is what it is most of the time, and these are the signs by which it is recognized.
Where the water collects, if it is in the white fascia which we have mentioned, then the tumor becomes slightly elongated in shape like a testicle and the epididymis does not appear because the moisture surrounds it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in a special membrane belonging to it, then the tumor becomes elongated towards one side of the testicle.
And for this reason, the person thinks it is another testicle. And if the moisture is between the skin of the epididymis and the white fascia, then it falls under the sensation, and if you want to know the color of the moisture, then press the tumor with the flat, broad instrument that I have described its shape, and what comes out after pressing with the instrument will show you what is inside.
So if we resort to treatment with the iron, it is necessary to order the patient to sit on a couch with his back slightly raised and place many cloths under him, then you sit on his left side.
The surgeon sits comfortably on the left side of the patient, extending his hand to one side of the groin area and towards the umbilical region, then he takes a wide incision and dissects the spermatic cord from the middle all the way up to near the navel.
He directs the incision along a straight line parallel to the cord that divides the spermatic cord into two halves until it reaches the white linea alba, then he extracts it and takes care not to cut too much, and it becomes clear to him from the side that adheres to the testicle more, and he extracts as much as possible.
Then he opens the full and wide aponeurosis, and drains all the fluid, then he separates the edges of the incision with sponges and elevates the aponeurosis upwards without touching the cord containing the testicle, and he cuts the aponeurosis as much as you can, either by a single cut or by multiple small cuts.
And do not neglect his thin side, for if you did not extract the cord completely, you would not be safe from the fluid returning; so if you have brought the testicle out of its sheath while operating, then when you finish cutting the aponeurosis, return it to its place and reunite the edges of the spermatic cord with sutures.
Then he should treat the rest of the surgical wounds until he recovers, for if the testicle has become gangrenous due to another disease, it is necessary to ligate the vessels in the cord to prevent bleeding, then cut off the spermatic cord from the cord and extract the testicle, and treat him as we have mentioned.
If the fluid has accumulated in both sides, then know that there are two hernias, so dissect the other side as you did with the first one, and if it is possible for you to make it a single operation, do so, then wipe away the blood.
And he inserts into the incisions a pad that has been soaked in oil or rose-water, and places another pad that has been soaked in sherbet and oil outside, and applies it to both testicles and umbilical region, and puts on top a wrapped dressing, which is the bandage. And tie it from above with the bandage that has six flaps according to this figure:
Then take two pieces of cloth, and cut and shape them according to this example, making the flaps that are attached to it from cotton or moistened wool, and gather them in a sash at the waist, and one of the flaps takes hold of the shoulder-blade towards the back.
And the second (flap) takes towards the armpit, and the two flaps on the thighs from below, and the two remaining flaps on the hips, and gather all of it in a sash at the waist. You can also make this bandage with thread instead of stitching with iron.
And take a gentle, curved scalpel to dissect the peritoneum, and it is suspended on what we have described until the white shiny peritoneum is exposed for containing water, then take another scalpel on this figure:
It resembles the Greek incision, then you will open it and suspend that peritoneum until all the fluid comes out, then you will extend the peritoneum with the hooks and dissect the layer containing it with the scalpel and cut it according to what is possible for you until you remove it all and beware of the ureter so that you do not touch it with the scalpel.
Be aware that this operation is more subtle and farther from bleeding, and better than working with stitching, for if you encounter a problem in the stitching or during the thread, or inflammation or bleeding or something else, it is necessary to treat every problem that arises from that with the treatment that suits it according to what has been mentioned.
If the patient was weak and did not tolerate this operation due to its difficulty, then do not persist in it, but rather work according to what I have described, and if it is correct with you, then follow what we have mentioned from the signs.
Since the bandage is watery, it is necessary to seat the patient on a high chair, then open the tumor at its base with a narrow incision, and put the bandage along the length of the body, making the opening wide enough to drain all the water, then place a compress on the site and bind it.
Here is the translation:
When you need to enter the wound with a scraper or a dilator, it is essential to extract the pus that has accumulated and formed its shape, or add slightly to the opening of the wound.
And know that the pus may return and collect after six months or so, for if it collects, then treat it in the same manner and ward off the illness from it.
Chapter Three and Sixty.
On the incision of the muscular wounds and their treatment.
Know that the incision on these muscles is one of the most damaging things leading to destruction in most cases, so we see abandonment and avoidance of it, and I warn against operating on them and the types of gangrene.
So I say that many ulcers have occurred on the bodies that are composed of putrid matter and that is due to many causes, either from a corrupt humor that flows to the affected part or from a blow, and the color of the ulcer is like the color of the body and does not have pus.
And the ulcer is putrid, and perhaps the ulcer was congealed in its color like wax and had no sensation, and it may be due to the obstruction of the veins and their inflammation, as has been mentioned before, or from the inflammation of the arteries, so what was from the obstruction of the veins is recognized by the spreading of the ulcer.
If you compress it with your fingers, and it is not suitable to expose it to the lancet, and as for what is due to inflammation of the arteries, nothing spreads from it when compressed with the fingers, and this type can be incised upon, like other muscles.
And it is that you incise the aponeurosis of the lumbar region, then extend the periosteal elevator to above and extract it from the white fascia, and free the ligament from the vessels, and ligate the vessels, and cut the ligament after freeing it from every side of the sides of the periosteum, for if the periosteum has adhered to those inflamed tissues.
You should extract the egg and cut it, and if there is adhesion between some of the fasciae or in what is between the vessels, you should release all that adhesion and cut it with a straight incision.
If the flesh has grown in the place of adhesion which is behind, you should cut all of it and extract the egg as we mentioned. If you have completed your work, wash the wound with warm rose-water and olive oil, then treat it with a gentle treatment until it heals.
Chapter Four and Sixty.
On the Treatment of Hernias that are accompanied by Ulcers.
Ulcers are festering wounds that resemble abscesses, accompanied by relaxation of the anus, and difficulty in the movement and exercise of the bowel, and in the treatment of this ailment from the nearest external [treatment] which we have previously mentioned.
But it is necessary to mention the work involved in it, as the ancients have done, so I say that you should sit the patient on an elevated chair, then push the buttocks downwards, and grasp the testicles with your fingers along with the vessels that are close to the penis.
And let another servant hold them firmly, and press them with a strong pressure, then make an incision with a sharp instrument, making a curved cut around the vessels until they are exposed, and then dissect from every side as I mentioned to you in the section on the surgical procedures for the varicose veins in the limbs, and then insert a thread into the needle.
And tie it at the first places that were affected by the ulcer, and also tie it at its end, then make a longitudinal incision in the middle, following the length of the patient's body, and extract what has accumulated in it from the purulent and corrupt matter.
Then treat the wound with a treatment similar to other surgical treatments that you want to perform for a period of time to remove the vessels that nourish one of the buttocks, and there is no harm in that, because if the ulcer has affected all the vessels, it is necessary to extract one of the buttocks along with the vessels so that the egg-shaped mass does not receive nourishment. Before cutting the vessels, they should be ligated so that they do not bleed excessively.
The Fifth and Sixth Sections.
On the treatment of wandering abscesses.
These abscesses occur from a rupture that appears in the descending peritoneum of the abdomen, near the umbilical region, and the pus flows from that rupture to one of the flanks.
And this rupture is either from a perforation of the peritoneum or from its extension, and these two types occur due to various causes, such as a blow, a fall, a thrust, lifting something heavy, and so on. And if it occurs due to an extension of the peritoneum, it will happen gradually over a long period of time.
And it does not happen suddenly, and the tumor is flat and towards the depth before the peritoneum becomes inflamed and pus forms, and if it occurs due to a perforation of the peritoneum, it happens from the beginning with severe pain and the tumor is varied and visible under the skin near the umbilical region.
And that is by the exit of the pus and its direction to the outside from the peritoneum, and it may come out with the pus and blood, thus these abscesses are called wandering and biliary, and they may be accompanied by a fetid smell, and the pus may penetrate into the peritoneal cavity and settle there, resulting in the destruction of the adjacent tissue.
Because it causes severe pain and distress, and it is not trivial if it becomes chronic. The treatment of these types of abscesses is very dangerous and requires great caution to avoid falling into it. The method of action is to instruct the patient to push the pus back into its cavity with his fingers, if possible, for a quick recovery.
Then he should lie on his back between your hands and raise his legs, then stretch the skin that is near the umbilical region upwards and make an incision in the entire length of the skin of the affected area, then insert sutures at the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open it.
The incision should be according to the extent that the egg can come out of it, then you should free the membranes underneath the skin of the thigh until when the white solid fascia appears from every direction, then you should insert your finger into what is above the egg.
In what is between the white fascia that is underneath the skin of the egg and the second fascia, and you release the adhesion that is behind the egg, then you bend with your right hand into the thigh's skin and with this you extend the white fascia above with your left hand and raise the egg with its fascia towards the direction of the incision.
And you order the servant to extend the egg upwards and release the adhesion that is behind, releasing it completely, and you feel with your finger so that there is nothing from the tangled fatty tissue in the white solid fascia, for if you find something of it, you should push it down towards the abdomen below.
Then you take a needle with a thick thread that is made of ten threads, and you insert it at the end of the fascia that is underneath the skin of the thigh near the incision, then you cut the edges of the twisted thread until they become four threads. Then you assemble some of them on each other in a woven shape and tie the fascia that we mentioned is underneath the skin of the thigh with a strong bond from two directions, then you also twist the edges of the threads and tie them with a strong tie until nothing of the vessels that nourish it can reach it. So that it does not protrude and become a painful tumor, and also becomes a second bond outside the first bond, distant from it by less than two fingers, and after these two bonds, you remove from the fascia underneath the skin of the thigh as much as the bone of the finger.
So that it does not protrude and become a painful tumor, and also becomes a second bond outside the first bond, distant from it by less than two fingers, and after these two bonds, you remove from the fascia underneath the skin of the thigh as much as the bone of the finger. And you cut the rest of it circularly and remove the egg with it, then you make a shallow incision in the thigh's skin to let out the blood and pus as we described previously, then the soaked lint is used with oil and placed on the wound, and the bond that we described is used.
When the white tender skin is cut, and a small part of it is removed to release the blood, it often happens that this is exposed, and the bandage is left until it falls off by itself. Then the abscess forms and collects what is discharged, until it ruptures with the foul pus.
Then the wound is treated with a sharp treatment of incisions until it heals.
Chapter 6 and 60.
In these arterial wounds, I have not seen anyone dare to treat them with iron, and the ancients mentioned that it should be treated as we described in the wounds with a pulse, that is, by ligating the vessels after making an incision below.
Then the middle is opened, and the tumor is treated with what opens it until the vessels are ligated, and the wound is treated as we mentioned until it heals.
Chapter 7 and 60.
On the fracture that occurs in the ribs.
The fracture may occur in the ribs, as we mentioned, in a certain position, and it does not descend to the inner cavities with anything of the pus, and if it descends, that is slight, and it returns at all times.
But if the fracture is delayed, the incision in the ribs increases until the pus and the abscess descend to the loin, and this occurs due to the extension of the fracture that occurs in the ribs, as we mentioned. And that is why it extends to the rib, and then it relaxes and fills the position, and its treatment is by cauterization, as we have described and explained.
And it may be treated with iron in this way: the patient is laid on his back between your hands, then the position of the fracture is opened with a transverse incision about three fingers' breadth, and the ribs underneath the skin are ligated.
When you expose the white fascia that is underneath, take a compress and place it on the site of the fascia, and then press it onto the depth of the abdomen. Then, you stitch the two sites together using the compress, and attach one to the other with sutures.
Then, you release the edge of the compress, and do not cut the entire fascia, nor touch the bladder, or anything else, as I have instructed you in the treatment of abdominal wounds. Then, you treat them with surgical treatments.
If the sutures are cut, clean them and close the wound until it heals, for the fascia will contract and not increase in size.
And it is better to make the incision at this site because it is closer to the safety.
Chapter 8 and 60.
Relaxation of the spermatic cord.
Many times, the spermatic cord relaxes in some people without relaxing the ligaments that are inside it, and its appearance becomes distorted. Therefore, whoever desires to treat it should place a poultice on his back.
And he should cut all the relaxed cord from the thick cord, then bring the edges together. And if you desire to suture, first suture the relaxed cord with three or four stitches, and tighten them well, then cut what is between the sutures.
Then treat it with other surgical treatments until he recovers and the sutures fall off.
Chapter 9 and 60.
On cauterization.
Cauterization is prohibited in our Sharia.
Therefore, it was not fitting for me to mention it in this book of mine, but I mentioned it for two reasons: one is that it should be known by the physician if he is asked about it, so he may know how to treat whoever is afflicted with it; and the other reason is that we often need to cauterize some animals for our benefit.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Here is the translation:
When you have exposed the testicles, separate them after having dissected them, and do not leave any of the membranes on them except for the delicate membrane that is on the vessels, and this type of dissection is better than that which is done with the scalpel.
For the scalpel might leave something of the anthela in the living being, then it treats the wound until it heals.
Chapter 67.
Treatment of Hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids occur in men in two types, one of which appears as a swelling in the perineum or in the groin area between the thighs, resembling a woman's vulva with hair, and it may obstruct urination from what is in the groin area.
And in women, there is one type, which occurs above the vulva on the perineum, like small, projecting buttons, coming out from one of them as if it were a man's penis, and the two are like the thighs. And the treatment for these three types.
The two types in men and the one type in women require that those excessive growths be excised until their effect is removed, then they are treated with other treatments for wounds until they heal. But as for the second type in men, which involves urinary obstruction from what is in the groin area, there is no operation for it, nor is there any protrusion of buttons.
Chapter 68 and 67.
On the excision of the clitoris and the projecting flesh from the vulva of women.
The clitoris may increase in size due to natural causes until it becomes erect and its appearance is disfigured, and it may grow in some women until it resembles that of men and reaches sexual intercourse.
It is necessary to grasp the base of the clitoris with your fingers or with a pincer and excise it, without hesitating in the cutting and not being anxious about the depth of the root, so that bleeding does not occur.
Here is the translation:
A return to outside on the example of the ulcer. Therefore, some of the ancient physicians called it a ulcerous disease, and they thought that it should be cut out like a gangrenous limb, and treated until it heals.
Chapter 27.
On the Treatment of Hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids are when the woman's anus is not perforated or the hole is small, and it can be either natural, born with it, or acquired, and the acquired one occurs due to a previous illness, which is either from an emerging bloody vein.
It can be a thin or thick vein, and it can be either in the depth of the womb or in its sides or at its top or bottom, and it is obstructed by intercourse, pregnancy, and childbirth, and sometimes by menstruation, and knowing that is done by examination through the vagina.
If the obstruction appears near, and it does not appear, then touch it with your fingers or with a rod; if the obstruction is from a thin vein and it is near the lips, then make an incision, which is to create on the lips something like a pustule, then place all your fingers of both hands.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs apart, then she should stretch out her lips strongly until the thin vein is cut, and the obstruction opens up, then take a swab, dip it in oil, and apply it to the site, and compress the woman every day so that the site does not close again.
If the vein is thick and dense, it should be cut with a sharp scalpel like a thin paper, if the obstruction is from an emerging bloody vein, then ligate it with threads, and cut it off, and have with you medicines that stop the bleeding without being painful, such as white lead, and chamomile, and others.
A tube of wide copper is used to drain the wound quickly, and it is held in place by a bandage, then a piece of cloth is applied to absorb the discharge, and treatment with a poultice is continued until healing occurs, for it may be necessary to cut on this pattern.
What has not been cauterized by the copper tube, if it is a cancerous tumor that is in the womb, it cannot be treated with branding iron.
Chapter Three and Seventy.
On the treatment of ulcers, sores, and red swellings that occur on the vulva of women.
As for ulcers, it is an inflammation of the vessels of the arteries until a lot of blood flows from them constantly, and if the ulcer becomes chronic, it turns into sores. We have mentioned in the chapter on anatomy their types, symptoms, and we will mention them here.
What can be treated and what cannot be treated, so I say that ulcers and sores, if they are deep in the womb and do not reach the sensation, there is no treatment with branding iron, and whatever is on the surface of the womb can be felt, it is those that can be treated.
It is necessary for the woman to enter a cold room, then to extend the sores with a scraper or a rough cloth and to cut them off from their roots, then to apply something to stop the flow of blood from one of the cutting veins without cauterizing.
Like aloe, and chamomile, and plantain, and their like, then lift her legs to the wall for an hour, then let them down in cold water, if the bleeding persists, sit her on a mattress of samak, and pomegranate peel, and walnut, and their like, then take a fine powder of barley, and make it into a paste with honey and vinegar.
And apply it to her back, if the bleeding stops, or else, apply a solid plaster to the sides and breasts without harshness, then take a swab of cotton, and dip it in the juice of the Tartarath, or the juice of the pregnant woman's milk, or the juice of the pomegranate, with a mixture of walnut and rose-water, and apply it to the affected area.
If the patient is troubled by a tumor at the affected site, treat it with the corresponding medicine until he recovers. As for the red swelling, it resembles an erysipelas rash, rough to the touch and unpleasant to look at; one should excise what appears of it according to what I mentioned in the chapter on ulcers, and treat it until he recovers.
Chapter 47.
On the Abscess That Appears in the Womb.
It may appear in the womb various kinds of tumors, such as cancer, and the ulcerated tumor, and the abscesses, and the festering, and the apostemes, and the gangrenous, and the phlegmonous, and the hemorrhoids, and the ulcers. I have mentioned all these diseases and their types and signs in the classification.
We should mention in this chapter the inflammatory tumor that appears in the womb, if it is one of those tumors that gather gradually, how to treat it with iron, we should examine whether the pain of the tumor was severe from its beginning, with fever and inflammation.
And its appearance is red, if the sensation falls upon it, do not hasten to treat it, and deal with it gently by what is beneficial for the humor, until when these symptoms settle, then it is time to make the woman sit on a chair with a cushion under her, and lean back against it.
And gather her legs towards the lower abdomen, and let her thighs be apart, and direct her feet underneath her hips, and bind them with a bandage that is suitable.
Then, have the woman sit on the side of her right hip, and use the instrument that opens up to insert into the womb, whose shape will be described later. And it is necessary, if you want to use this instrument, to measure the depth of the woman's womb beforehand, so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the womb.
If the instrument was longer than the depth, it is necessary to place a rest on the shaft of the instrument for the sake of facilitating its entry into the depths of the wound, and it is necessary to bend the loop that is inserted through the instrument from the upper side.
And you hold the instrument and the servant turns the loop until it opens into the wound, so if the abscess appears and is touched by the hand and is thin in its base, it is necessary to incise it at its head with a narrow scalpel, so if the entire duration is spent.
It is necessary to make a thin, curved incision in the wound, hidden in the flesh of the wound or with green olive oil, including some compression, and the incision will be outside the wound at the neck of the womb, and it will be from the outside on the womb and on the peritoneum, a thin, curved suture in water that has been cleansed with khabazi.
Then treat afterwards with the beneficial remedies that are suitable for it, until he recovers.
And it is possible to wash the womb and the wound with water and honey, then with water that has been cleansed with the juice of the Suse or Zurunad for a long time, then return to the remedies, if the abscess was scattered internally in the womb.
It is necessary to refrain from treating it with iron, but rather treat it with what we have mentioned in the previous section.
Chapter 55 and 56.
On teaching about the treatment of living organs, how they are treated if they deviated from their natural shape.
It is necessary for the practitioner to know the first natural shape of birth, and from its signs, if you see a woman leaning forward towards the bottom and stretching to breathe in deeply and relaxing what is upon her from the pains.
And the birth of the fetus will be hastened, so know that this birth is in its natural shape, and its exit will be on its head, and the placenta with it or suspended from its neck. If you see these signs, it is necessary to press her belly so that the fetus comes out quickly.
If it has descended onto his head, the afterbirth will come out with it and be cleared of those remnants in a good clearing, but this birth is not natural because the fetus may emerge on its knees and bring out its hands before its head and knees.
And it may bring out one arm or one leg, or emerge headfirst or in a bent position, and perhaps turn around on its axis, and so on of those abnormal forms. Therefore, it is necessary for the accoucheur to be gentle with these things all and avoid mistakes and errors.
And we have explained each shape of them and how the trick is in it, so you can deal with it and stop it. If the fetus emerges headfirst, which is the natural exit, and it puts pressure on the woman, making delivery difficult for her and weakening her strength, then I sit her down on a cushion and instruct the women to hold her firmly.
And I massage her womb with the warm and moist compresses, then the accoucheur inserts a small finger between her fingers and feels for the afterbirth or feels it with her fingertips until what is inside of it from the moisture comes out and tightens the woman's belly until the fetus comes down.
If it does not come down, then it is necessary to apply a warm compress to the woman with melted fat of the deer, and then instruct her after the application to move around and shake herself with the cushion and hold her mouth and nose, for the fetus will come out in its time. If the fetus' hand emerges first, then it is necessary to gently pull it little by little.
If it does not enter, then place the woman on a stool and raise her legs up high, then shake the stool on the ground while the woman holds onto it so as not to fall during the shaking. If the hands did not enter and the fetus died, then extract them and pull out the rest of the fetus.
And he will put his hands on her flaccid abdomen and feel it, and if the fetus emerges onto its feet, then you should push them upwards, then turn the fetus a little by little until it is upright, then take one of its feet and stretch it out a little by little.
And if it emerges onto the thighs, then order her to take a deep breath and contract her muscles strongly, for it will emerge. If it does not emerge as we have described, then turn the fetus a little by little until it takes its natural position, for then it will emerge slowly. If you are unable to do what we have described, then try everything.
Take the handles of the obstetrical instrument and the handles of the hook, and oil the Shiraj and its joints, and strike all of them in the hollow of the haunch a strong strike. Then insert it into the woman's genital area and lower part of her abdomen, then sit her in warm water until she reaches the point of delivery.
And if you see that it has not come down, then make her a warm drink and carry her. If she holds the drink for an hour, then sit her on the birthstool, then contract her muscles and close her mouth and nose, and press her lower abdomen with a gentle pressure, for the fetus will emerge at that hour, emerging onto its knees and hands.
If it emerges in this manner, then insert your hands little by little, and then make the woman lie on her back and spread her legs downwards while she is in a reclined position, and grasp her hands. Then press above her abdomen little by little. Then remove what is beneath her legs from the cushions until it is in a lowered position. If the fetus does not emerge, take both of its legs and shake them with a strong movement. Then press above the pubic area little by little until the fetus rises upwards. Then insert the hook and turn the fetus little by little.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation:
The birth of the fetus on its hands and knees, with its face towards its mother's back, it is necessary to grasp the fetus' hand and turn it slowly, slowly, and bring it out gradually; if it settles, then take it out in front of what we have described from the membranes and ligaments.
Then move it slowly, slowly; if you do that, then sit her on the chair and tell her to lean towards the right side, then move her and press her with the band; for the fetus will come out, born upright on its side.
If it descends to the mouth of the womb in this manner with the afterbirth, then split the afterbirth with your finger until you are free from the rigidity; for if you grasp onto the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it off from the navel so that it does not suffocate and die, then push the fetus inside until it becomes as it should be.
And tell the woman to push hard several times, for it will come out easily, the birth of twins or many offspring. Know that twins are often born and have given birth to three or four, and they live, but that is rare and unusual, and five is something outside of nature, they do not survive.
And handle them, for if they are many with one afterbirth, and they split into separate parts, connected at the navel of each one of them. They can come out just like a single fetus comes out naturally easily, and they come out as we have described.
For if some of them are difficult during birth and turn into unnatural forms, handle it as we have described. And let the handling be gentle and do what you do with gentleness and caution, and be aware of every situation according to what is necessary for guiding to safety.
Mention what is formed in the womb of the offspring, they are miscarried. It may form one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten in the womb. And it has been verified that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them were formed like that.
It is essential for the esteemed physician to be proficient in the science of surgery, so that when it happens to him on a certain day, he should be prepared for it with what is fitting.
Chapter Six and Seven.
On extracting a dead fetus.
If you treated the dead fetus with what was mentioned in the section on treatment and it did not come out, and you were forced to resort to manual operation, it is essential that you examine; if the woman was strong and healthy, and there was nothing among the symptoms that would make you fear a perforation, it is essential that you lay the woman on a couch on her back.
And her head should be inclined downwards and her thighs raised, and an assistant should hold them from both sides or tie them to the couch so that she does not jerk her body when the fetus is being extracted.
Then he should lubricate his hands with the smooth ointment, and the wax of the Ktn, and the oil of the olives, then he should anoint the fingers with these ointments and oils, then he should insert them into the womb gently, then he should search for a place to grasp the fetus, and the suitable positions for that.
Look, if the fetus was lying on its head, then grasp it by the eyes or the nostrils or the mouth or the neck or under the eyebrows or the temples or in the places near the joints or under the shoulders.
And if it was lying on its feet, then in the crotch and the middle joints, and it is essential to hold the instrument with the right hand and bend it between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand gently and grasp the instrument in some of those places we mentioned.
Until you reach an empty space, then grasp its opposite with another instrument or a third if you need to make the pull even and not inclined to one side, then extend a straight extension and it should not be on a single straight line only, but rather move to every direction.
The surgical incision should be made as when a bone is broken at the site of the fracture, and it is necessary to scrape away what is between that and the surrounding skin, so that the edge of the scalpel does not slip and some of the fingers are not injured by the scraping, and they are inserted from one side to direct them to what has been scraped away; thus, if some of the placenta is expelled, the surgical instruments should be moved to other sites.
It is necessary to exert gentle pressure to do this until the entire fetus is expelled, and if one hand is exhausted before another, it cannot be withdrawn due to its entanglement; therefore, it is necessary to wrap a bandage around it and then pull it out until all of it has been expelled and cut off.
Whether in the wrist or in the elbow, and similarly it is necessary to do so with the other hand and with the legs; if the head of the fetus is large and there is difficulty in its delivery, or if there is a collection of fluid around its head, it is necessary to insert a small spoon-like instrument between the fingers.
And to perforate the head to release the fluid or to extract it with the instrument called the Moshdakh, which is depicted in its form along with the forms of other instruments in the subsequent chapter.
Likewise, if the fetus has a large head by nature, it is necessary to perforate the cranium or to extract it with the Moshdakh as we mentioned, then to remove the bones with the elevator; if the head is expelled and compressed at the trachea, it should be perforated until the vertebrae that are in the chest are dislocated.
If it is not possible to dislodge the chest, and it does not come out for delivery, then make an incision according to what is possible; if it is below the abdomen or there is a loop or if there is a hardness in it, it is necessary to dissect until the vertebrae are freed from it.
If the fetus is on its feet, then pulling it out is easy and directing it to the mouth of the womb is straightforward; if it is compressed at the abdomen or chest, it is necessary to pull it out with a bandage that has been wrapped around your hand, and to perforate the abdomen or chest until what is in them is freed.
If you extract the organs and return the head and bend it, then insert the left hand into the wound and if the womb was open, you insert your hand into the neck of the womb and grasp it with your fingers to return the head, then insert a scraper or two scrapers and grasp it with them.
If the womb has adhered to the surrounding area, it should not be forced, but rather, soft and smooth objects should be used to separate them, and a poultice is applied, and you sit in warm water and soak.
And if the fetus is on its side, it may be possible to straighten it out, so use what we mentioned for a living fetus. If that is not possible, then cut and extract, and it is necessary that nothing of the afterbirth remains inside the womb. Then, when you have finished your treatment, use what we mentioned for treating inflamed tumors that appear on the uterus.
If a hemorrhage appears, then descend into the constricting water and use other treatments. I have seen a woman who had conceived and then died with the fetus in her womb, then conceived again.
Then the other fetus also died, and she appeared after a long time with an abscess in her womb, and it became swollen until it opened and produced pus. I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal, so I applied some strong adhesive remedies to it.
Then a bone came out from the site, and some days passed, then another bone came out. I was suspicious of that because the belly was a site with no bones in it, so I thought it was one of the bones of the dead fetus. I opened the wound and many bones were extracted from it, including bones from the head of the fetus.
I did not cease following that until I extracted many bones from it, and the woman was in the best of her conditions. She lived for a long time, and pus would occasionally ooze out from the site. That is what I have reached in this case.
Because in it there are symptoms and complications that the skilled physician anticipates with his mind from the treatment.
The Seventh and Eighteenth Sections.
There are pictures of the instruments that are needed to extract the fetus.
A picture of a hook that is used to open the womb's mouth:.
This is the forceps that is used to grasp the books, suitable for it are hooks on both sides of the clavicles, but this hook should be thinner than the forceps and be either of ivory or of boxwood, and each piece of wood will be in the thickness of a finger.
And their tips are towards a finger and their length is seven and a half, and in the middle of the clavicles there are two ridges from the same type of wood that has been fastened to them, their length being about seven or a little more, and their width is about two fingers or a little more, and these are the ridges.
They are the two that enter into the womb's mouth to open it with them when you operate with the hooks, a picture of another instrument similar to that, thinner and lighter.
It is made from ebony or boxwood in the shape of forceps, but it has ridges on its sides as you see, each ridge being about a finger's length and their width is two fingers, so if you want to open the womb with them.
The woman sits on a bed with her legs separated, spreading them apart between her thighs, then you insert these two ridges, closed, into the womb's mouth and hold the instrument's side below between her thighs, then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, according to how much you want to open the womb. Until you make the desired opening, a picture of another hook mentioned by the predecessors.
A picture of the expeller that is used to expel the fetus:.
Image of the forceps used to extract the fetus' head:
It resembles a scissor with teeth on the edge, as you see, and it is made with a straightened curve like a scalpel, as you see, with teeth like those of a saw, cutting and separating:
Image of a scoop also:
Image of a Saw:
This saw has a slight thickness so that it does not break when pulling the fetus with it, image of a saw with two hooks:
Image of two narrow forceps for cutting the fetus:
All these instruments, each one of them, and their various types, were prepared by the craftsman to facilitate his work and to make it easier for people to praise him, so do not despise any instrument that is prepared, for you will surely need it.
Chapter 8 and 7.
On extracting the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after birth, you should tell the midwife to hold herself back, then insert her fingers into the womb and grasp it with her fingers, and if it comes out by this method, otherwise take a measure.
And make a perforation in the cover, making an opening for the insertions of the womb's mouth, such as Fudhinja and Sudaab and Shibat and Babunj and Shiha and Sulikha and Qunturiyun, all these medications or some of them, and soak them in water and carry them to the fire, then place a copper tube on the perforation of the cover and the other end in the womb's mouth.
And massage until the steam reaches the bottom of the womb, then grasp as we mentioned, for the placenta will come out quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, tell the midwife to insert her left hand into the vagina or the cavity of the uterus.
Insert your fingers into the perineum and feel with them, and if you touch it, grasp it and pull it out slowly until it comes out. If it was stuck in the birth canal, insert your hand as we described until you find the placenta, then extract it slowly onto the abdomen.
You should not pull the uterus strongly, but rather transfer it gently to the right and left sides, then increase the pulling gradually; for it will come out then and be freed from adhesion. If the mouth of the womb was constricted, we described the treatment by dilatation, treatment of the cervix, and the use of medicines.
If it did not come out with all that we described, be cautious and refrain from repeating the pulling, but rather connect what came out of it to the mouth of the womb, then insert it into the woman's thigh, and then inject her with a remedy for the uterus; for it will strengthen her after a few days.
And it will come out, but if it becomes inflamed, then a foul smell rises from it to the belly and head, and that harms the patient; therefore, it is necessary to use the appropriate remedies.
Therefore, some of the ancient surgeons have tried remedies for uterus and cervix prolapse, such as the instrument that is inserted into the woman when the menses and placenta are retained, and so on.
It is made of brass, resembling a tube, or it is made of iron, with the narrow end placed in the perineum and the wide end on the nostril, and the remedy is inserted into the womb until that remedy goes in and another comes out.
Chapter 79.
On the treatment of the uterus that has not been perforated.
Many of the midwives and unperforated uteri have been blocked by a thin membrane, so it is necessary for the accoucheur to perforate that membrane with her finger, or else she should make a small incision with a sharp instrument and avoid touching the surrounding tissue.
Then you put on it a dressing coated with grease and oil, then you bandage it with the wraps until it heals. If you fear that it may become inflamed, you insert into the wound a tube of silver or many tubes and remove it when the patient wants to evacuate.
It may happen that the obstruction of the passage also occurs due to the accumulation of pus or blood in the wound, and it is necessary to open up that accumulation, then treat it with the treatment and management we mentioned.
The Eighty-Eighth Chapter.
On the Treatment of Ulcers that Occur on the Soles.
Ulcers that occur on the soles are a complication and hardness that occurs near the passage from outside or in the void from one of the directions, and the ulcer is one or more.
So if that complication becomes chronic, a white watery discharge or thin pus may issue from it, and it may be among those ulcers that penetrate to the marrow and to the surrounding area, and they may not be penetrating, for the penetrating ones are recognized by what is discharged from them of dung and flatulence when using the instrument of probing.
And sometimes worms may issue from it, and they may be among those ulcers that, if in the void, penetrate to the bladder and to the passage of the penis, and they may be among those that penetrate to the joint of the thigh and to the heel of the foot, and what is known about the ulcer that penetrates to the passage also differs from the non-penetrating one.
You insert your index finger into the passage and insert a thin probe into the ulcer from a copper or iron instrument, if there is no roughness in the ulcer; but if there is roughness, you insert a probe of silver or a thread from horsehair threads.
Until you feel with the probe or thread on your finger, and if you do not feel any roughness, and nothing of dung or flatulence or worms issues from the wound, as we said, then know that it is non-penetrating, so proceed to treatment.
If the fracture is extended to the bladder or to the ureter, it indicates that the urine will flow out of it and prevent it from being retained in its place by medication, and if it is extended to the joint of the thigh or to the ankle bone, it is marked by the arrival of the spar at that point.
If there is no abrasion to the bone and pus is present in a direction towards the site, and it constantly flows out, and there is no benefit from treatment, nor does it adhere to the limb, and all these fractures are non-unifying, so none of them will form a callus.
And its treatment is futile for whoever relies on it from the ignorant physicians, and as for those that are not extended and not complicated, I will describe the callus formation with the help of a solid structure, as I have experienced and tried, which is to place the splint between your hands on his back.
And you should raise his thigh above and bend his knee towards his belly, then insert the spar of iron or lead, if there is an abrasion in the fracture until it reaches where the spar ends, for you will feel the callus forming near the seat, so you should insert your fingers into the seat.
For if you feel with your fingers the spar has penetrated to its full extent, being hidden without your feeling it between your fingers and it by the skin or the flesh, then you will know that it is extended, so do not labor over it, for there will be no callus from it, as we have said.
And they have said that it heals in some people through the gentleness and from the treatment that is hoped to benefit, by applying a thin layer of wax according to the size of the fracture, as previously mentioned, and inserting it gently into the fracture until it reaches near the seat, then leaving it for two or three days.
Until you know that it has absorbed all those excess, attached, and redundant flesh that resembles a bird's pipe, then you treat it with a poultice of melted fat in the honey until those absorbed flesh comes out, then you treat it with sticky plaster, for it will heal.
If the wound does not heal with other treatments, and if the splint is inserted and does not reach the bone which is in the cavity, and there was a thick layer of flesh or membrane between them and the splint, I saw the abscess on the surface of the skin, so I incised the skin from the beginning of the abscess. And you continue with the incision along with the splint, which is in the abscess, until you reach the end of the splint with the incision, and then the splint is removed and drops out, then you clean those adherent membranes that resemble a bird's feather pipe, and nothing remains of them.
Then you treat it with soothing medications until it heals, for if the blood overcomes you and it is difficult for you to cut those membranes, it is better to do what you can do, and faster to benefit by cauterizing them with fire or a sharp medicine, because cauterizing with fire combines two good effects, removing those excess membranes.
And stop the bleeding and remove the blood clots, then treat it with rose water or borax powder mixed with oil, until the area becomes clean and those rotten membranes come out in the pus, then treat the wound at that time with soothing medications that promote the healing of solid flesh.
And these are the medications that contain astringent and stopping properties, for if they are applied, the wound will heal and not become inflamed again; if the abscess has reached the depth of the cavity and is far from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the cavity and open it up.
For if you feel the splint and between it and your finger there is a membrane of flesh or skin, and it was close to penetrating, then the work on it would be only through the method of gentle touch and hope, that is, you use one of three ways, either you cauterize it as we mentioned.
If you do not cut until you reach the apex, to facilitate the insertion of the instrument and treatment from a distance, do not rely on cutting because it might sever the surrounding ligament at the joint, causing the prolapse of the intestine outside without intention. Then, treat it as we have mentioned, so that it may be repaired as we have said.
And if you perforate the peritoneum and make an incision after cutting near the joint as we have said, either with a sharp instrument or another sharp one at the edge, then clean out those adherent membranes that are in the incision, each to where it was necessary to dissect.
Then bring the edges of the wound together with the incision and the upper lip until they unite, and the noselike orifice remains open inside the joint, making it easier on the patient, although the noselike orifice may close in this way.
And it is when you insert the instrument into the noselike orifice and it is on one side of the joint near the surface of the skin with the ligament, then take at that time an instrument like a pointed awl, like a skewer needle, in this manner.
And insert in it a thread made of five strands or thereabouts, then insert the instrument with the thread into the noselike orifice until it reaches the apex, if there is a protrusion on the edge of the joint from the inside near the surface.
Then bring out the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the joint and bringing out the end of the thread, gathering both ends together and tightening them, and leave it for a day or two. Every time you cut the thread in the flesh, tighten it strongly until those membranes between the threads are cut off and drop away. Then treat the wound until it heals and recovers.
If the noselike orifice is not protruding, then make it protrude as much as possible, but do not do that for the sake of the ligament lest you sever it. Then, deal with it as we have mentioned until it recovers.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
The Hundredth and Eighth Section.
On the excision of varicose veins, and their ligation, and treatment of ulcers.
Varicose veins occur on the limbs, either within the skin resembling red streaks or like a cluster of grapes, and they may be small or large, and blood flows from them continuously.
They may be single, or multiple, and they may be outside the skin, on its surface, but those that are outside the skin are mostly lacking in humidity, and a yellowish fluid or a little blood flows from them continuously, and they appear on the color of the skin.
And the treatment of those that are within the skin is to make an incision, and to dissect until the skin is exposed, and the varicose veins appear, then you ligate them with a thread or grasp them with a forceps, and then cut them off at their roots; if you do not ligate them with the thread due to their brittleness and fragility.
Then shave them with a rough razor or a piece of burnt rope, or grasp them with your fingers and then cut them, and apply some caustic remedies afterwards, to fulfill their purpose as a substitute for cauterization, or apply them according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
Then treat them with other treatments until they heal, but if the skin does not allow for their exit, then make a small incision in the skin to extract what is within it, and apply gentle pressure to expel them quickly when making the incision; thus, you will have removed the varicose veins that are outside the skin, and their treatment becomes easy.
And it is that you grasp them with forceps or ligate them with a thread and cut them, then treat them as we have mentioned until they heal; and if you are averse to cutting with a cautery iron, it is preferable to use a thread in this manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle.
Pass the thread through and tie it with a needle at its base from the other side, and wrap the end of the thread around the needle, which is opposite and tight. Then, tighten the thread strongly and pull out the needle, doing so for all the stitches, leaving one that you do not pull.
You extract a little of the blood, then you put on the affected area a piece of cloth dipped in rose water or iroutine, and you apply it to the affected area, and you bandage it with a compress, then you leave it until it falls off. If the stitches fall apart, you treat them with ointments and other treatments until they heal.
As for the treatment of fractures, it is often necessary to deal with the ugliness of the splint and the curvature of the bone. If it becomes inflamed and does not respond to medication, it may be necessary to scrape it with a scalpel or a rasp until it becomes smooth and the upper crust that prevents its union is removed.
Then you treat it until it adheres as desired, and if it does not adhere, you scrape it again with a stronger rasp than the first time, until it is formed well and is repaired. Then you treat it, and it heals.
Chapter 88.
On the treatment of curved and non-curved hernias, and wounds that do not unite.
A hernia is a protuberance that appears on the surface of the body, resembling the head of a hernia, and it occurs throughout the body, not just in the soles of the feet and toes, and it causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to make an incision around the hernia and grasp it with a forceps or a hook, and then to dissect from its base. Then you treat it, and if it is small, it is a minor, rough, inflamed, and protuberant swelling on the surface of the body.
What is frequently encountered in the treatment of wounds in children and its management, is to extend the sutures and cut them off or remove them with a thin thread or a hair until they fall out, and if you want to leave it as it is on the basis of what has been mentioned previously, either by cauterization or by medicated bandages.
I have mentioned the curved and non-curved scissors that I described in the treatment of scabs, but as for the scab, it is also a small, dense, thick substance on the surface of the skin, deeply rooted, and if it becomes cold, you feel its roughness like the roughness of the scab.
It exists entirely in the body and its abundance is in the fingers, and its treatment is to take a tube made from the feather of a strong goose or eagle, and shape that tube around the scab until it forms a circle around it from all directions, then insert your hand with the tube until you dissect what surrounds the scab.
And shape it in the depth of the flesh, and extract the scab from its root, and if you want to do that with a tube of copper or iron in this manner.
The upper part of the tube is connected to the rasp, constricted and opened, so as to facilitate control over the fingers and its movement, and if you want to remove the scab as previously mentioned in the chapter on surgical instruments.
Chapter 30.
On the images of the instruments that are used for injecting in the treatment of haemorrhoids, abscesses, and quartan fever.
The injector may be made of silver or of China material or of copper, polished or ornamented, and it may be made in small and large sizes according to the users' needs. The ones used in the treatment of small children are very small, and those whose channels are narrow or curved, their injectors are made to be very gentle, a picture of a large injector:.
The upper flap, which is attached to the suture, is wide on this pattern, where it attaches to the suture as you see, and its lower flap, which enters into the cavity, is tightly pressed onto the bone, with two sutures on one side and one suture on the other.
The width of the perforation is according to the thickness of the membrane or slightly thicker, and the suture that you place in it from the skin of a living animal or from a thin piece of leather, which is made on the pattern of a small awl, its point being sharp.
And you make many small perforations, as you rotate, and it becomes, after what is between each perforation, a thickness of a finger, then you insert in those perforations a thread and tighten it from the twists of ten or nearly ten threads, and gather them together like an awl. So, if you apply the medicine firmly at the head of the lancet between the two stones, firmly and tightly, then you lancet with it, and this is the figure of the circle of the suture and the perforation:
And the way of applying it is to fill the bone or skin with the medicine, and it is wrapped according to the likelihood of the affected part, and beware that it be not too hot or too cold, then the patient lies on his back and raises his leg upwards.
And he puts under it a compress or a bandage, then he binds the edge of the lancet with a binding or with egg white or with rose-water or the like, then he inserts it into the cavity with gentleness, then he takes the suture's servant with his hand and tightens it strongly until all that is in the lancet is evacuated from the cavity.
Then he removes the lancet and the patient raises his leg to the ground, for if the medicine helps it to exit, then he retains what he can, and if he sleeps at night, all was better in the morning, for he had been afflicted with hemorrhoids, and he hastened its evacuation, so that the evacuation is complete until he recovers.
If there is a painful swelling in the perineum or painful tumor, let the incision be very fine and more delicate than the incisions made by the surgeons who operate on children, and this is an illustration of a fine incision with a scalpel tied to it.
Chapter 84.
On the Treatment of Wounds.
I have mentioned in the chapter on treatment that I have discussed the treatment of similar wounds and I will discuss their treatment here with the hand and medications, according to completeness. So, I say that wounds differ according to the condition of the member in which the wound occurs and according to the location where the wound is situated.
The things that cause wounds are many, such as a hit with a stone or a cut with a sword or a dagger or a stab with a knife or a blow or a bite and so on from many things.
And wounds differ according to their locations on the body, such as a wound that occurs on the head or neck or chest or belly or liver and so on from the organs.
And I have described the treatment of some wounds to make them a model and a law for other wounds, and I began with simple head wounds specifically because the compound ones will be mentioned later in the third chapter of this book.
So I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head and does not involve a fracture of bone, you should examine it to see if it was caused by a hit with a stone or something similar, and it has only split the skin, and the wound is large and you fear the occurrence of a severe inflammation, then hasten and wash the scalp thoroughly. And do not delay it and extract from him as much blood as his strength allows, if it does not stop the bleeding, neither more nor less, for the blood that comes out of the wound is slight, and let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the affected area.
Beware of the patient with inflammation, and the intense heat, and the swollen veins, for if you neglect to treat him, his condition will worsen, and he will be unable to eat, and the swellings will increase, and it will lead to a severe ulcer with yellowish discharge in the wound or with the intense heat that has taken hold.
And if the severe ulcer is intense, then operate on the wound if it has become thin in its skin and the air has not penetrated to the place that I will describe to you soon, and if the air has penetrated to it, then operate with some of the remedies.
Stop the suppuration, then treat it until it heals, for if the wound is large and was caused by a cut of a sword or its like, and the edges did not meet with the sutures, then bring them together using stitches as I have described in the stitching of abdominal surgery.
If the wound has exposed the bone and has become attached, but was not held together except by a weak attachment, then cut it off, and treat the wound with medications that consolidate the humors, instead of the wound, and order the patient to take nourishing foods that have strength, such as broth and sweet dishes and their like.
If there is decay in the wound and it has not adhered to the bone, then remove all of the decaying tissue and treat it, for if there was a vein or artery in these wounds that was bleeding and the blood did not stop with medications, then compress on the vein.
If the bleeding did not stop, then compress at the pulse and bind it, and if the urgency requires it, even if what we mentioned does not benefit, then cauterize until the blood stops, for if these wounds are small and superficial, then order him to be easy and gentle in treating them, so he should leave this remedy on them, and it will stop the bleeding.
Before the air reaches it, prepare a remedy by taking one part of Labban, two parts of Shiyan, and three parts of Gharir, whether it is Mutaqqan or not, crush them all together, mix well, and apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly until it adheres strongly.
Here is the translation:
This action also happens to him in many major surgical operations, if he is cautious and places it on them and tightens it, while the surgical operations were smooth with no change in the air, and as for when the air has changed some of its changes, especially if it was during the summer season.
It is suitable to apply this treatment with what we have mentioned, by applying some sweet and soothing balms on it, or applying a paste made from the finest flour, mixed with water and honey, until the suppuration subsides, then treating it with gentle remedies until it heals.
But if a fracture occurs in the bone and it is slight, he should be treated with bandaging, and I have mentioned the treatment of fractures of the head in what has been previously stated, in the surgery of the neck; so if the wound is in the neck, there is no difference between its treatment and that of the head wound, if it was simple.
And if a nerve or artery is cut in the neck, and it was a nerve, there is no trick but to treat it by constricting its opening strongly with things like a compress and a clamp, and their likes, because they disturb the nerve and numb it.
And nothing cold should be applied to the wound, because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain is the most noble of the organs, and what is treated by it from the cooling medications, such as the cooled rose-water, or the rose-oil, or the tutty.
If it is also washed with rose-water and other mineral medications in this manner, and the soothing balms, and if the wound was large, then he should use a dressing or close its edges with a bandage, and treat it until it heals.
If the wound had a deep hollow and a collection of pus had gathered in its lowest part, then it should be drained from the most superficial place where it is, for if an artery was cut in the wound and its blood was pouring out, then it should be stopped or ligated or cauterized, if the need for that arose.
If the wound has cut through some of the vocal cords or all of them, and has affected the trachea, then bring the edges of the wound together with a suture on the trachea, without touching the trachea, but rather twist it and return it to its natural shape, then tie it tightly and leave it for a few days.
Then treat it with medicaments that have a constricting and drying effect, until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, then scrape it; if there are splinters of bone in it, remove all of them or as much as possible, and leave it to allow the wound to close and heal, making its treatment easier.
If the wound is superficial, apply to it the medicaments that we have described; if there is a bone in the wound and it has become necrotic, treat it with what we have mentioned in the chapter on chest wounds and those between the shoulder blades.
If the wound was caused by a blow from a blunt object or a thorn, and you see that it has become inflamed, then examine; if the bad smell emanates from it when you press on the affected area, know that it is a deadly wound. If it does not have an opening and was superficial, do not apply any medicaments to it initially, nor tie it up, lest the blood accumulates in its cavity.
Return to the heart, for it kills the affected area. But put on it a cooling compress and change it every two hours during the day; if you do not have a medicament, put on the mouth of the wound a cotton plug to absorb what comes out of it from the fluxes, and put the affected area to rest on the wound.
What collects in it, and if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and there is no stiffness or numbness, nor difficulty in breathing, nor constriction in the chest, and you see that its condition is good, then know that the wound is sound and treat it with bandages and other treatments until it heals.
If you feel a roughness and a thinness of the skin constantly, then know that it has become a septic point from its mouth, and the pain on the wound is not what gathers in it; and if it has passed to the wound in the chest or back, then it acts with what is presented from the sutures.
If it was large or small, if it had affected the bone and cut off fragments from it, then open the wound and remove those fragments. If they were loose, then remove them; and if not, leave them until later.
The wound will be easy to open, and as for other wounds that occur in other organs, their treatment is governed by what we have mentioned.
Chapter 85.
On Surgical Operations on the Abdomen and the Extraction of the Omentum and Its Suturing.
The hernia that appears on the abdomen may be large, or small, or medium; a large one may bring out omentum or several omenta, making their introduction and suturing more difficult and tiresome.
And the small hernia also may be difficult for another reason, in that it is necessary to return it with difficulty and the omentum, if you do not hasten to return it to its place from its hour of inflammation and swelling, making its return difficult. Therefore, it is better than the large hernia or the medium-sized one, because returning the omentum does not become difficult as it does in these two types.
And know that suturing the abdomen is in four ways: two general ways that are suitable for suturing the abdomen and other abdominal wounds, and two special ways that concern other wounds, except that they are more specific to suturing the abdomen.
And I will describe them to you one by one, with explanation and clarification. So I say that if the wound is small and a part of the omentum has come out and its return is difficult, then it is due to one of two reasons: either because the hernia is small, as we have mentioned, or because the omentum has become inflamed before the air was let in.
If it is thus, it is advisable to soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in warm water and squeeze it out, then bind it with a bandage and tighten it until the swelling subsides.
And the erab which has a compressing quality is better than water alone in reducing the swelling, so if you find that the swelling has subsided, loosen the bandage with warm water in which a little of kammi or khubazi has been added, for it facilitates its insertion with gentle ease.
If the patient complains of return of the symptoms after this treatment, make a small incision in the skin with the instrument which makes the small incisions and repeat the first treatment, for it is better than making an incision and it will not be necessary to resort to incision except in cases of necessity and inability to bear the treatment.
The single curved forceps has one end limited and the other end not limited, and the delicate extremity is not firm in the grasp but is slightly flexible, and it resembles a small solj. As you see, if the wound gapes open and the bandage enters, it is advisable that it be returned to its natural shape.
And its specific position is better if it can be managed thus, and if the wound was wide and located on the lower abdomen, it is advisable to lie on his back with his legs elevated above his head, and if it was on the upper abdomen, he should elevate his head and chest above his lower parts.
And likewise, if the wound was on one side of the abdomen, you should always elevate the affected side, where the surgery is being performed, above the other side; and thus it is advisable to use this in major surgeries and in moderate ones.
And in minor surgeries, you should adjust it according to what is convenient for you, then prepare between your hands a gentle and moderate grip that holds the entire wound with his hand and brings its edges together, then uncovers it to apply the suture thread little by little.
This is the description of the simple suture, and it is that you take a needle or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leave from the edge of the skin an amount equivalent to the thickness of the knuckle, and insert one needle without putting thread in the edges of the skin. With the edges of the superficial fascia under the skin, from inside, you pierce them from that direction; and you have gathered the edges of the skin and the edges of the superficial fascia, and formed four stay sutures. Then, you tighten with a thread around the needle several times from both directions until the edges of the wound meet together perfectly.
Then, you leave an amount equivalent to the thickness of the finger as well, and insert another needle, then you sew it with the thread as you did with the first needle. Do not cease doing that until you complete the entire wound, and the needles are evenly spaced between the thickness and the thinness.
Because the thin needles are very sharp and cut through the flesh and the bones also, it is difficult to enter the skin. Therefore, it is necessary to be moderate in the thinness and the thickness, and it is not necessary to insert the needle at the edge of the skin too closely.
So that the flesh does not cut quickly and the wound does not open before it heals, and you do not tighten too much with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from healing. Then, you cut the edges of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when he moves and you make for him a dressing of two pieces of cloth from each side to hold the edges of the needles.
And you leave it until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of suture with needles is more beneficial in small surgeries because it can be sufficient to suture with one or two needles, or approximately.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
The suture thread should be placed above the wound to form a suture according to the suturing of Al-Kisah, which tightens the margins and makes a space between each suture and the next after the small finger's pressure, and this suture is recognized by all people.
And with this suture, a surgical incision was made on a man's belly that had been wounded by two blows, and the wound of the surgery was more than a finger's span, and it had torn from its middle about two fingers' span from the middle of the belly.
He treated it after the abscess had formed outside the wound for twenty-four hours, and the wound took about fifteen days to heal, and he recovered until he was well and lived afterwards for many years, and the physicians would declare that it was impossible for him to recover.
It is amazing that I did not treat it with medication, because I was in a place where there was no medicine available, so I put on the wound a cotton pad soaked in honey twice a day and washed it with warm water until he recovered.
And one of the types of special sutures is what I recall from Galen's text, which is to start with the suture from the skin and insert the needle from outside inwards, so when you pierce the skin and the underlying tendon on the straight line along the entire length of the belly.
I left the suture thread in the outer aspect of the abdomen at the side where I inserted the needle, and pierced the needle through its other end from inside outwards at the outer aspect of the abdomen, so if it pierces, it pierces again in this same outer aspect of the abdomen from outside inwards.
And I pushed the suture thread of the outer aspect of the abdomen at this side, and pierced the needle through its other end from inside outwards, and pierced with it in the outer aspect of the abdomen to the outer aspect of the navel, until all of it is pierced.
Here is the translation:
Take it out from the poultice that is on its side, and do it again and again until you have sutured the entire wound according to that example, and the characteristic of this suture is that it sutures the sutures of the fracture for the fracture.
Suture the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the poultice, and leave it once from the other side until it is relaxed. As for the second type of special suture that Galen also mentioned, this is his exact words.
It is to suture it according to the example of how the skilled physicians suture, gathering each part to its like, matching the edges of the peritoneum to each other and the edges of the wounds to each other, and that will be as I have described to you.
It is necessary to insert the needle at the edge of the wound near you from outside and pass it inside, then release the edge of the peritoneum, then return the needle and pass it from outside to inside at the edge of the peritoneum, both of them, then return it also.
And pass it from inside to outside at the edge of the other wound on the opposite side. This type of suture is better than the ordinary simple suture, and this is the suture that I mentioned earlier. This is Galen's exact words. Some have said that you can use two needles for suturing the abdomen. And that is to insert a single thread, and start by inserting the needle from your side and passing it to the other side, then insert the other needle from the opposite side, so it passes from your side according to the suture of the Asakifah.
Know that the hernia, if it is in the middle of the abdomen, its suture is more difficult than other places of the abdomen. And as for the treatment of the wound, its governance in its treatments is like the governance of other wounds, and that is because you should close the wound with its natural moisture before the air reaches it, and you should restore its function, and govern it, and apply the suitable dressing.
If the wound has been exposed to air, then apply some of the medications that you have prepared until it heals and the swelling subsides, and the stitches are removed, and the dressing is lifted, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it recovers.
If you have not prepared medications, then apply to it a cotton pad soaked in rose water and change it twice a day as I have taught you until it recovers. You will not need another treatment in most cases if the wounds are small, but be cautious not to irritate the main members of the body with pain.
It is good to apply a woolen cloth soaked in warm oil or rose oil and place it around the areas between the armpits and the chest, for if you feel pain or inflammation in those areas, it is frequent that this happens, so treat it with a strong vinegar dressing.
And it is not unlikely that the inflammation has reached the chest and become a putrid wound, penetrating to its depth. Know that what was thick in the body is easier to treat, and what was thin is more difficult to treat.
And as for the known chest wounds, they do not accept treatment from a surgical incision that reaches the ribs, because of the abundance of vessels and bones in them, and the sensitivity of their nerve endings. And if what has burst forth from the wound is pus, and you have recognized it, then treat it according to the condition of the chest, whether good or bad.
If a period of time has passed and it has turned green or black, it is good to hold it with a thread above the affected area so that it does not cause an outflow of blood, for there are vessels and sinews in the pus. Then, cut what is below the ligature.
And make the ends of the thread hanging down from below the wound, exiting from it, so that it is easy for you to drain and extract when the pus flows out and the wound heals. This is the wound that appears in the chest. But if a small abscess appears in the chest.
It is possible to make an incision in some people because I have seen a person who had a rupture in his belly and the rupture was on the right side of the intestine, so I made a small opening and inserted my fingers, and I did not find any obstacle, so I widened the opening and it became possible for me to bring out the excrement and gas, and thus I treated the obstruction. Then I did not remove the sutures until the wound had healed and the site had mended, for when I saw that the site had mended, I feared that a bad accident might occur to him in his belly, so he was not exposed to that bad accident, and he remained in good health. He eats and drinks and gathers strength and enters the bath and recovers from his illness, and some of the experienced ones have mentioned that when he was presented with a small wound in the belly, it was not worth paying attention to this condition.
And it is that the large ants are taken, then the edges of the wound are gathered, and an ant is placed on each edge, with its mouth open on the edge of the wound; if it bites down and holds fast, its head will be cut off and it will stick, not come loose. Then another ant is placed near the first one.
And do not cease to act thus, placing several ants according to the size of the wound, and then bandage it and stitch the wound; for those heads will remain stuck in the belly until the belly heals and recovers, and no bad accident will occur. It is also possible to treat the belly with a fine thread.
That which is taken from the living animal's sutures, after it has entered into a needle, and it is that one end of this thread is taken from the sutures, and then a fine silk thread is tied to its end, and then that thread is inserted into the needle. And there is a thread of sutures that stitches the belly, and then returns to the wound, and this kind of stitching with ants and sutures is indeed on the path of experimentation and trial.
If the wound is large and open, and not in one of the fleshy parts, there will be no trickery nor benefit from cauterization.
Chapter 68
On the treatment of abscesses and swellings
Know that every wound or abscess, if it suppurates and becomes chronic and turns into a ulcer, and does not heal, and the pus continues to flow, is called by the masses an abscess in whatever member it may be, and we call them swellings.
It is, in reality, a hard, white, compact, dense, and solid substance, without any cavity, like the compact bone of a bird's wing.
And therefore, some have called it a 'wing', and it may be that at times it becomes soft, continually discharging pus, and perhaps the softness ceases at times; this softness may be abundant, or scanty, or thick, or thin.
And perhaps I mentioned in the section on surgical wounds that every ulcer that does not heal and does not grow flesh is due to one of nine reasons, namely either because of a lack of blood in the body, or because of its weakness, or because there is within it and on its edges hard flesh that prevents the growth of good flesh. Or because it is abundant in noxious and filthy matter, or because the ulcer itself is rotten and the material that flows from it is bad quality, or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or because of corruption occurring in the country due to a type of plague, or because of a specific property of the country.
Or because it is abundant in noxious and filthy matter, or because the ulcer itself is rotten and the material that flows from it is bad quality, or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or because of corruption occurring in the country due to a type of plague, or because of a specific property of the country. As I have demonstrated in the city of Saragossa, where the natural temperament is such that it hinders the maturation of humors and slows down the healing of wounds by nature, and because there are single or multiple hard bones; I have explained all these reasons, signs, and treatments with medicines in the section.
Here is the translation:
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
What remains of these incisions in this form is from the ugly wounds that do not accept treatment and are neglected with ignorance and stupidity, for if they were from the incisions that did not reach these mentioned places, and were treated with gentleness and caution.
And I wanted to achieve knowledge of that, so take a file made of iron or copper, if the incision passes over a straight bone, then scrape it with it; and if there is curvature in the incision, then scrape it with a file made of fine rasp, for the rasp adapts to its body.
It is easy when entering and bending towards the curvature, if the incision has many cavities that you cannot reach with the file, so remove one of its cavities, for the roughness that reaches it will lead to the other cavities and connect.
Then examine the exploration on any aspect you can, to know if there is a bone or nerve, or if the incision is shallow, far or near, or if it has many cavities, and stand on all that with the strength of your fingers from the slight touch, feeling the pain when you press your hand on the spot.
And avoid that from the faulty and harmful causes of the tumor, for if you stood on all that with a true standing, then you will be certain about the treatment, and it is that you should look, for it was.
The incision appears near or in a healthy place, far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein or one of the mentioned places, so dissect the incision according to what has been described and remove what is in it of the roughness and the filthy and superfluous flesh.
And what grows in it of flesh or pus, and avoid that, and treat it until it heals; for if the incision was deep and on a straight bone, it is necessary to dissect it deeply as much as you can, then clean it from all its filthy flesh.
I used the serrated forceps in the acute abscesses and inserted them into the bottom of the nasal passage, which was inflamed by the iron, and did that repeatedly until all the purulent discharge that remained in the bottom of the nasal passage came out.
Then I pressed on him with the medicated bandages that restore the flesh to its natural state, until he recovered. If he did not recover with that, I applied it again as previously described and explained. If the cause of the nasal passage was a bone and it was confirmed by you, then open it and dissect it as I have informed you, unless something prevents you from doing so.
It is a vein, or nerve, or main member, as we have said. If the bone was exposed to you and there was some pus and suppuration in it, then drain it until its pus is evacuated. Then treat it with what adheres to it until it recovers. If it does not recover and the abscess increases as it used to do.
Be aware that you have not reached all the abscess, so expose everything that is on it again and clean it with a strong effort, then press on it. If it recovers, otherwise be aware that the abscess is in a deep cavity far from the abscess, so expose everything that is on it again.
And clean it with a strong effort, for the rotten bone was a small bone and you were able to extract it, so extract it with fine forceps that are suitable for that.
If there were many bones, then extract all of them and do not leave any of them behind. Make an effort, for if something from the ligaments obstructed you without being a danger in cutting them, then cut those ligaments and the tendons if they were there, and release the bone.
If you were not able to extract the bone at that time, then place on the wound what covers it and leave it for a few days until it putrefies what is around those bones from the tendons and ligaments, and preserve the wound so that the slit you made during your operation does not close.
Put it on a straightened splint in the form of a cylinder with oil or a straightened splint in the Egyptian plaster, or one of the green plasters; for if you fasten those bandages and adjust the bone properly, it will be easy to remove them and pull them.
If it was a large single bone, like the shin bone or thigh bone and their likes, and only its surface was affected, then scrape thoroughly until the blackness and putridity disappear, then close the wound. If it was a part of a large bone that had become putrid and reached the marrow of the bone, then there is no alternative but to amputate.
And cut it off to where the putridity ends, and then apply a dressing until it heals. I will tell you about a case that was presented to me, a man with a wound on his leg, which I made an example and a model for your treatment, this man was suffering from gangrene.
Around thirty years ago, a man was presented to me with a wound on his leg, caused by a movement inside the body until the matters reached his leg and became inflamed and swollen greatly, but there was no external cause, then he struggled with it for a long time along with the mistakes of the physicians until the tumor opened.
And many matters flowed from it, and he was in a bad state of treatment until his leg became weak and many abscesses formed on it, all of them pouring forth pus and filthy matter, and a group of physicians worked on him for nearly two years, but none of them had any skill in manual dexterity.
Until I was asked to treat him, and I saw his leg, with matters flowing from those abscesses in a great flood, and the man's body had become thin and yellow, so I inserted the rasp into one of those abscesses, then the rasp reached the bone, and all those abscesses burst open.
And I found that some of them had burst into each other from all directions of the leg, so I made an incision and dissected one of those abscesses until I exposed part of the bone, and I found it to be corroded, decayed, and fragmented, with cavities and crevices, until the probe reached the marrow, and I removed what was visible.
I will remove the defective bone and I think that there is no defect in the bone except what has been cut out and separated, and I have restored it. Then, I made a firm dressing with adhesive medicine for a longer period, so it did not become inflamed. Then, I returned and opened up to expose the bone again above the first opening.
I found the defect connected to the bone, so I separated what appeared to me of that defect. Then, I made a gentle pressing and it did not become inflamed or infected. Then, I opened up on it also, but I did not remove by cutting the bone piece by piece, and I restored its dressing, so it did not become inflamed until I cut from the bone about a finger's breadth.
And I extracted it with its membrane, then dressed it with medicine, and the inflammation subsided quickly and healed. And indeed, this repetition in his work and his condition of weakness and little chance of recovery and fear of death, because it used to happen to him at all times from excessive vomiting, so he recovered completely.
And I implanted a solid flesh in the place of the bone, and his condition improved in his body, and his strength returned, and he regained his well-being, and he did not suffer from the movement that harmed him with the fracture, for it was as if the bone had been naturally formed in its place in the body.
Then, it is necessary to separate it in this manner, and that is to take a bandage, and fasten it at the end of the new bone, and order what extends from above, and make another bandage, thicker than the first one.
Then, bind it to the flesh underneath the bone, and extend its end to pull the flesh downwards, and you will expose the flesh from the place you want to separate, so that the saw does not hurt the flesh, and put a thin plate or a flat thing under the bone from below, firmly fixed.
Because if you do that, the rasp will not be prevented from cutting the rotten bone, and it is necessary for the rasp to be above the place of rotting slightly so that it does not appear in the cavity of the bone with rot, and then it will be necessary to rasp again another time.
For if the bone is rotten and not detached, but rather some of it adheres to some, and the rot is in its middle or in some of it, then uncover the flesh from all its directions, then place the scalpel from below, then rasp it from the first direction where the rot is.
If you have finished rasping, then rasp from the other direction, and let the rasping be at a distance from the rot slightly, as we mentioned. If the rot is in a joint, cut the rotten joint itself and rasp the bone where it adheres from the other direction.
If the rot is in the connection of two joints, there is no trick but to amputate. If the rot is in the palm of the hand or the palm of the foot, the matter is very difficult to treat, but it is necessary for you to cut out the rot as much as appears to you and to clean it and to make it as good as possible.
And with what trick do you straighten it for yourself when a vein or nerve does not obstruct you, and know that the saws and rasps are many for cutting these bones according to the position of the bone and its direction and its density and its roughness and its size and its smallness and its curvature? Therefore, it is necessary for you to prepare a specific instrument for each type of operation.
And know that the operations themselves will guide you on the type of instrument you need, if you have long experience and knowledge of the arts of this craft, for one who is skilled in the craft and has seen many cases of diseases. So he will be able to choose for himself what instruments are needed for each disease, and I will describe to you at the end of this chapter a few instruments.
Make it an example beneath which you will base others, if God so wills, a pattern of a surgical instrument.
A pattern of another surgical instrument:
A pattern of a small surgical instrument:
A pattern of a large surgical instrument:
The head of this simple instrument is in the form of a curved hook, and its shape is like that of a scalpel, but it is suitable for use on joints if they are dislocated or have large abscesses. A pattern of another small simple instrument:
A pattern of a narrow simple instrument:
It is made with its upper part curved and its surface from iron, and its handle from a wooden cone, solidly fixed. A pattern of a simple instrument with a hollowed-out part:
A pattern of another simple instrument for scraping:
A pattern of another simple instrument with a bent end:
A pattern of a small simple instrument resembling a forceps:
A pattern of another small cutting instrument:
Its end is like a awl, it is used in many places for piercing the bone's marrow. A pattern of a simple instrument suitable for piercing what has accumulated in the bone:
Its end is like a sharp pointed needle, made from Indian iron, and it is also recommended that all the simple instruments and cutting instruments we mentioned be made in this way. A pattern of a simple instrument:
Chapter 7 and 8.
On Cutting off Limbs and Setting Bones.
The limbs may become putrid either due to an external cause or an internal one. If you treated that putridness with medicinal treatment and it did not benefit from the treatment, and you saw the putridness spreading in the limb without anything stopping it.
It is necessary to amputate that limb to the point where the gangrene has reached, to rescue from death or from great pain, which is more significant than losing a limb. A sign of this is that the limb becomes black, until you think that it has been burned by fire.
Or it putrefies after the blackening, until that putrefaction reaches what is adjacent to that limb and takes hold of the entire body, so hasten its amputation. And likewise, if the cause of the gangrene is some creeping pest, such as a sea crab or a viper or a centipede and the like.
If the gangrene or pestilence is in a finger, then amputate the finger and do not delay, lest the gangrene spread to the hand. And likewise, if it has taken hold of the hand, then amputate it from the base of the arm, and do not delay, lest it spread until it takes hold of the upper arm.
And likewise, if it has taken hold of the upper arm, then amputate the upper arm at the elbow joint itself. If the gangrene has spread and reached towards the shoulder, do not amputate the entire shoulder, for that would be a deadly operation. Instead, try other treatments according to one's strength.
And likewise, do the same with the foot if gangrene has taken hold of the toes, amputate the toes at one of the joints. And if it has taken hold of the ankle, then amputate the leg with its bones, and if it has spread to the knee, then amputate the thigh at the knee joint.
And if the gangrene has reached above the knee, then there is no remedy except to resign oneself to fate and surrender the patient to death. And it is proper to amputate a limb or to sever it by tightening a ligature below the place where you want to amputate, and tightening another ligature above the place.
And you should apply one ligature below and another above, and then sever the flesh between the two ligatures with a sharp scalpel until the entire flesh is exposed. Then amputate or separate it. And it is necessary to place a compress of lint on all sides.
When you touch the vein at the correct site, it will be evident to the senses if there is an extra or inflamed vein; if bleeding occurs during your operation, stop the bleeding quickly by applying pressure or using some compressing sutures to constrict the blood flow, then return to treating it until it heals.
Then bind the injured limb with a bandage that suits it, and treat it until it recovers. I will give you an example of a case where a man suffered from this condition in his leg, which I described to you, and that is what happened to him: he had a black swelling on his leg with a burning pain resembling fire.
And that was the first corruption that occurred in his finger, until the man felt it all, so he began to move his hand away from himself when he saw the corruption spreading in the limb with intense pain and burning, which he used to feel at the joint, so he desisted.
Then, after a long time had passed for him, that corruption appeared to him in his left hand's fingers, so I treated it by applying a remedy that I carried on my hand, after cleaning the affected area, and the corruption did not spread, but rather began to move into the other fingers.
Until the corruption reached his hand, and I was forced to amputate it, so I applied a dressing on it from my experience in treating that condition, and I also feared for his death when amputating his hand, because the man's strength was failing, and he was about to leave for his hometown.
He informed me that he had only saved his hand by amputating it, and I told this story to serve as a warning about what happens from this type of disease, and to be a guide for those who suffer from it and take action against it.
Chapter 88.
On the treatment of abscesses and how to inject them with medications.
If an abscess forms in some of the fleshy parts and the abscess takes a long time to gather, then it bursts or ruptures and all that was in it from the pus empties out, leaving the site empty as if it were a vessel.
The fracture that has occurred and has not been properly set, and has not affected the bone, nor the nerve, nor the ligament, and from here it is deserving to be named 'hidden' and should not be called 'broken' unless its duration reaches a point where it affects the corruption in one of these organs.
So, it is called 'broken' or 'dislocated', and its treatment is to cut the entire fracture as it revolves, and it will not be named thus if it has occurred and become dislocated, and you are certain that it does not adhere to its position due to corruption.
For if you find that the fracture has adhered and the corruption has not reached that amount, and there is a thick piece of meat in the fracture, active with the needle, it is that you should look at the hidden (part) - if it was large and the pus that flows from it is abundant, then treat it with the Egyptian medicine.
Which is: vinegar, honey, and sugar, all of equal parts, mixed together in a vessel and cooked over the fire until the medicine dissolves, then you take what you need from it and mix it with water and honey, and apply it to the hidden (part) and bind it firmly, and leave the medicine on it for two hours.
Then, you extract it with the press, doing that every day until the hidden (part) is cleansed and the pus disappears. If this medicine does not work for you, take the ash of burnt pomegranate or the ash of burnt quince, and mix it with water.
Then, you massage it and apply it until you are certain that the hidden (part) has healed. If it does not heal with the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then treat it with a mixture of water and honey in which is mixed a small amount of powdered sugar.
Or, treat it with honey and wine, mixed together, because the property of honey is to cleanse and purify, and wine helps to hold the hidden (part) in place; and it will not be so unless the wine is of superior quality and strong. So, if you do that repeatedly and are certain that the hidden (part) has disappeared, then treat it with what nourishes the flesh.
As you take from the rhizome of the nasal bone and dissect it with a scalpel and a straight forceps or hook, while freeing it from some medications and the other nasal bones whose characteristics we have mentioned in the chapter on nasal bones, if the passage of the antrum is narrow and does not allow the insertion of the instrument.
Open it with the iron a little, or place a curved file in the Egyptian nose bone or the Suriyani nose bone until it expands, and also if the mouth is wide, gather its lips with the sutures and leave as much as the instrument can enter without excess.
And also, if the mouth from which the pus flows upwards to the top, split it in a lower place so that the pus flows down, because when the pus accumulates in the depth of the antrum, it prevents the flesh from growing.
If you cannot split the antrum downwards as you wish, then incline the instrument in a way that allows the pus to flow out easily according to what is visible to you, and make sure that no part of the pus remains.
As for the medications that are applied to the antrum from outside and how they are placed on it, it is that you take one of the medications that are suitable for what you want and spread it on a piece of cloth, and let the cloth be as large as the antrum covers it entirely. Then you make an incision with the scissors in front of the mouth of the antrum, a little wider than the mouth of the antrum, then spread some of the soft medications on another piece of cloth according to the size of the incision and place it on it in a way that is away from the mouth of the antrum to facilitate the exit of the pus and do not remove the large piece of cloth until afterwards.
For several days, and as for what is on the mouth of the antrum, it is what you remove at every time to let out what has accumulated in it of pus, and to know what flows from it of discharge, whether it is much or little, thick or not thick.
With this, you should also examine the site of the abscess itself: does its owner feel pain in it, or is there no pain in it, and is there a swelling or is there no swelling? If you have treated it in this way and seen the purulent matter that comes out slowly from the site of the abscess.
You should know that the abscess has adhered or nearly adhered, so then you should open it on the fifth day or on the third day, and when you have opened the wound, replace the dressing with another and renew the medication. For if pus comes out of the abscess after a long period, it will be thin and clear, so do not despair at the suppuration.
You should drain it quickly, because some people delay the healing of the flesh in their wounds and contradict that. For if pus comes out of the abscess after many days without being thick, you should know that the abscess has not matured, so the suppuration of the abscess is delayed.
And treat his condition by strengthening the medicaments and make the medicaments be in their thick consistency and in their thinness like the Nakhliyah ointment, if it has been strengthened with the addition of Quqlqtar. And most informative of what is treated with is that the Nakhliyah ointment should be taken.
And apply the lead ointment and sprinkle on it the attar of roses, which is mixed with its thick consistency, then bandage it with it and use it. And you may do like this deed if you do not have the Nakhliyah ointment, honey, or rose-water, even if you take from the bitter and aloe and colocynth and grind them all together and apply it to the sore while it is on fire. Then apply it to the dressing and bind it to the abscess, or smear it with honey that has been cooked until it thickens, and put the medications on it and apply the dressing, binding it.
Here is the translation:
A fracture in the bone or in other solid organs or ligaments requires treatment according to what is presented.
Chapter 89.
On the treatment of gout and ulceration, and cutting off the excess fingers and splitting of the nails.
Gout is a plentiful humor that grows under the nail of the finger or toe, and sometimes grows in other fingers, so if its matter increases and its treatment is neglected, it becomes swollen and painful.
Or it becomes putrid and rotten until it eats into the root of the nail, and sometimes it corrupts all of it, and sometimes the corruption reaches the bone, so that it has a foul smell and the tip of the finger becomes swollen and its color becomes dark blue, so if you treated it with what we mentioned in the section and the treatment did not succeed.
Then it is necessary to cut off with an iron all the putrid matter that grows from the nail, and then to cauterize the wound afterwards; indeed, cauterization in this case is very beneficial, provided the bone is sound and the nail is also sound.
And the corner of the nail fold had pushed the flesh inside and made it swollen and painful, so it is necessary to put a thin probe under the corner of the nail that has pushed the flesh and lift it up, and then cut off that flesh gently.
And apply to the remaining flesh from the corrosive medicines that eat away until it disappears completely, then treat it with ointments until it heals; and if the corruption had affected the bone, it is necessary to cut out that bone and extract it, for it will not heal as long as there is rotten bone.
For if you see the putridity and corruption spreading in the fingers, cut them off at one of the joints as mentioned previously, then treat them until they heal; for if the nail is struck or bruised and a severe pain occurs, it is necessary to open the abscess first.
Cut the nail with a sharp instrument, inclining it from above to below, and be careful not to reach the flesh underneath the nail, lest you cause pain and severe injury to the patient. This will lead to excessive bleeding in the affected area.
And as for the extra fingers that grow on some people's hands, sometimes they are fleshy, sometimes they have bones, and sometimes they have nails, and their growth is rooted in the joint of some fingers.
And their growth is in some of the finger's joints, and what grows on some of the finger's joints does not move, and what grows at the joint of the finger sometimes moves; if it is just a fleshy piece, it is easy to cut it off at its base with a sharp instrument.
And as for those that grow at the base of the joint, it is difficult to treat them, so you should refrain from cutting them. And as for those that grow on the fingers at one of the joints, it is necessary to cut the flesh in a straight line up to the bone, and then scrape the bone with one of those suitable instruments.
Then treat until it heals, and as for the adhesion that occurs between some of the fingers, it is frequent that this happens and it is something that is born with humans, and it occurs when a wound or burn or similar injury occurs; it is necessary to separate those adhered parts.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then put between them a soft cloth or a piece of leather anointed with rose oil so that they do not adhere quickly and separate from each other, or make between them a thin sheet of copper, until the area is as it should be.
And likewise, if adhesion occurs between some of the fingers and the palm, then separate that adhesion according to what is needed, and repair it in a way that suits the shape of the limb.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
On the excision of the veins.
The veins are many, varicose, and full of bloody fluid, occurring in most parts of the body, but more frequently in the legs; it often happens in the thighs, calves, and hams. It is necessary to use the excision of the swollen vein from the black skin several times with strong excision.
Then the doctor treats it with iron, and its treatment is by cauterization, which has two effects: one is that it makes an incision and lets out black blood, and the other is that it seals the vein and lets out its putridity; but making an incision is on this condition, to drain the leg first with warm water.
Until the thick blood is dissolved, then the doctor should tighten the bandage around the leg from above its wound to its ankle with a wrapping, then make an incision in one place or two places or three separate incisions.
Then he should drain the black blood with his hands from the bottom of the leg to the top, and from the top to the bottom, until he removes as much blood as he thinks is sufficient or what the strength of the patient allows; then he should bandage it and order him to take nourishing food for the black skin, and to avoid puking and bleeding.
When the veins are full and that harms the patient, and its treatment is on this condition: to shave the doctor's leg if it has much hair, then to immerse it in warm water until it becomes hot and the vein opens or a strong sweating occurs.
If he does not immerse it in warm water until the member becomes hot, then he should make a longitudinal incision on the skin opposite the vein, either at the top near the knee or at the bottom near the ankle, and then open the skin with scissors and extract the vein from every direction until it becomes visible to the sense.
When it appears, you see a red vein, and when it is freed from the flesh, you see it as if it were a gut. Then, you insert a probe until, if it rises and exits the flesh, you tie it with a strong, smooth ligature. Then, you make another incision near that one, about three fingers in length.
Then, you strip the flesh from around the artery until it appears, then you elevate it with a probe as you did before, and tie it with another ligature as you did previously. Then, you make another incision or several incisions if you need to do so.
Then, you dissect it and cut it at the end of the incision near the ankle, then you pull it out until it exits from the second incision, then you pull it to the incision above it and do that until you pull it out from the third incision above all of them until, if its entirety emerges, you cut it.
If it does not respond to pulling and dissecting, then you insert a strong thread into the needle and tie it, and pull it out, and insert a probe underneath and manipulate it with your hand in every direction until it emerges, taking care not to cut it. If it gets cut, it will be troublesome for you to dissect it afterwards.
And you insert a dressing on the affected area, and if you dissected it all, then put a medicated poultice on the site of the incisions, made with rose oil or zit, and bandage it until it heals. If the diseased artery was twisted and had windings to its sides, that would be the case.
And do not be on a straight path as we mentioned, but rather make incisions on it at every direction of its windings and twistings, then tie it with ligatures until you dissect it entirely. And take care when making an incision on it not to cut the artery or pierce it, for that would be troublesome for you to dissect afterwards.
Picture of the nail that was split by the scalpel:
Picture of the deep suture:
It should not have a curved suture, nor be sharp at the end, lest it injure the vein and become a rough bend, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein with its fineness; but rather it should have a thick edge, as we said.
The Sharp Instrument and the Rasper
In the extraction of the median vein
This vein is generated in the legs in hot climates, such as Hijaz and Arab lands, and in hot climates with little hair and slight moistness, and maybe it generates in other places of the body besides the legs, and its generation occurs due to an inflammation that happens under the skin.
As it happens in the living bodies, and the lice, and the abscesses, and the generated swellings between the skin and the flesh. And the sign of the beginning of this vein is that it happens in the leg with severe inflammation, then the place becomes swollen, then the vein begins to emerge from that swelling.
It is as if it were the root of a plant or an animal, so if its tip appears, it should be wrapped with a small piece of lead that weighs from one dirham to two dirhams, and tied, and the lead is left suspended from the leg.
Whenever something emerges from it to the outside, wrap it in lead and tie it, for if you leave it, it will spread and cut some of it, and wrap the rest, do not cut it from its root before it all emerges, because if you cut it, it will constrict and enter the flesh, causing putrefaction and inflammation in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it should be treated and drawn out little by little until it emerges completely, and nothing of it remains in the body. It is possible that from this vein, in some people, there may emerge five or ten finger-lengths.
It did not reach me that a man had an incision of twenty fingers, so I waited until you treated him, then I inserted a bandage into the wound and pressed it with a compress for a long time until all the putrid matter was evacuated from it, and I helped to clean the site with medications.
Then I treated the patient for tumors, and it may be that this artery has many branches, and it is not surprising if it appears in the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, causing him many pains and aching, as we mentioned in the section on anatomy and what we have presented.
Chapter 89.
On the incision on the generated lumps under the rib, and it is called the ulcer of the cattle disease.
This disease is called in some countries among us the ulcer of the cattle disease, because it often affects cattle and it is a small, single, generated lump that forms between the skin and the flesh and spreads throughout the body, causing swelling and connection.
It progresses gradually from one member to another until it perforates, where it has not perforated the skin at that site, and comes out and forms a ulceration from some of the corrupt humors, as it appears in the lumps and tumors, and loves to settle in the abdominal cavity.
And indeed, it is feared from its mischief that if it settles in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, perhaps it will open up there and come out, thus damaging the eye. This appears often. Therefore, if you want to treat it and extract it, then it must be done when it first appears and begins to progress gradually.
It is necessary to dissect above and below it with a strong ligature, then make an incision over it and extract it. If it has penetrated into the flesh and you do not find it, then apply a hot iron to the site until it is perforated, and beware of its damage to the eye, as we have said.
If you find it has settled in the head near the eyes, then press under it on the forehead strongly and steadily, then make an incision over it and extract it. And it is necessary to take care of the patient's body with sweet medications for the foul ulcers and to guard against the putrid matter that causes the inflammation.
Chapter 83.
On the incision for the disease that is recognized by the swelling.
This disease, which is called in our country "al-Nafar", is a abscess that appears on some of the limbs and then transfers from one limb to another, and I have seen it as I described to you.
I was called to a woman who had some numbness in her limbs, so I examined her arm and found a small swelling in the artery of the arm, and when it remained for an hour, I saw that swelling move with the pulse as the finger moves when it is inserted into the hollow.
If it moves from one place to another, the pain leaves that place and settles in the shoulder, then it remains for an hour until it spreads to the rest of the body, until it becomes in the other arm, and then I knew that it affects her entire body, as I observed.
I was amazed at the speed with which it transferred from one limb to another, and I had not seen this disease before with such a symptom, except that I had seen a group of people who experienced pain transferring from one limb to another, but I did not see it as clearly as I saw it in this woman.
And I did not think that it was because the woman was from the people of the desert, with a dry and rough skin, and uncovered arteries, so it was clear to me that this transferring sensation appeared because of this, and it is unlikely to appear in the people of the cities and villages, who have soft and hidden arteries.
If you want to treat it and its owner feels a sensation of discomfort, then the patient will become aware of it as we have mentioned, so press on it firmly with your fingers and hold it tightly until that constricted air is released and the spot becomes relaxed.
If you did not see it with your own eyes, treat it by massaging the affected limb and what is hidden of the air, and evacuate it like evacuating a stubborn abscess and a bruise, and treat it with medicaments.
Chapter 84.
On Removing Arrowheads.
Arrowheads may differ according to their types and according to the locations in which they are found in the body, and as for their difference according to their types, there are large and small ones, and some have triangular and quadrangular points.
And some have barbs and some have fragments, and as for those that are according to the members in which they are found, they are on different patterns, either the members are main vital organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, and stomach, and so on. So when an arrowhead falls in one of these organs and death symptoms appear, which I will describe to you later, it is necessary to hasten the removal of that arrowhead from them, for death often follows its owner in most cases. And when these bad symptoms do not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not lodged in the depth of the organ, then extract it and treat the wound. And among the signs of a head injury, if an arrowhead strikes the brain and penetrates the bone, and wounds the dura mater that covers the brain, then it produces severe headache, vertigo, and stupor.
And when these bad symptoms do not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not lodged in the depth of the organ, then extract it and treat the wound. And among the signs of a head injury, if an arrowhead strikes the brain and penetrates the bone, and wounds the dura mater that covers the brain, then it produces severe headache, vertigo, and stupor. And there is a redness in the eyes and a redness of the tongue, and convulsions, and confusion of mind, and a reversal of senses, and sometimes blood comes out from the nostrils or ears, and sometimes speech is cut off and the voice goes away, and a white frothy discharge emerges from the site of the wound, resembling pus, and it is drawn out like the liquid of meat.
If these signs appear to you, refrain from treating the limpness and extracting the arrowhead if it has not come out, and as for the signs of the arrowhead, if it has reached the heart and was close to the left nipple and felt as if it had been implanted in a solid body and not in an empty one.
Perhaps the arrowhead was moving with a motion similar to that of a pulse, and blood would flow out from the wound, which would be followed by numbness in the extremities and a cold sweat, and you should know that death is imminent without any doubt. And a sign of the arrowhead is if the lung is wounded, with a flow of frothy blood from the wound.
And the vessels that are below the neck become swollen and change the color of the limb, and they puff up with a faint puffing, and ask for inhalation of cold air; if the arrowhead has reached the diaphragm that is in the chest, then it is close to the small ribs and the puffing becomes severe with severe pain.
And all the organs of the shoulders sink, and if the arrowhead has reached the liver, it is followed by severe pain and a discharge from the wound of blood resembling the liver in its redness; and if the arrowhead has reached the stomach, perhaps something unripe from the food would be vomited out from the wound.
And the matter is clear, and if the arrowhead has reached the abdomen and become fixed in it, and something from the feces or urine or pus has come out from the wound, then there is no hope in treating it nor in extracting the arrowhead; for if the arrowhead has reached the bladder and urine has come out.
And something bursts out from it to the outside, and the pain intensifies on the limb, so you should know that it is dying; and as for the rest of the organs, such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, back, hip, leg, and similar ones, they have given up on the severe matter.
When the arrow did not meet with a sharp or blunt instrument, and it was not poisoned, I will tell you about some of what I have seen regarding these arrows to guide you in your treatment, which is that an arrow had lodged in a man's eye socket at the base of his nose.
I extracted it for him from the other side beneath the eyebrow and he was healed, and no harm occurred to his eye. I also extracted another arrow that had lodged in his eye beneath the lower eyelid, which had become embedded and only its small tip remained attached to the skin.
It was a large arrow from the arrows of the Qasi tribe, with a rhomboid iron head and no barb, so it healed quickly without any bad incident occurring to his eye. I also extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat, and the arrow was Arab-made.
He was the one with barbs, so I split it open between the ribs and it had lodged in his throat, so I manipulated it until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed. I also extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his belly, and we thought he would die from it.
He did not remain for a period of thirty days or thereabouts, and nothing changed in his condition. I split open on the arrow, manipulated it, and extracted it, and he was healed without any bad incident occurring to him. I also saw a man who had been struck by an arrow in his back, so I treated the wound and dressed it.
He did not remain for seven years, until the arrow came out from the bottom of his thigh. I also saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in her belly, and I treated the wound, but the arrow remained without changing anything in her condition, and she did not find any harm in any of her natural functions.
I also saw another man who had been struck by an arrow in his face, and I treated the wound, but he did not find much pain. And there were many cases like this, and I extracted an arrow from a man of the Sultan's guard who had been struck in the middle of his nose, which had deviated slightly towards the right nostril.
Here is the translation:
It is necessary that the incision be made from the side of the arrowhead, and the site is pressed with force to extract the arrowhead, and a probe is inserted to detect if it has reached the site and appears as a sign of the arrowhead, so he makes an incision there, but if no accident occurs at the site, it indicates that the arrowhead has not reached it.
I pressed on it with force, but no accident occurred, so I left the probe in the wound for a while, and the patient remained quiet, not feeling the arrowhead inside his nose, until he felt it moving and informed me of it, so I applied the strong adhesive medicine to the wound several times.
Until I made an opening and explored, then I felt the fine tip of the arrowhead that was stuck in the bone. Then I increased the opening of the wound with that strong adhesive medicine until it became visible to us, and the tip of the arrowhead appeared, and it stayed with him for a period of time, about four months.
Then I did not widen the wound, but rather made it constricted for the introduction of the forceps to extract it and move it around, but it did not respond to coming out. So I did not leave it until I had grasped it with a pair of forceps, securely holding onto it in the shape that appeared at the end of the papula.
And the physicians were of the opinion that the cartilage of his nose would not be repaired, so I closed it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered completely, without anything bothering him. And I inform you of how to extract some arrowheads, making it a principle and guidance for what I have not mentioned.
Because the details of this craft and its nuances cannot be grasped through description, nor can a book encompass it. Rather, the skilled craftsman measures the little against the much, and what is present is based on what is absent, and he discovers new actions and new instruments in the face of unusual circumstances.
If we remove from this craft, I say that the arrows, indeed they exit from the organs which were implanted in them in two ways: either by being pulled out from the place where they entered, or from the opposite side of the direction, and those that exit from where they entered.
Either the arrowhead is stuck in a fleshy place, and it is pulled out and exits, but if it does not come out from its position where it fell, you should leave it until the flesh that is around it begins to putrefy, making its extraction and removal easier; also, if it is implanted in bone.
And if it does not come out, leave it also, and manipulate it by pulling and shaking every day, for it will come out. If it does not come out after some days, it is advisable to make a small perforation around the arrowhead in the same bone from all sides with a fine awl until it widens for the arrowhead, then pull it out and remove it.
If the implanted arrowhead is in a skull bone and has affected one of the brain membranes, and some of those symptoms I mentioned to you have appeared, then stop pulling out the arrowhead and leave it until its urgency subsides after some days.
Then hasten to pull out the arrowhead and remove it, for if it is deeply implanted and does not come out by pulling, use the perforators around the arrowhead as I described to you, then treat the wound until it heals. And if the arrowhead has been displaced in a place of the body. And if you do not sense it, probe for it with a sounder, and if you feel it, pull it out with some instruments that are suitable for its extraction, because you were not able to reach it due to the narrowness of the wound, and the arrowhead was in the cavity, but there was no bone, nerve, or vein.
Here is the translation:
If you try to extract the arrow from any location, you should use your fingers with the forceps to grasp all of it until you feel its tip and bend it strongly so that the arrow does not break in your flesh and its extraction becomes difficult for you.
Leave it until it becomes putrid, then open it and you will find that it is easy to extract at that time. If blood flows from the wound, use the treatment we mentioned earlier in its place, and be cautious not to cut a vein or nerve, and use cunning.
You can extract the arrow in any way, but do it with gentle and gradual pulling, and fix it as I described to you. It is necessary for you to use a suitable device when extracting the arrow, so that it takes the shape it had when the arrow was embedded.
If you cannot do that, use what you can of the methods. As for the arrow that emerges from the opposite side, either something has protruded from it to the outside or you find the tip of the arrow by feeling from above the skin nearby and observing its prominence.
Make an incision on it, and let the incision be according to the amount that the forceps can grasp. Then extract it, for it will be easy to remove. If it is stuck in a bone, place your hand around it until it affects the arrow in the bone and widens its path. Then extract it.
Leave it until it is extracted, for if the arrow's shaft is in it, push it with it. If the shaft has broken off and you need to use a pusher, introduce the dilating instrument into the wound, so that its curve enters the groove of the arrow's head, then push it with it.
If the arrow is barbed, push it with an instrument that enters into that groove, for the arrow will be easy to extract by that. If the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary to remove all the flesh that has been affected by the poison, if you can do that, then treat it with what is suitable for that.
If the instrument falls on the chest or in the belly or in the peritoneum or in the loin, and it is close to what you aim for with the scalpel, and you are able to cut it, then cut and be cautious not to sever a vessel or nerve, and take it out.
Then make an incision in the wound if it needs stitching, and treat it until it heals, like the image of the curved scalpels used for suturing.
Its edges are like a bird's beak, crafted as if it were a file, so that when you grasp the instrument or something, it does not let go. Many types have been made, large and small and medium, all of which depend on the size of the instrument, its narrowness, and the width of the wound.
Image of the convex elevator:.
Image of the concave forceps:.
This is a forceps with a rounded end, not pointed, so that it may easily enter the convex instrument and grasp.
Chapter 85.
On the sectioning of veins.
The veins that it is customary to section in the body are thirty, of which six are in the head: the two nabid veins behind the ears, known as the sensual; the two jugular veins in the neck, visible and apparent; and the two veins in the corners of the eyes, known as the inspecting.
And the vein that is in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the side of the nose, and the two jugular veins in the neck, and the two veins on the upper lip from the mouth, and the two veins on the lower lip, and these are the known veins of the gullet, and the two veins under the tongue.
And as for the veins that are sectioned in the arm and hand, there are five: one is the cephalic, which is on the lateral side, and it is called the common vein of the head; and the median, which is the middle vein, composed of branches from the basilic and the cephalic, and it is commonly called the vein of the body.
The basilic vein, which is the topic in the inner aspect and is also called the umbilical vein, and the common people call it the "vein of the flank" and it is the one that lies on the thigh and it is the one that appears above the pubes, clearly visible.
And it is the vein between the speronal and condyloid, having two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one beneath the knee joint on the outer aspect, the second is the Safeen, located at the ankle on the inner aspect, and the vein of the ankle, located at the heel on the outer aspect.
And in the other leg, there are three veins like them; but as for the two veins behind the ears, they are of benefit in treating chronic and hectic diseases, and the affliction of the head and its chronic pains, and how they are beneficial in treating what I have described.
And it is that you shave the patient's head and scratch its back in the place of the veins with a rough kerchief, scratching intensely, then you constrict the patient's neck with a bandage until the veins appear, and their locations behind the ears in the two low places of the head are felt; so you feel them with your finger and when you feel their pulsation beneath your finger, there is a treatment by cupping.
Then you take a scalpel, which is known as a lancet, and insert it under the vein in the skin until it reaches the bone, then you lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards, and cut the vein along with the skin, cutting completely, and the length of the cut is equivalent to two closed fingers.
And in this way, you bleed as much as you want, then you bandage them with a compress and leave them until they heal; and I have mentioned their treatment at the beginning of this book, and their benefits. As for the two arteries that are in the temples, they are of benefit in treating chronic and severe headaches, and constant and sharp pains, and the piercing and intense pain that ascends to the eyes.
How to dissect them, as I have described to you, is to insert the scalpel under the skin and make it pass through until the tendons appear, then move the blade underneath the tendons and make it emerge from the incision site, and thus you will learn to use the scalpel with confidence, then lift the skin from above the tendons up to the incision site with your left hand.
And insert the scalpel from below and lift the tendons upwards, and separate them as you did with the other tendons, and drain the blood according to your need, then release the pressure on the skin and place your finger on the tendons for a while.
Then apply a compress and a bandage, and tighten it from above with firmness and tightness, and leave it until it heals. And you have presented their descriptions and divisions and their treatment at the beginning of this book. As for the suture of the forehead's tendons, it is more beneficial after suturing the cephalic tendons, for the treatment of chronic facial wounds, such as those caused by a blow or a bruise or a penetrating injury.
How to dissect, as I have described to you, is to constrict the skin with a bandage until the tendons appear, then take the instrument called the hook, and its shape is this:
You place the curved hook, which is at the head of the instrument, on the same tendon and strike from above with a spatula or another instrument in its way, and let the blood flow as much as you want, then release the pressure on the skin and tighten it until it heals.
And it may be opened with a thin scalpel, but it is not desirable that the scalpel be sharp at the tip like other scalpels, rather it should be slightly blunted at the tip, and dissect carefully because the bone is near, lest the scalpel breaks if it is fragile.
As for the two tendons that are in the corners of the eyes, they are beneficial for treating eye diseases such as conjunctivitis and hematomas and cataracts and facial wounds. And how to dissect them is to constrict the skin with a bandage, then dissect them and be careful not to slip on the bone, and make the incision slightly oblique with a small, slightly blunted scalpel.
If the location does not have flesh in it, then if the wound is on a thin part of the body and you fear that it may become inflamed, then you should bandage it with a compress and tie it up for one night, and then remove it, and if there is a flow of blood from the nose, you should stop the bleeding from the severe hemorrhage.
And severe pain and facial spasms like a red flush that appears on the nose, but it will not be severe if it is chronic. And how can one stop the bleeding by pressing the vein with your left hand and holding the thin part of the nose with your right hand?
And insert it in the middle of the nostril itself, between the nose and the forehead, on a straight line, because the vein does not appear to the senses there, so the blood bursts forth from its hour. And it is necessary that you press your hand on the wound a little and bandage it for one night, then it will congeal quickly.
And as for the wounds, they are beneficial in stopping the bleeding and reducing the inflammation and the blackish discolorations that appear on the surface of the skin, such as the black spots and the pustules and the red eruptions. And how can one stop them by pressing the vein underneath them with a bandage and holding the compress on top of the vein?
And the vein is based on a bone, then you stop the bleeding by compressing it slightly and moderately, then you release the blood according to what you see as necessary, then you do the same with the other vein, then you remove the bandage.
And you compress the two veins moderately so that the vein does not constrict and you leave it until the bleeding stops, for then the wound will heal. And as for the veins of the gums, they are beneficial in stopping the bleeding after compressing the jaws, for it cures the ulcers in the mouth and the putrid flesh and the red eruptions and the cracks in the lips and the red eruptions.
The places in the nose and around it, and how to dissect them so that you place the scalpel in front of you, and hold its edge with the thumb, then turn its sides and look at the two veins that you see, one on the right side of the nose and the other on the left.
And also, around them are many small dark veins, so you cut them in a circular way, for if you miscalculate and do not know what it is, you will incline to cutting the larger one and exposing it, and likewise, you should operate on the two veins in the lower nose.
And as for the two veins that are under the tongue, it is beneficial to dissect them after dissecting the uvula, which is in the throat, due to diseases of the larynx and mouth ulcers. And how to dissect them: you should place the scalpel between your fingers, with the edge facing the direction of the sun, and raise the tongue and look underneath it for one vein on one side and another on the other, and their darkness.
So you dissect them and be cautious not to cut them, for if you do, you will encounter hemorrhaging from those veins. As for the three veins that are dissected in the elbow, they are the ones that are commonly dissected in people, and their dissection is done on two sides.
There is a puncture with a thin, rhadanian or zeituni needle to the vein, and there is an incision with a sacchian needle, and it is the lancet [and this is its shape]. The image of the thin, rhadanian puncture:
It is thin as you see, suitable for opening the confluent, full, bulging, and manifest veins that contain thick, gloomy blood. And this is the image of the zeituni puncture:
And this puncture is less in display and more delicate in edge, suitable for dissecting the fine veins that contain thin, yellowish blood. And this is the image of the lancet puncture:
This type of surgical procedure is suitable for the separation and can be divided into various types according to the width of the wounds, and their narrowness; it can also be used to refer to other similar procedures, which are well-known among surgeons.
And as for the basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, its benefit lies in that it draws blood from the vessels that are beneath the gullet and neck, down to the chest and abdomen; when it is cut, it is necessary to beware lest a hemorrhage occurs, and it should be on a tendon of it, for if it is severed, an artery will be encountered, and an incision will be made in the tendon, cutting that artery.
If bleeding occurs, it is necessary that the incision not be on the tendon of the artery, but rather a separation with a surgical procedure; if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, it is necessary to avoid it and turn to another or seek some of its branches.
Or, if you want to ligate the arm vein, it is clear and separated by a surgical procedure as we mentioned; if you intend to cut it specifically, it is necessary before constricting the arm to explore the area until you recognize the position of the pulse, then you ligate it with a bandage.
Then, you constrict the arm and separate the artery by a surgical procedure, as we mentioned, and beware that the incision occurs far from the position of the artery; and when you see, upon constricting the bandage, a swelling at the place where you ligated with the bandage, then that swelling is an indication of the artery's movement, so avoid it.
If you see the blood upon cutting, it will gush out like a burst of water, and if the blood is thin and bright red, then know that it is from an artery; so, hasten to place your finger on it for a considerable time, then remove your finger, and if the bleeding stops, constrict the arm.
Here is the translation:
Take a straight razor and shave it, then take half of it and stretch it over the site of the bleeding, fastening it with a bandage and compressing until the last day, for if the bleeding is severed, it will stop, and the treatment that has been mentioned for the application of cautery to the cutting wounds will be effective, and its blood will not be difficult in most cases.
For a small wound, tighten the bandage on the arm, and as for the bleeding vein, it will be beneficial to stop the blood from the top of the head and the bottom of the limb, since it is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and a branch from the cephalic vein, as we have said.
It is necessary for the patient to be in a reclining position, for if he stands up, it will increase the bleeding of the wound and harm the patient, and may cause a rupture that will appear as a bruise, and sometimes the patient may not recover from it, and this bruise often appears suddenly.
For some people, the bleeding is slight and does not accumulate, it is necessary to make a small incision with a needle and avoid the bruise, for if the vein is between two tendons, then open the vein lengthwise, and as for the cephalic vein, it will be beneficial to stop the blood from the head.
It is useful for the diseases of the eyes, and it is necessary in this vein specifically, if you cannot stop the bleeding; it will be beneficial to cauterize the wound with a Zaituni or Rehani brand, because it closes all the veins, since it does not have an artery or nerve.
But it is necessary for you, when bleeding, to avoid the wound at the head of the joint only and seek the soft spot, and it will not harm if it does not bleed upon the first stroke, that it may be cauterized again repeatedly; but perhaps it may become inflamed in some people if it is not cauterized on the first stroke.
But it does not harm him at all, and how the abscess and its complications, and what is required to reform it, for first it is required to learn that the abscess is either used only to preserve health.
And how it is used in diseases and what is used to preserve health and its stability, and to prevent the occurrence of diseases, that the abscess should be in one of the three veins that are in the elbow, namely the cephalic, basilic, or median, and that the abscess should be in the first spring if signs of fullness appear.
And the abscess should be on Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours have passed from noon, and as for the abscess that is used in diseases, it does not have a limited time but rather whenever necessity and urgency require it, whether at night or day.
And at every hour and at every time, and it is not appropriate to abscess children until they reach fourteen years, nor should the elderly who have passed sixty years be abscessed. So if someone is averse to abscession for any reason, then...
It is necessary to clean the area well before abscession with a gentle scrub, if there is much dirt and pus, lest it should spread to the veins during abscession from the dirty area, causing harm to the main organs. And one should not abscess those who are suffering from fever, or scatica, or gout, until that is alleviated in them.
And one should also beware of abscession after bathing, eating, and excessive sex, and from gatherings, exertion, sports, and fasting, and everything that weakens the body or soul, then look into the tempering of the humors before that, if the blood is thick.
With food, drink, and medicine, if it is possible, then he should enter the bath, if nothing prevents him or he does not exert himself with some sports to relax his blood and make his abscession in the middle of the day, as we mentioned, and he should avoid all psychological and bodily troubles that day.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
The surgeon sits on a cushion that is higher than the one on which the patient lies, then he extends his arm and feels the pulse with his fingers two or three times, then he tightens the bandage with a knot and wraps it twice or thrice, but the tightening should be moderate.
Because if the tightening is not moderate, either it will be excessive and the blood will flow back, or it will be too relaxed and the blood will also flow back; then after the tightening, it is necessary to feel the pulse with both hands, one on top of the other.
Until the veins become swollen and the sensation is clear, then he should massage the affected area with a small amount of old oil, specifically; then he should place his left index finger on the same vein below the spot where he wants to make the incision, slightly pressing so that the vein does not move away from the stroke. Because some veins are wandering and move away during the incision, and some are full of air, so when the affected area is pressed on them, they subside under the pressure and deceive the surgeon, and if he opens them, it will not be a wide opening.
Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to be cautious and careful in all these matters, then he should make the incision, and if the vein opens from that spot, or else he will have to open it again under that spot a little above or below with the scalpel, unless the area becomes swollen.
If there is swelling or inflammation, he should leave it for a day or two and not tighten the bandage, lest he brings on a severe fever, and let him not take a bath; then he should repeat the incision if necessary, for if the wound was small and the bleeding was slight.
And beware that not all the blood flows out as you want, so return to the wound in the same spot, and press on the vein with a small amount of pressure, and do it with the scalpel before the area becomes swollen; for many people, the area swells after a small incision.
If you find that it has become swollen, do not apply a poultice to it; for it will not benefit from anything being placed on the ulcer, and it is easier to evacuate the blood, which is better in this situation than the poultice itself and other remedies.
You should use poultices of rose oil for all abscesses when evacuating blood, and they may be substituted by the Triaque of Farouq or the Shakhznaya; if you apply one of them to the affected area, the blood will be evacuated and dispersed if it is thick.
If a large abscess occurs at the site of the bloodletting and it is frequent, it will not be severe for one who has not been previously bloodletted, unless the opened vein is small; so hasten to apply to the abscess a wet sponge with a little salt and bandage it for an hour, then it will disperse.
And it is necessary to do that after the blood has exited from the vein itself, either completely or from another vein; if something remains in the affected area after a few days, whether it be a black or greenish color, it will not harm; and if you wish, apply to it something from the soothing and lenitive remedies.
Or something from the paste of Fudhunj, and its like; and it often happens that an abscess forms at the site of the bloodletting of the basilic vein, so apply your hand to it, and if you find it warm when you press on it, then that is a bad sign, so beware of applying anything we mentioned earlier.
For it may be that a vein has been injured, but it is bound with what is in it to constrict the affected area, then treat it with other treatments until it heals; and it is necessary for each person to have blood let out according to their strength and what appears from the predominant color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it out until it becomes red, and if you find it thick, let it out until it disperses; and if it is bitter, let it out until its bitterness goes away. And it is necessary for one who has a strong constitution and needs to have the blood let out in one session.
When the artery is cut and the wound is large, and it was weak, then one should stop the bleeding with a compress and let it dry in several stages, and it is best to use a curved scissors that does not cut too much.
This stroke of the scalpel is sounder than cutting a nerve, and it is better to cut straight and at length. And if it were to be touched during the operation, it would be better to cauterize it before making the incision with a piece of burning rag dipped in rose water or vinegar.
If it were bleeding and the blood came out in three or four stages, and it was of a melancholic temperament, then let him take before the operation a piece of burning rag dipped in wine with honey and spices, or in sweet vinegar with rose water, or in good vinegar with Rehan.
If the bleeding occurred during the operation and its cause was a large amount of blood, then let him be given milk and diluted rose water, and the honey-like substance should be used with galena, and he should be treated with it, and all that we mentioned in the section on bleeding should be used.
What is from the treatment of bleeding, and whoever wants to calm his arm and stop his blood a second time, then it is better for one who has had a large phlebotomy and weak strength to remove the blood little by little according to the strength on consecutive days.
And whoever wants to calm his arm and stop his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then let him do that on the seventh or ninth hour from the first phlebotomy. And whoever wants to draw the blood from his body to the opposite side of where it was drawn, then it is better for him to be treated on the second or third day.
And whoever has a lot of blood in his body, which is hot and intense, and causes inflammation, then it is better to remove the blood at one time, and remove a large amount, and widen the opening until the bleeding stops after all the conditions of the operation are met. You should place your hand on the pulsation when the blood is being let out, lest death occur in the place of the incision, for it often happens that way if the vein is severed and the bleeding occurs, and it will not be suitable if you want to restore the limb and control the bleeding again.
And when you constrict the mouth of the artery and the blood's exit is difficult, do not press on it strongly or twist it with force, for that is very harmful. Instead, leave it until the bleeding stops again, or apply a gentle pressure with the finger on the bleeding point to stop the blood that has collected in the mouth of the artery.
Or apply to it something of salt that has dissolved in water, or apply to it something of the powder of the Faraq oak or the Shiznaya plant, and press on it with a gentle pressure until the blood comes out; if the artery has become swollen, then leave it.
And do not touch it until the swelling subsides, for if you are forced to control the bleeding again, you will not be able to do so except by applying a bandage above that place or by applying a bandage on the other limb or on the other artery.
And it is necessary to bandage the limb firmly, taking care of the Achiles and the Basilic vein if they are not visible or were hidden because they are composed of them, and how to bandage is that you should insert your hand in warm water until the numbness subsides and the artery becomes apparent, then you should tie above it with a moderate-tight bandage.
Then you should bandage the artery with a moderate-tight wrapping, neither loose nor long, and let the bandage be wide and its wrapping above the wrist of the hand be moderate, if the bleeding is difficult, then return the hand to its original position in warm water and let the blood flow out into the water.
Until you achieve your goal, for if you are in the summer days, you may dispense with returning the hand to warm water, and it is more likely that the blood flows out into warm water in winter time, and bandaging this artery is safer than all other arteries. Since there is no vein or nerve, and as the ligament of the right arm is cut off, it benefits from the pain in the liver and spleen, and how to bandage the arm with a splint or handkerchief after dipping it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen.
Since there is no vein or nerve, and as the ligament of the right arm is cut off, it benefits from the pain in the liver and spleen, and how to bandage the arm with a splint or handkerchief after dipping it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen. He should be cautious in cutting the skin, then he cuts a little on the curvature and even if he cuts all of it, it would not harm him at all, and he should avoid touching the tips of his fingers with the place, because there are nerve endings and the location is sensitive from the flesh, then he should dip his hand in hot water.
And let the blood flow from it, for if you do not dip it in hot water, the blood will congeal in the mouth of the vein and be obstructed from flowing, so when you have removed as much blood as needed, apply a compress to the vein, and bandage it tightly so that it adheres quickly.
And it is necessary to do the same for every narrow vein, and as the benefit of cutting off from the left arm is that it benefits from the pain in the spleen, and you should do the same in cutting off as you did in the second one, whether, and as for cutting off the saphena, its benefit is for the diseases that are in the lower parts of the body such as the pains of the intestines.
And it stops the hemorrhage and diseases of the kidneys, and the chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs, and their like diseases, and how to cut off so that he should put his leg in hot water and carry out the massage until the veins become soft, then bandage above the knee joint with a compress, and the vein is placed at the outer ankle, near the Eminence.
And many branches come out of it on the face of the leg, so he should cut off at the widest vein or at the ankle where they meet, for that is better and more sound, and if he cuts off on the face of the leg, he should avoid the nerves that are underneath on the face of the leg.
Make an incision in the skin as if you want to cut beneath it, and let the blood flow out, so pour water over your hand and let the blood flow until it stops. Then, apply the bandage to the wound at first opportunity.
Then, apply the bandage to above slightly so that the place is safe and you do not fear any harm if you have taken care to avoid the nerve as we mentioned, and likewise do with the veins of the other leg, and similarly for the veins of the women as we mentioned at the bend of the thigh.
And the benefit of making an incision at the bend of the thigh is that it was from before the blood flowed, and how to make an incision so that you insert a thin, long, and curved probe, and extend it from behind the thigh up to above the ankle with four fingers, in a gentle and smooth way, so that it does not appear except for that.
So if it appears, make an incision in any case, either on the outer aspect or on the inner aspect, and it is better to cut with a single cut or to make multiple small cuts, for the place will be safe, and it is very hidden in most people, so you did not find it.
And do not make an incision on the sensation of the pulse, but rather make an incision on some of its branches, and it is what appears on the back of the foot near the ankle and the calf, and take care to avoid the nerves and release a moderate amount of blood as you desire.
Then, loosen the tightness and put a compress on the site of the incision, and tighten the site, so that it will heal quickly.
Chapter 86.
On cupping and how to use it.
The cupping vessels can be made of horns, wood, copper, and glass. Cupping is of two types: one with scarification and blood extraction, and the other without scarification.
This surgical instrument which is used on two surfaces.
And the surgical instruments of the Achdein, which are two sides of the neck, and the instrument of the Dqn, which is under the lower jaw from the mouth, and the surgical instruments of the shoulders, and the instrument on the ankle above the heel, and the surgical instruments of the Zndn, which are in the middle of the arms, and the instruments of the legs, and the instruments of the elbows.
And the surgical instrument, it is not suitable to extract blood from the thin, visible veins in the flesh, and for that reason, the power should not be dropped in extracting the blood, nor is it proper to use the surgical instrument with a nail or without a nail in one of the diseases that are caused by excess, until the entire body is purified.
For if the need for the surgical instrument arises from a disease or from a habitual condition, we use it at every time, in the beginning of the month and at its end, and in its middle, and at any time it was needed.
And that is because some people, if their blood increases excessively until they need to extract it with the surgical instrument, find in their head a heavy feeling and headaches, and among them are those who find excessiveness and redness on their face, head, and neck, and among them are those who find freckles on their face, and dimness and darkness in their eyes, and among them are those who feel the sensation of the surgical instrument's location.
And among them are those who have a abundant flow of saliva, and among them are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth, and their tongue is torn apart, and the blood gushes out, and among them are those whose sleep increases, and among them are those who see in their dreams blood and redness and destruction and wounds and similar things, so when we saw something like that.
When there is a case in the middle third of the month, we are ordered to perform bleeding after two or three hours have passed from daytime, and as for the benefit of nasal bleeding, it benefits from the heaviness in the head and what descends into the eyes.
But it is better that this be after evacuating the bowel, and this bleeding may be in place of phlebotomy of the back of the neck. And one should beware of using it on someone with a cold temperament or who has a headache, for it may cause great harm.
Therefore, it is not proper to use it on the elderly and those who have cold diseases in their head, and those who are accustomed to it and have become reliant on it.
Therefore, it is proper to order the bleeder to lower his hand a little in the bleeding, down to the bottom, for fear of causing numbness; and as for bleeding of the veins, it is in place of phlebotomy of the ankle and phlebotomy of the Basilic vein.
Therefore, it benefits from flatulence and chest constriction, and it is beneficial for asthma and coughing and fullness. And it is proper to raise the bleeding of the veins a little, because if it is directed downwards, it may cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
And as for bleeding of the temples, it benefits from sudden headaches in the head, and dizziness, and vertigo, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in place of phlebotomy of the Basilic vein. And it is proper to order the bleeder not to make his hand firm on the scalp, lest he cut a sinus and cause bleeding.
And as for bleeding beneath the tongue, it benefits from ulcers in the mouth and putridity of the gums, and it is freed from the diseases that are in the mouth. It may take the place of phlebotomy of the jugular vein which is in the lips. And as for bleeding of the hips, it benefits from numbness that occurs due to fullness and heat.
Here is the translation:
It is necessary to warn the surgeon not to make an incision in the affected area because the location is dense with muscles, tendons, and ligaments, and if a single ligament that supports the vertebrae is cut, it will cause paralysis of the lower back and its surrounding areas.
It is necessary to warn the surgeon that the ligament should be large and from a sound location, because the site requires strong stitching and maybe the glassy ligament will be cut and the condition will worsen, and as for the surgery of the thighs, it will reduce the putrefaction clearly.
Because it attracts blood from all parts of the body and treats chronic ailments in the kidneys, spleen, and liver, and stops the flow of pus and treats hemorrhoids and fistulas, and takes the place of phlebotomy and cupping, although it harms the body greatly and causes weakness in most people, and surgery on the varicose veins has a benefit close to that of surgery on the thighs.
How to apply the ligature: it is that you place the ligature first empty and tighten it gradually, not over-tightening the ligature, but rather you put it quickly and remove it quickly so that the blood flows into the site evenly and does not accumulate, and you do not repeat that and wait until you see the site has become red and opened up.
And when the blood flow appears, then you make a small incision and slowly return the stitching, then you examine the condition of the limbs; if someone has loose flesh with open pores, it is necessary to make one suture only, lest the site becomes infected.
And you warn the surgeon to widen the incision slightly and deepen it a little, and adjust the stitching in accordance with the flow, and make gentle movements; if there is thickness in the blood, it is necessary to make two incisions: in the first one, open a path for the thick blood to exit, and in the second one, expel the thick blood.
If the blood is thick and it has coagulated strongly, we shall make a third incision to reach the limit, and if we want to let out a little blood, we would open one vein. If we want to let out much blood, we would open more veins, and if we think that the blood is dense.
We should make a deep incision in the affected vein, and we should not use the adhesions when placing the cupping glasses, and what is preserved from them, except for those whose blood is thick and strong and their pores are narrow.
It is suitable to grease the cupping glasses with a mixture of melted rose-water, or if it was in the summer season, then like the grease of Khiriy, or the grease of Banafsa, or the grease of sweet almond oil, or the grease of Cyperus oil.
And if it was in winter, then like the grease of Narciss, or the grease of Susun, or the grease of Babunj, or Zenbq, and similar. If the phlegm was thick and cold, then let the grease be Marzangush, or Namam, or Ban, or Shabbath, and similar.
If the patient had a wide porous body and the flesh was soft, it is suitable to refrain from greasing, and it is suitable for them to wash their cupping glasses after bloodletting with rose-water, or cold water, or water of unripe grapes, or Cyperus water, or Rhegleh water, and similar. And if his blood was very humid.
He should wash his cupping glasses with vinegar, or water of quince, and similar. And if his phlegm was thick, he should wash his cupping glasses with old wine, or Marzangush water, or Shabbath's sediment, or Babunj's, and similar. And it is suitable to beware of bloodletting in the bath, and after the bath.
It is not advisable to bleed after bathing, or an hour or two hours later; nor should one sleep after phlebotomy. It is not advisable that the surgeon and the assistant prepare before and after phlebotomy.
One must examine first, for if the surgeon or assistant are choleric and dominant in their temperament and nervousness, it is advisable that they take cooling medications such as rhubarb and Indian salt, and let their temperament calm down with the likes of rose-water and sugar, and make their complexions tranquil and calm.
And whoever is of a cold temperament, it is advisable that he drink honey sherbet or apple sherbet or pomegranate sherbet, and take moderate perfumed wine which is between the old and the new, and is tempered with a small amount of food, making his food calming and gentle, and the baths are soothing, and it is advisable that the drink on the day of phlebotomy is more than the food.
And it is sometimes advisable to give some people the Faruq antidote or musk medication or sheltha before phlebotomy, and before and after it, to tone up the main organs and settle the blood, and it is not advisable to give it to those who are hurried.
And as for the phlebotomies that are without condition, they are the phlebotomies that are applied to the liver, spleen, lungs, and abdomen, and to the location of the kidneys and the upper arm, because these organs do not tolerate the condition, and what is intended by them is only to draw blood from one organ to another.
We apply phlebotomy to the lungs in case of inflammation or we use it to remove bad blood from a cold organ that has become stagnant, as we apply phlebotomy to the abdomen and the back, for it evacuates the organ and calms it and drives away the pain, thus analyzing that bad blood.
You should apply it to the kidneys if a stone or concretion forms in them, so that by its attraction it may draw out the stone or concretion from its position. Similarly, you should do if you apply it to the liver and spleen when they are inflamed, and these cupping instruments can be used empty only for evacuating the congestion.
You can use it with fire and you can use it filled with hot water in cases of numbness, that is to fill the cupping instrument with hot water or water in which some aromatic herbs have been boiled, which are suitable for that.
Then you place the filled instrument on the affected area and hold it, and remove it, and repeat this process as needed. This is a picture of the cupping instrument that is used with fire.
It should have a mouth with two open fingers, as we have drawn it, and its depth is half a finger, and on its side there is a small hole, about the size of a needle, made from Chinese brass or yellow brass, thickening the edge.
A polished, smooth, and slippery surface so that it does not harm the limb when applied to it, and in its center there is a small hole intersecting from brass or iron where the flame is placed with fire. This cupping instrument can be made larger than what we have described, or smaller according to the diseases.
And it is suitable to use them, for the cupping instruments of children and women are not like those of men and their bodies. As for how to apply this cupping instrument with fire to the limb, it is that you ignite a small flame from a compact piece of wood or a small candle and place it in the center of the cupping instrument, which is fixed on the middle of the limb.
So that the fire rises upwards, towards the bottom of the cupping instrument, lest it burn the body of the patient. Then, it is placed on the limb, and the finger is placed on the hole we mentioned, until when we hold the cupping instrument, we do not remove our fingers.
The steam should exit through that orifice and the cupping glasses are placed on the affected area, then the lancet is brought to the surface and it is adjusted if it inclines towards it. As for the cupping glasses used in treating gout with water, there is no fixed groove nor orifice.
And they are used by filling them with water and placing them on the affected area only, and this is their form.
And these cupping glasses, whenever they were large, could hold a lot of water and were better.
Chapter 87.
On the treatment of abscesses.
The abscess, it is usually used in most cases on the organs where cupping glasses cannot be placed, either because of their smallness such as the lips and the teeth and the like, or because the organ is compact with flesh such as the fingers and the nostrils and the like.
And the method of using it is to suck out the abscess which is in the pure, clean water free from impurities, then leave it for a day and a night in the clean water until it dissolves and nothing remains in its hollow. Then the body is purged, either by phlebotomy or by cupping, then the affected area is massaged.
Until it becomes red, then it is treated with cupping glasses; if it becomes full and the cupping glasses can be applied to that place, it is more beneficial. Otherwise, the area is washed with vinegar and then with plenty of water, and it is bandaged, and if the blood flows after the abscess has fallen off, and that is a good sign, then a cold compress is applied to the area.
And it is placed from above until the bleeding stops; if there is a lot of blood, then a piece of zinc, or a small stone, or something similar from the stopping agents is applied to stop the blood, or an ointment made from the crushed leaves of the pomegranate tree is applied to the area.
Leave the ligature in place until the wound is closed, for if the blood stops flowing and it is necessary to re-ligate, do not re-ligate at that point unless there is no alternative, for if you release the ligature from re-ligating, wash the area with a lot of blood.
You insert a needle into the area until some blood comes out, then you place it; if you feel something in the blood, it will stick to the instrument. If you want to drop it, sprinkle some powder or salt or antimony on it, and it will drop onto the instrument.
Chapter Three.
On Suturing.
This chapter is also necessary and needed in the craft of medicine, which is suturing of fractured and broken bones.
Know, my sons, that this chapter has been neglected by many physicians and laymen, and no one has written a book about it or even read a single letter about it.
And because of this, this art has become forgotten in our country, and I have not found a single knowledgeable person who can teach it. And I have benefited from it what I have benefited, through my prolonged reading of the ancient books and my diligence in understanding them until I extracted its knowledge from them, then I combined experimentation and practice throughout my life.
And I have drawn for you from that in this chapter all that encompasses my knowledge. And I have tested it after I had refined it for you, and freed it from the excess of prolivity, and shortened it to the utmost brevity, and made it clear to the utmost clarity, and illustrated for you in it many figures of the instruments that are used in it.
It is an increase in clarity, as I have done in the previous chapters, and there is no power except with God, the Exalted, the Great.
The First Section.
There are some general things and introductions about the art of bone setting, and how to present them. Before we start mentioning the fractured and dislocated limbs one by one, it is necessary to mention in this chapter some general statements and principles. You must first understand them and grasp their reality, you and whoever is zealous to learn this noble craft.
I say that if a fracture, or dislocation, or sprain, or fall occurs, it is necessary to hasten first to its treatment, or its healing, or all of them together. If it is not prevented from that, something will prevent it, such as weakness of the body or the one who suffered it being young or old, or the weather being extremely hot or extremely cold.
Then he should restrict his diet to cold legumes and the meat of birds and game, and prevent hot drinks and fatty meats and excessive eating, and every food that fills the blood vessels with blood until, if he is certain of the inflammation, he does not hasten to apply a poultice to the affected area.
Then the patient should return to his first regimen, which is his usual habit. If he took a fractured bone in its proper place, it is necessary for him to nourish it with nourishments that are rich, fatty and sticky, such as Hippocras, rice, and meat broths, and milk of cow or goat. And eggs, and fat fish, and thick drinks, and so on. For with this regimen, the consolidation of the fracture will be faster and better. And know that if the fractured bones are in young men or old men, it is not possible for them to return to their natural state ever again.
Their bones are fragile and porous, and will not consolidate, but will rather be like the bones of very young children. However, nature will build upon the fractured bone from all its aspects something similar to a callus, which is thick and dense, and will hold it together until some of it adheres to another.
Some of them are tied together until they meet at the site of strength and firmness, just as if it were originally created that way, so that nothing of its effects is impaired.
For this reason, it is necessary to make the nourishment of the patient suitable and strong, and to avoid its being too little or too much, as we have said. And know that fractures vary in their types according to the difference of the members, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the head bone, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone.
And so, all the other members are different from one another. We will mention each type of fracture in its own chapter, explaining it in detail and distinguishing it from others. And a type of bone fracture may also differ within itself.
For it may be a fracture that breaks into fragments without producing splinters, and it may be a fracture along the length of the bone with splinters and protrusions, both embedded and not embedded. And the fracture may occur with a wound and a crack in the skin, and the fracture may be a simple one.
And each type of fracture has its own special trick for treating it, as will be mentioned in detail at its place. And what is known about bone fractures is their deviation and curvature, and their appearance to the senses, and their grating sound when you press on them with your finger.
So when there is no apparent deviation at the site, nor grating sound, nor sensation upon pressing on the bone with difficulty, and the doctor does not find much pain, it may not be a fracture, but rather a bruise or a slight crack, so it should not be treated with heavy pressure and bandaging.
But I will apply to it from the medicines that will be mentioned later, according to what suits the site. Then, I will treat it gently and gradually, and know that if the bone is broken and separated into two pieces without producing splinters, it is as if each part has moved away from its companion.
You should examine him from the moment you notice the symptoms and regulate them before they occur, for if they occur, leave him until the inflammation subsides, then treat it in whatever way you think fit, according to the severity of the disease and the patient's condition.
And know that treating a fracture and setting it is easier than one that has become compound, then it will be based on what the patient remembers, for if there are fragments in the bone, it is necessary to straighten the bent limb with the help of two assistants, whether it is an arm or a leg.
Put your hands, if the limb is small, or with pads, and with the help of a assistant, and place the limb in its natural position, until when you extend it, the broken bone will be straightened, then reduce those fragments to their places in whatever way you think fit according to the patient's condition and severity.
And beware of exerting force on the injured part with your hand, lest you cause pain or inflammation, and try to bring one bone edge to its fellow in the best position, and it is necessary at that time to feel them with your hand and examine them, for if you see something amiss, correct it and set it right according to your ability.
And beware of strong pulling and vigorous jerking, as many ignorant people do, which often leads to inflammation or putrefaction in the limb, as I have seen that happen many times due to their actions.
Then, after setting and straightening, immobilize the limb with bandages and splints, and warn the patient not to move it during his sleep, rest, or when he turns over, nor during all his movements, lest it becomes dislocated, and ensure that the position of the limb is one that prevents discomfort.
And that is when he feels, in the state of setting the limb, pain or discomfort, he should not move it to a different position until one where he does not feel discomfort, and ensure with that his setting is straight and even.
When a fracture occurs in a limb, and how to set the broken limb, I will describe it to you. You should know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and largeness, and their treatment; for some of them are small like fingers, toes, and nails, and their likes.
It is necessary for the bandages to be wide and gentle, and not tight, because the strong ligature constricts the large limb and holds it from all sides with equal tension, without allowing any defect.
Then, after freeing yourself from immobilization, you should apply the suitable splint for that. There is a thin cushion on the site of the fracture, then you start wrapping the ligature around the site of the fracture itself three or four times according to what the limb deserves, and tighten your hand slightly with the ligature, then move it to the upper side of the site of the fracture.
You tighten less than you would for the broken site, then you loosen the wrap a little from the site of the fracture and relax the tension a little until you get something correct from the site, then you take another bandage and wrap it also on the broken site.
You wrap, then you move the wrap to the lower side of the fracture, and let your action be in tightening the wrap and loosening it according to what we mentioned in wrapping the upper one first, then you put between the wraps some thin cushions or soft material that will help set the fracture.
If there is a fracture, and if not, do not put anything in it, then you wrap another bandage on it, and immobilize with these tight, secure wraps from your time, as long as there is no swelling or redness in the limb.
If there is swelling or redness, apply what will reduce that inflammation and let the swelling subside, then immobilize with the wraps at that time, and let the wraps be from stiff, straight, and well-made splints, either made of willow branches or being from the strong, straight wood of the Syrian olive tree.
You make a splint from the straight branch of a nut tree or a pomegranate tree or a walnut tree, and similar things that are strong enough for that, and you adjust each splint according to this form and shape.
Except that the splint which is placed on the fracture itself should be a little thicker and wider than the other splints, and as for the length of the splint, it is made according to what suits the fractured limb, from its largeness to its smallness, the shape of the splint:.
Then you fasten the splints with another bandage according to the way you fastened the first one, then you tie above with tight ligatures according to what we mentioned about the fastening, and it is that the fastening should be on the site of the fracture more. And wherever the fastening is farther from the fracture, it is less.
And it is necessary that the ligatures be moderate in thickness and softness, and they should be from clean, moist bandages specifically, because if the ligatures were very thick like what I have seen some surgeons do, making their ligatures from folded strips of rough bandages, it is a great mistake.
Because the fastening with them is excessive and the soft ligatures also do not suit, because you do not achieve by fastening with them what you want, and it is not desirable that there be less than a finger's breadth between the splint and the splint.
So if the patient complains of the edges of the splints after fastening in the correct positions, put under them some soft padding or crumpled linen until it does not hurt him at all, and if the fracture is with a wound and there is a rupture in the skin, we deal with it separately.
And know that not every fractured limb needs to be splinted from the first day, and that is because if the limb is large, it should not be splinted until after five days or seven days or more, according to your fear of the occurrence of severe swelling.
This type of dressing that was used to treat the wounds on the head, shoulder and ribcage, is a general type of dressing that is abbreviated and treats the shoulder, and it is sufficient for most of the wounds, without being too tight or constricting.
And you should take the powder of the Rahi, which is the fine powder that adheres to the sides of the Rahi when it is moved during the process of grinding, and you should sift it in such a way that it is neither too coarse nor too fine, then you should use it.
Another type of dressing that treats the shoulder, knee and ribcage, is taken from the Msh, Lden, Aqqiya, Rsn, Mugth, and Sik, each weighing ten dirhams, and their mixture with five dirhams each, and twenty dirhams of Athl, and twenty dirhams of either Armenian or Roman clay. The whole is ground and mixed with water of Athl or egg whites if the mixture is too liquid, then this dressing is used, for it is good for setting bones quickly and it treats most people's dislocations.
Another type of dressing that is also beneficial for the shoulder and ribcage, is taken from Mugth, Msh, and white Khatmiy, each weighing ten dirhams, and their mixture with five dirhams each, Aqqiya six dirhams, Armenian clay twenty dirhams, the whole is ground finely and mixed with water or egg whites, and it is used.
A type of dressing for joints and slipping bones, which are dislocated from their positions, and it eases the severe pain associated with them, and sets the bone and shoulder in place. It is taken from the soaked Suffj, which is wrapped in a cloth and the Zait is melted, and it is applied to the affected area. And this dressing does not have any constricting power.
Here is the translation:
You want to analyze a section of the tumor, take from the basis of the cartilaginous and bony parts, and separate them with precision, taking care not to injure any part, and if the limb is not paralyzed, then anoint it with rose water or vinegar, and use it.
Another stronger type of bandage is used for analysis when a hard tumor occurs on the periosteum, taking from the basis of the cartilaginous and bony parts, and the ligament, and the King's melic, and merzengouch, and separating them with precision, each part by itself.
He bandages everything and anoints it with vinegar or sweet milk or rose water, all according to the temperature of the limb and its condition; and as for Aqrata, he did not mention in his book that it should be applied to the fractured limb during its setting.
The Kyriotikon, made from wax and oil, is nothing but a medium between the solidity and fluidity, and Galenous thought that it should be applied to the fractured limb during its setting with things that have a gentle heat, such as myrrh, storax, and labdan, and so on, as we mentioned.
A type of bandage is beneficial for ulcers and abscesses, taking marshmallows, and hemp, and human hair or bird's feathers, and cartilaginous parts, and dissolving them together, and then he bandages and anoints it, and as for the amount that should remain on the limb.
Then he should leave it, for if it does not happen with the abscess or ulcer or severe pain, and the fractured bone does not move from its position, do not touch it at all, even if it takes a long time, for if it happens in that position, there will be severe pain or a suppurating ulcer or swelling.
So hasten to remove the bandage at the time and do not delay it for a moment, then take a soft sponge or a linen cloth with a gentle touch, and dip it in warm water, and wash the place until the pain subsides and the abscess is removed, then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Here is the translation:
If the patient's condition has improved, I have seen that the swelling and redness and pain and puffiness and all the symptoms have disappeared completely and returned to normal, so I treated him as I did at first, for nothing of what we mentioned happened in the member.
You should not remove the dressing except after three, four, five or seven days, and it may be left for twenty days, all of that is according to what appears to you about the condition of the member as we have said, until the suppuration becomes certain and the flesh begins to consolidate over it.
You should also increase the compression more than the first compression, and you should also increase the consolidation of the food for the patient according to what has been mentioned previously, for I have seen that the place of suppuration was weak and fragile, more so than it should be, so I knew that the nutrition was impeding its reach.
So, change the dressing with a loose one each time you remove it, and let that be every three days, and reduce the compression slightly, for by this action the nutrition will reach the member quickly and it will heal rapidly; and as for what the ignorant people from the bandagers do, they suppurate the member another time.
For if they did not bandage properly as it should be, and they bandaged on unevenness, it is a grave error from their action and a great ignorance; and if it were correct, I would have mentioned it in the previous books and acted upon it, but I saw no effect from any of them regarding that. And the right thing is not to act according to it.
Chapter Two.
On Suppuration of Corrupt Matter in the Head.
The types of suppurating corrupt matter in the head are many and their forms are diverse, and their causes are varied; for among them is what occurs due to a blow with a sword, and it may be that the whole bone is broken until it reaches the dura mater beneath the bone. As the hammer acts on the wood.
And so this type of fracture is called a "qudumiyah" and it is that the cut of the sword only reaches part of the bone and does not penetrate to its end, and this type of fracture is called a "qla' mutlaqah". The wound from these two types of fractures may be large or small.
And of the fractures, there is one that is a bruise or a contusion and it occurs due to a blow with a stone or a fall onto a stone or something similar. And this fracture may be either a superficial one that approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or one that is on the surface of the bone.
And the wound from these two fractures is also either large or small. And of the fractures, there is one that is hidden in the bone at the level of the hairline, and it is a subtle crack that occurs.
And so this type of fracture is called a "shu'uriyah". And there is a fracture that occurs due to a fall or a blow with a stone and the like, which drives the bone surface inward and becomes deformed in the place where it lies, just as it would exhibit if a copper vessel were struck with a blow and a part of it were driven inward.
And this is more likely to occur in the moist, spongy bone, such as the skulls of young children. And it may be that all these types of fractures have fragmented or unfragmented pieces. We will discuss the treatment of each of them in its place, and we will become familiar with all these types of fractures through examination.
And you examine them with the probes and remove the putrid, filthy flesh from them. And as for the "shu'uriyah" type, it is recognized by examining the bone and scraping and rubbing it with the file, for then the fracture appears black. And as for treating the fracture, you first consider the symptoms of the patient.
For if you see among his symptoms what indicates clear signs of fear, such as trembling, extension, and wandering of the mind, and interruption of speech, and anxiety, and severe, piercing, and inflamed eyes, then do not approach the patient or treat him, for death is likely to occur with these symptoms in most cases without exception.
If you find a patient who is not bothered by his condition and has submitted to the treatment, then take care of him at that time, because if the injured part had been treated from the beginning, it would have been during the winter days.
You should extract the bone before the 14th day in any case, and if it is during the summer days, you should hurry to extract the bone before the 7th day, lest the material under the bone putrefies from the membrane, so those symptoms we described appear.
If the fracture of the bone has reached the membrane covering the brain and it is with a severe concussion and depression, you should cut off the affected part of the injury, as I described to you, which is to trephine the skull of the injured person.
And uncover the bone on whichever side is convenient for you, according to the shape of the wound and what is hidden from the patient, for when you uncover the bone, you will find a flow of blood or a warm abscess, so be prepared for that with what is necessary.
And it is to stuff the area with a dressing soaked in wine and oil, and to clean the wound until the abscess settles and the bleeding stops, then you take care of setting the bone and extracting it, and that will be on one of two sides of the operation.
As for the single aspect, it is to cut the bone with a gentle curved incision, and this is its form:.
Then you use another incision after this one, slightly above it, and this is its form:.
Then you also use another incision, also above the second one, and it is necessary for you to have several different incisions, some of which are above others and some shorter than others, and they should be extremely sharp at their edges, made from Indian steel or good quality iron.
And use the file to strike on the incision, so that you don't displace the head and harm it. If the bone is strong and solid, it is better to perforate around it before using the incisions with the instruments you have named non-piercing and I have named them non-piercing.
Because it does not exceed the limit of the bone of the skull to what is beyond it, so that the periosteum has a straight line beneath its base, outlining it with a circle or small ring, preventing it from penetrating and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
And it is desirable for you to take from these periosteum several straight lines, each one of which is suitable for the thickness of that bone, until you have prepared a sufficient amount for each skull, with a straight edge in length and width, according to the thickness of that skull, and there are three types of this. From the large periosteum, medium, and small:.
And as for how to make a circle around the fractured bone, it is that you place the periosteum on the bone and press it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been reached, then you transfer the periosteum to another position, and you make a space between each circle according to the thickness of the rods or their likes.
Then you cut with the forceps what is between each two circles, and do that with great skill as much as you can, as we have mentioned, until you saw away the bone, either with your hand or with another instrument from some of the tools that I have prepared for that.
Like the scoop and the delicate forceps, and it is necessary to beware with all caution that you do not touch the periosteum or the instrument to anything of the suture, for if you have sawed the bone and separated it from the suture, and it was adhering to it and brought it out, it is necessary that you should scrape.
And you smooth out the roughness that remains in the bone with another instrument similar to the forceps, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and finer than the other forceps, for if there remain some small bones and fragments, you take them with skill using what you have of instruments.
Then we treat the wound with the ointments and remedies that will be mentioned, and as for the other aspect of the work, it is an easy task, far from the difficulty that Galen and his admirers have described, and this is what he says. It is suitable for you to start by exposing the part of the bone from the site where the fracture is most prominent and most known, until when you have exposed that part, you will have formed an idea about this section of the broken bone, and this is its picture.
The broken part of it is smooth and does not cut anything, and the straight part of it is in its two ends as you see, to be the broken part leaning on the splint, and the surface of the broken bone is then struck from one side.
With a small saw, until you cut through all of the bone with ease, as it rotates, and you are safe from the membrane, in which no frightening accident happens to the patient, and if the healer is among the ignorant people, he would be misled, and even if he was experienced.
For if there remains a piece of the bone attached to the membrane at some places, you dissect it away from the surface of the broken bone itself and free it from it with ease, so that it is freed from it without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone did not reach the membrane, and what was cut off from the bone was its surface, and there remained roughness and fine fragments, it is suitable that you should scrape away that roughness and remove those fragments with a gentle file, which has taken various different forms, so that you can use them in every place, and adjust and correct according to what the work guides you.
And the same broken bone and its shape, and it is suitable that you should use in scraping first the most prominent part of the bone with those files, then use afterwards a finer one, and do not cease to do that repeatedly until you reach using the finest and most delicate ones.
As for the small, fine, and delicate incisions, it is necessary to use each one according to what leads to its success, which is a thing that does not escape anyone who has a minimum of skill in this craft, and stops at what we have written and clarified concerning the large wounds.
For if the periosteum remains exposed when you extract the bone, it is necessary to take a piece of cloth equal in size to the wound, and soak it in oil and fat, and place it on the mouth of the wound; then you take another piece of cloth, either triangular or quadrilateral. And soak it in serous discharge and oil and fat, and place it on the first piece of cloth; and make that with as little pressure as you can, so that you do not burden the wound; then you use a wide bandage from above, and do not constrict it except to the extent that it holds the wound.
And leave it with this treatment for a day or two until the painful inflammation subsides, then you remove it and use afterwards the medicaments that are beneficial, such as the juice of the willow, and the powder of the crust of the horn, and the powder of the knotweed, and the Zar, and their like; and it is that you make a poultice from these medicaments.
And apply to the wound as it is, and with the bandage, so use in that a medicine that cleanses without irritating, and direct your effort at the time of treating the wound to be clean, not containing harm from fat or pus, nor letting the discharge gather in it.
For if the discharge gathers on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and destroys it, and as a result, a severe affliction occurs on the patient; and it may appear in the sutures of the skull when the bone is exposed, or even more so if its treatment is neglected.
If you see blackness on its surface, it is a sign that the patient has the symptoms we mentioned, so know that he is in danger, without a doubt; and if the blackness occurred because of a medicine applied to it, and there was power in that medicine to produce that blackness.
Take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them well, then add a layer of kohl, then apply it to the wound, and treat it with the required treatments until it heals.
Chapter Three.
Treat the nose if it is fractured.
Know that the nose does not break unless the upper jaw or one of them is broken, because they are strong bones, and it is unlikely to break, but rather it will be subject to bruising, displacement, and fracture.
If one of the jaws is broken, it is necessary to insert a small finger into the nostril and adjust the fracture from the inside with your finger, while supporting from the outside until the nose takes its natural shape, and be gentle so that you do not cause any harm to the surrounding area or jaw.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, it is necessary to adjust it with a rod inserted gently, and if the fracture is on both sides, do the same, and do not delay in treating it on the first day of the fracture.
If possible, and if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the severe inflammation has subsided, then insert a piece of cloth into the nostril, taken from a clean new cloth, if the fracture is on one side, or insert two pieces if the fracture is on both sides.
And let the cloth be inserted gently to the extent that it fills the nostril, and some of the surgeons among our predecessors mentioned that one should grease the cloth with butter and change it every day, but I did not find that beneficial, rather it is necessary to grease the cloth with egg white mixed with powdered rose water.
Then leave the cloth until the bone is established and the cartilage is consolidated, and you may insert into the nose, in the place of the cloth, two or three reeds of the cane, wrapped with a clean cloth, so that it holds the fracture of the nose firmly and does not allow the jaw to move.
This is a necessary thing if you want to make it and if you want to make the sutures, for then you will present it to the nose during your operation and stitch the nose with the qirootiy or with a straightened thread in a circular way or with a twisted thread from the rhinocarion.
For if it does not present and the nose is broken, then you should stitch it from outside with a thick suture and thin threads of Kendra; we have found that the white of an egg is beneficial, then you put a compress on it for a day or two, and do not bind the nose with a thing of biteness; for if you break the bone of the nose, it will be a small fracture.
Or you should make an incision on it and extract it with the instrument that is suitable for it, then you should close the incision and bandage it with what sticks and adheres from the suitable medicines; for if a wound occurs inside the nose, you should treat it with a dressing and use nasal pipes of silver. Until he recovers.
The Fourth Chapter.
Treating the fracture of the lower jawbone.
If the fracture of the lower jawbone is not accompanied by a wound, it will be easy to treat, for if the fracture is only on the outside and does not break into two pieces and does not sink inwards, then its treatment will be simple.
It is necessary that if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert the middle finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth and likewise, if the fracture is on the left side, you should insert the middle finger of the right hand and raise the fragment of the fracture from inside outward.
And you should hold the other fragment from outside the bone, adjusting it, for if the fracture of the jaw has broken into two pieces, it is necessary to use a press from the two sides on its straightness until its adjustment is complete; and if there is displacement in the teeth.
And separate what you have collected from it, so that it remains with a thread of gold or silver or an ivory pin, then place on the fractured skull a circular clamp, and put on it a thick, firm, padded dressing, or a piece of felt like a shoe sole, suitable for the length of the fracture. Then bind it from above, according to what you find convenient for binding and adjusting its tightness until it does not become loose, and order the patient to avoid exertion and violence and to make his food light and easy to digest, for if you think that something has changed in his appearance or condition, then hasten to relieve him on the third day.
Then bind it from above, according to what you find convenient for binding and adjusting its tightness until it does not become loose, and order the patient to avoid exertion and violence and to make his food light and easy to digest, for if you think that something has changed in his appearance or condition, then hasten to relieve him on the third day. Then heal what you have fastened with a plaster of rose-water or egg-white or fine powder, after removing the clamp from it and placing on the dressing a light, gentle compress; as long as that dressing remains on it and does not change for the better condition of the bone, leave it alone.
Do not uncover it until it heals and the fracture is consolidated; for it often takes three weeks for this fracture to consolidate, if a fever or severe inflammation appears during that time, then use what we have mentioned repeatedly to calm it down until that inflammation subsides.
And if the fracture is with a wound that has a splinter of bone, and it has become separated from the main bone, then be gentle in extracting those splinters according to your ability to remove them with the instrument; if the mouth of the wound is narrow, then widen it with the dilator as much as you need.
Then, if you have extracted those splinters and none of them remain, stitch the mouth of the wound if it is wide, and if not, then apply one of the medicaments that are suitable for that. And bandage the wound until it heals.
The Fifth Chapter.
On setting a broken rib.
The fracture of the clavicle is more frequent from the inner aspect than its outer extremity, and its union takes place in one of three ways: either it unites and consolidates with two fragments without any splinters, which is easier to reduce.
And sometimes it happens that splinters occur in the fracture, which is more difficult to reduce. And sometimes the fracture occurs with a wound, and the operation is performed if the fracture is not with a wound, by placing two assistants, one of whom holds the injured limb, and the other stretches the neck towards the other side.
Then you align the fracture with your fingers until it takes its proper shape, without any protuberance or curvature. If you need to apply more pressure, it is proper to place under the armpit a cushion made of soft leather or a pad.
And its bone is according to your need, and you stretch and elevate the clavicle, and press the cushion with your hand until the fracture is aligned properly. If you are unable to pull the end of the clavicle outward in order to set it in its proper place, it is proper to let the arm lie on a pillow.
And you place a moderate-sized pad under the armpit on the bone, and you press the assistant's hand downwards until the clavicle's bone, which is in the depression, rises above, and then you correct the fracture and align it with your fingers.
If you feel that a splinter of the clavicle has broken off and is moving, it is proper to open up and extract that splinter gently, if the splinter is stuck in the bone, you should make an incision with one of the instruments I have prepared for that purpose. After you have placed under the clavicle the instrument that protects the pleura, which is an instrument made of wood or iron, and this is its shape.
It resembles a spoon, without any curvature, and its width is according to the size of the bone, whether large or small, and likewise its length, depending on what you need for the operation, and it has two ends, one of which is wider and the other narrower.
If the fracture of the wound that you made while extracting a splintered bone and you encountered inflamed swelling, then gather the edges of the wound with sutures. If the fracture is small or the inflamed swelling is slight, then close the wound with the fracture and apply a compress in proportion to the size of the fracture.
If there is inflamed swelling, then apply a compress of rose water and vinegar or wine, and place it on the bone. If the bone was broken without a wound or fracture, then it is necessary to apply a poultice made from dust of roses with egg whites. And you put a soft poultice on it, then place a pad under the armpit if needed, then take a long splint that is slightly curved and apply a bent compress on the poultice and the bone, then take a plaster from a thin sheet. It should be three fingers in width and also in length, then insert it into the fracture, then insert that fracture with the splint at the place of the poultice which lies on the site of the fracture, then bind the poultice to the fracture as it is wrapped around. And fasten it around the neck and under the sound armpit and under the ailing armpit, and wrap it repeatedly on each side, and as I saw that the binding controls the fracture perfectly, which is what does not hide from you.
And pay attention to all of it so that the splint does not slide away from the fractured bone. And for that, it is necessary to inspect the patient every day, so whenever you find the bandage relaxed and see that the splint has shifted, then correct it and tighten the bandage. Then make the patient sleep on his back and place a small cushion under his armpit when he sleeps at night.
Let the patient's limb be elevated above his breast, for elevating the fracture of the clavicle is by raising the shoulder or binding his arm to his neck, and do not remove the bandage unless an incident occurs at the site, such as a blow or inflammation, until twelve days.
If you have seen a fracture in the skull and there is a wound for that. Apply a bandage to the fracture and leave it until it begins to form a scab, and it will be strengthened more in 18 days. And it may be that with some people it is less than that.
Chapter Six.
The fracture of the shoulder. It is rare that the shoulder fractures in its thin part, but rather it fractures at its joints. When it fractures, it does not fracture at a specific spot or in its middle, and this is known by feeling, so according to what shape the fracture takes.
Reduce it and return it to its natural shape by all means possible, then place on the site of the fracture a dressing of rose water and egg white and vinegar, and put above it a compress of warm linseed oil, then apply a wide bandage from linen.
Bind it to the size of the shoulder, all of it or a little wider, and if there is swelling under the bandage at a site of the shoulder, then soothe that swelling with vinegar until the bandage settles in place, then fasten from above with a long binder.
Fasten it firmly and tighten the bandage so that it does not move from its place, and loosen the binder every day; whenever the binder becomes loose, tighten it and adjust the bandage if it moves from its place. And let the patient lie on his sound side, and the shoulder will mend in 20 days.
20 days or 25 days, and if you complete this regimen, remove the binder and you will be safe; for it is one of the bones that does not displace, and its fragments do not unite. If a splinter of bone protrudes and was hidden under the skin, then split open and extract it. What we mentioned in the fracture of the cranium from the two pointed instruments for the sharp wound, if something of that happens.
Chapter Seven.
On the Fracture of the Ribs.
The ribs may fracture in their middle and slightly, but what is exposed of that is more likely to fracture and become comminuted. And among its symptoms, if it fractures in the middle, it inclines downwards and becomes very painful, with difficulty in breathing.
And perhaps the patient may hide it, and the fracture is not apparent to the senses, but he will place his hand on his back, and bend his shoulder, and then flexes his elbows, and collects his arms from the two sides, and adjusts them in a way that makes it possible.
And agree that the shape of the bone returns to what is desired, then place upon it a compress and a bandage, and apply above it a splint made from a thin plate or from a piece of willow or similar materials, after wrapping it in a clean cloth. Then adjust it by binding it to the fractured bone so that it does not move, and pass the bandage around in a circular fashion to the back, passing it several times and tightening it firmly. Then check the bandage at every time, and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it.
And if the necessity calls for its removal when it appears at the site of the wound or the abscess, then hasten to remove it and lift the compress, and correct what has appeared from that by a method of treatment. Then reapply the compress if you see fit. And keep him bandaged tightly until he recovers.
Chapter Eight.
On the fracture of the limbs, know that the limbs are prone to fracture in the strong and thick areas close to the joints and their extremities, since they are cartilaginous and it is difficult to detect it by feeling with the fingers during examination.
Here is the translation:
The fracture that is exposed to one who suffers from it because of the weakness of the bone, and also shows fatigue, cough, and spitting of much blood, and this is a difficult treatment, for the ancients have tried many remedies in it.
Some of them have said that it is necessary to make the digestive organs absorb what produces flatulence and gases, so that the belly may be inflated and expanded, and the fracture may be pushed outward, and we reject this because it would not be a cure for the hot tumor, if it has not occurred, and if it has occurred, it increases it and makes it stronger.
Some have said that a cupping glass should be placed on the affected area, and then suction is applied with force, which is similar to cauterization, but it is feared that the cupping glass may attract the pus to the affected area due to its weakness. Some have said that it is necessary to cover the affected area with a cloth that has been soaked in hot oil.
And a plaster is made between the splints until it is filled, so that the bandage may be straight if it is wrapped around in circular fashion. Then, the digestive organs are treated with dietary and medicinal treatments, for the relaxation of the digestive organs is a severe matter that cannot be delayed. And the bone was fractured in a way that was damaging, and we feared for the digestive organs, so it is necessary to make an incision at the affected area and expose the broken rib, then we insert the instrument that preserves the pleura, which is advanced and described, and we cut the bone with precision and reset it.
Then we gather the edges of the wound, if it is large, with sutures and treat it with medications until it heals. If a hot tumor appears during that time, we quickly apply a cold compress on the affected area and treat the digestive organs with what alleviates the tumor from the inside as well.
And he rests on the side that is most comfortable for him, until he recovers.
The Ninth Section.
On the surgical treatment of the hernia in the back and nape of the neck.
As for the vertebrae of the nape of the neck, if it suffered a fracture and there was little that could be presented to it, and most of what could be presented to it was a blow, and likewise the vertebrae of the back also. So if that happened to someone and you wanted to know whether he would recover or not. So look, if you saw that his hands were paralyzed and weakened, and he was deadened and could not move them or control them, and if you poked them with a needle or pricked them with a point, he would not feel it and would not find pain in them, then know that he will not recover in most cases, for he is dying.
And if he moves them and feels the poking and pricking, then know that the marrow of the bone is sound and the patient will recover with treatment. If a hernia in the back occurred like that and you wanted to know whether it would also recover or not.
So look at his legs, if you saw that they were paralyzed and the same thing happened to them as happened to his hands. Then, if he leaned on his back, gas and wind would emerge without his will, and if he lay on his stomach, urine would emerge without his will. And if he lay on his back and wanted to urinate but could not, then know that he is dying, so do not bother with his treatment. For if nothing of that appeared, the matter was lighter, and the treatment for what happened from that is to apply cooling compresses to the hot tumor.
By applying to the affected area a medicated plaster made with rose oil, either alone or with roasted egg yolks, applying it three times a day until the hot tumor subsides. Then apply one of the soothing cooling bandages to the area, and bind it with a bandage, and order him to rest and settle.
He should not sleep on the side where he does not feel pain until he recovers, for if a fracture occurred in the bone and a splinter or a shard has separated from it, it is necessary to make an incision on him and extract that bone. Then gather the edges of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and treat it with medicated bandages until he recovers. If the fracture is at the end of the bone of the forearm and it is a weakness in the wrist, it is necessary to insert the little finger from the left hand into the palm.
And set the fractured bone with the other hand according to what is possible and adjust it, then apply a compress and a bandage. If you need that, then fasten it.
If you feel a splintered fracture in it, make an incision on it and extract it, and treat the wound with treatment as described until he recovers.
The Tenth Chapter.
Treating a fracture of the hip.
If the bones of the hips are fractured, then their fracture is that they become dislocated in their extremities and separate in length and incline inward, and it shows externally at the joint and causes pain and numbness in the leg from that side.
And treat it by passing your hand over it until you feel the fracture, and see how its shape is. If the fracture is only in its extremities, then set that fracture according to what appears to you from the adjustment, until it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is in the length or has incline inward, then place the joint on its belly until you feel that you have treated that fracture. If you have adjusted it, apply a compress to it, then put a splint made of wood or leather and fasten it tightly.
Do not fear to move the fracture or removing the splint, and adjust the bandage with what fills it, until it takes a firm hold on its straightness. And order him to sleep on his back or on his sound side, for if he has an acute feverish inflammation.
Remove the bandage and splint until the inflammation subsides and the swelling goes down, then return to the splint and tighten it as needed. If there is a break in the bone or a crack from its edges, do not remove it.
And do not touch it, but rather wrap it from the outside as we mentioned, and leave the splint until it heals.
Chapter 11
On setting a fractured bone.
The arm is from the elbow to the head of the shoulder, and if it breaks, set it on one of two sides, one being that you take a straight rod, smoothed and curved in this shape:
And bind it with two bandages at its ends, then suspend it from a elevated place, and let the patient sit on a stool, then put his broken arm on the rod until it becomes straight in the middle of the curve of the rod, then tie something heavy above it.
Or let a servant extend it downwards, then the doctor wraps the fracture with his hands together until the fracture is set as needed; and the other way is that the patient lies on his face and ties his hand to his neck with a bandage.
Then order two servants to hold, one of them holding above the fracture with his hand and the other holding below it, and each of them pulling towards his side; and if you want the pull to be stronger, tie under the fracture with a bandage and above it with a bandage, and let each of the two servants pull towards their sides.
If the fracture is near the shoulder, it is necessary to put one bandage under the armpit and another below the fracture towards the elbow; and likewise if the fracture is near the elbow, it is necessary to put the bandage on that place and on the elbow itself.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
When the abscess is formed, open it, and clean its surface so that you can apply a dressing to the wound; then take a piece of new cloth and apply it to the dressing, and bring the arm together over itself and place your hand openly on the bandage.
And apply the compress and bandage to the arm, so that the arm may be in the place of the splints; if it does not become bent from this, and the fracture did not change, then you should use the splints. If you fear that it will become changed from this, then use the splints.
And it is that you put on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than other splints, and let there be between each splint a space of one finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture, increasing by three fingers from each side.
Then bandage over the splints the bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandage should be tightest at the site of the fracture.
And every time after the fracture, the bandage was less, for I saw the placing of the splints and the bandage as we mentioned when you set the limb in its natural position at the hour of your recovery, so do it.
And if you fear the severe abscess, leave the bandage and splints until the seventh day as we mentioned, then loosen the dressing every three days so that there is no irritation or swelling or the nourishment is not blocked from reaching the limb, and thus correct that altogether according to what we mentioned.
For if you are confident that none of that will happen, do not change the dressing except after many days, and let the patient lie on his back with his hand on his stomach and his arm placed under a pillow filled with cotton wool, elevated.
And inspect at every time, morning or evening, lest the shape of the fractured limb becomes deformed or the dressing becomes loose, so correct that altogether with your effort, and make the patient's nourishment on the level we previously mentioned, to be gentle and easy, until when the bone is likely to become strong.
If you delay treating his food, it is customary for the joint and the thigh to become stiff within forty days. Then it is necessary to open and use the bath, and to treat with ointments that are suitable for that, if there is a fracture or a broken bone.
Do not open the bandage until fifty days or two months.
The Twelfth Chapter.
On the Fracture of the Upper Arm Bone.
The arm consists of two bones, and they are called the Zhengdin; one is small and it is the one that extends to the elbow, and the other is large and it is situated underneath the small one from the bottom up; sometimes the large Zhengdin breaks alone or the small one alone, and sometimes they both break together.
When the small upper Zhengdin breaks, its treatment is easy and its healing is quicker; and when the lower Zhengdin breaks, its fracture is severe and its healing is difficult. If both bones break together, it was as if the bone that broke was the small upper Zhengdin.
It is necessary for the doctor, when treating him, to make his bandage gentle at first so that he can get used to it; if the large Zhengdin is the one broken, it is necessary to make the bandage stronger; and if both Zhengdins are broken, it is necessary to make the bandage even stronger.
It is necessary to put the shape of the hand in a position during treatment and to bandage it, stretched out on a pillow, with the elbow above the level of all the fingers, and the wrist below them, and the little finger resting on itself.
And let the pillow be placed under it at an elevation so that the little finger does not become bent.
Then a servant extends the arm from below, or with his hand, and another servant extends it from above, like that; then the doctor sets the bone in shape until he puts it in the best possible form; if there are fragments of bone broken off, they are treated.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Take the treatment from there, and apply it at first to the prominent vein, and let the sharp instrument be inserted through the perineum, between the thigh and the hip joint, and press it firmly until the tumor settles.
Then insert the perineum instrument, with its blunt point, through the dust of the rhad, with the whiteness of the egg, and then move the needles, and let the needle that is placed on the aching spot be slightly raised and strengthened, and know that the number of needles in the arm will be more in most cases.
The aching spot was in one or two tendons, then make your pressure on the site of the aching spot stronger and firmer, and whenever you pressed upwards or downwards, make the pressure slightly easier according to what has been mentioned previously in this chapter.
And let the instrument that is wrapped around the aching spot be flexible and not too hard, and let the thread by which it is tightened be from a special knot, middle-way between the joint and the bone, as we have described, and bandage the limb and the bruise after some days.
If something happens, it should be treated like a wound that has occurred in the limb, so it is necessary to wash the limb with warm water until that wound settles, and leave the limb without bandaging for a night until it relaxes, then the pressure is applied.
If the pressure has relaxed and the bone has been displaced or something similar, then treat it with all your effort, and also look, if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to the pressure, it is necessary to relax it a little and leave it for some days until the nourishment reaches it, then apply the pressure.
If nothing of what we have mentioned appears on the patient, it is not necessary to remove it until after twenty days or so, then hang the patient's arm from his neck and let his forearm be in a moderate position, and protect his joints from turbulent movements, and make him sleep on his side.
It is known that this fracture will be restored in thirty days or in twenty-two, and perhaps it will be restored in eighteen days, all of which depends on the state of the patient and the strength of his constitution.
The 13th Chapter.
On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
The wrist and finger joints are rarely affected by fractures, but rather they are often affected by abundant contusions, so when a fracture or contusion occurs in the wrist.
One should place the injured person in a sitting position and his arm should be placed on a level surface.
Then he should extend his arm and stretch out the broken bone, and the physician should adjust it until it is in its proper position. Then he should apply a compress and a splint, if there is no inflammation or redness. Then he should apply a plaster cast from above, according to the size of the site.
And he should bandage it with a soft cloth, if the fracture is at the lower end towards the palm of the hand, so make a circular shape from the cloth and instruct the injured person to grasp it with his broken hand, then tie it with a long cloth.
And let the plaster cast be from a single piece of cloth, so that the cloth is not bent with the bending of the entire hand, and tie it as needed. If the fracture is on the outside, one should make a plaster cast from above and another from below in the palm of the hand, so that the hand remains open and straight.
Then he should apply the bandage as the hand is turned and interlace between the fingers with a strip, if the fracture is in one of the finger joints. If it is in the thumb, adjust it as needed, then bind it with the palm, and if you want to make a small standing plaster cast to hold the fracture in place.
Do not move if the fracture is in the middle fingers such as the third or fourth or fifth, but splint it with a small straight splint and bind it with the adjacent finger to make it stable, or bind all of them together on the wrist.
As we mentioned in the case of the arm and its treatment, and after the swelling has subsided, you should apply what is necessary when the pain recurs, and describe it as it happens.
Chapter Fourteen.
On the treatment of fractures of the thigh.
The thigh bone often fractures and becomes dislocated because it is bent forward and backward, and its treatment is by applying a bandage above the fracture and another below it, with the patient lying on his face.
Then, he should stretch each bandage to its direction on the basis of this, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone; and if it is near the base of the thigh, it is necessary to apply a soft bandage, either from a pillow or something similar.
At the base of the thigh, towards the groin, the bandage should be placed above and the other below the fracture; and if the fracture is near the knee, the bandage should be near the knee so that it presses from below. Then, the doctor will align the bone with both his hands until he restores it to its natural shape.
And the bone will reunite nicely, so when that happens, it is necessary to remove the bandage and apply pressure; if no swelling or inflammation occurs in the limb, then wait until the inflammation subsides, and then return to its treatment.
And it is necessary to apply a rigid and wide splint on the fracture for two or three days, and then leave what remains; then, apply a splint to the leg until the ankle becomes stable at the base of the limb, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and fix the ends of the thread from above on both sides.
Then you should place a bandage on the thigh and calf, leaving what remains of the surgical dressing. Then you should apply to the thigh at the site of the fracture itself several layers of dressing, and make one layer over the bone of the calf. Then, fasten the splint that is between the thigh and calf with a linen roller to straighten it.
Then, start to apply strong bandages from the middle over the site of the fracture, three or four layers. And each time you wrap with a bandage from the site of the fracture, make your tightening weaker and more gentle.
Then, direct the end of the thread that I had inserted between the thigh and calf to what is above from the layers of dressing, then pass the end of the thread down until it reaches the ankle of the leg, and fasten it there also, with the ends of the dressing on the other side.
Do not loosen the bandage from its position, then leave the tightening on it as long as it does not harm the limb, nor become inflamed, nor swollen, nor putrefy, and so on. If something of that happens, then hasten to release it and correct what has happened from that, all according to what we have mentioned previously.
If there is a splinter in the bone that has entered, it is necessary to remove it if you can, otherwise, make an incision and extract it, and treat the wound with what we have mentioned previously until it heals. This will fix the fracture of the thigh without adding the calf with dressings.
As we mentioned in the arm and forearm, except that its splinting like this does not combine with it for the patient's comfort, and if you splinted it alone without adding the calf to it, then it is inevitable that its owner will always be lame.
Be aware that the thigh is stabilized in approximately 50 days, or a little more or less, all of which depends on the difference in temperament and other conditions.
The Fifteenth Chapter.
On the fracture of the cranium.
The cranium fracture is rare, and it often suffers many contusions, and if it does suffer a fracture, then it will be either a split or a depression in its parts, and that will happen with or without an wound.
And you should rely on sensation for that, and set it with the fingers so as to restore what is dislocated from its parts, until they reunite and adjust according to the way of setting and alignment, then apply the dressing and apply a round splint if you need to.
And you should tighten from above with a suitable compression, then observe all the conditions that we described in other fractures, such as inflammation and its likes, by opposing each obstacle with what is suitable for it until he recovers.
The Sixteenth Chapter.
On the setting of a fracture of the thigh bone.
The thigh has two bones, one thick and called the femur, and the other thin and called the patella, and they are susceptible to types of fracture that affect the bones of the arm. And therefore, its setting is like the setting of the arm, and the work is one, for if the fracture is in both bones, it will displace the thigh to all directions, and if the fracture is in the thin bone, it will displace the thigh forward, and if the fracture is in the thick bone and occurs from below, that is something that cannot be hidden from you.
So use extension and alignment, and bind the splints accordingly, except that if the fracture of the thigh is a comminuted one with many fragments, the extension should be less and gentler, and you should exert your effort in setting it.
And in the thigh, there is something additional to the arm, which is that when you have set the splints and completed all your work, take two sticks of cedar wood or others like them from the palm trees, which are used to straighten the rafters that are placed between the grooves of the boards.
Choose from them what is slightly thick and not from the thin ones, and let its length be along the length of the leg from the knee to the ankle, then wrap each one with two bandages along its length, placing one on the leg and the other on the other side.
And let it be from the knee to the bottom of the foot, then tie the two fascia in three places, at the extremities and the middle, for with this bandage the leg will be steady and not lean to the right or left, and it will be strong, and a splint made of wood along the length of the leg can be used.
And it is put in place to prevent movement, and it is most necessary to do that with a fracture if there is a specific wound with it, then inspect the leg every day and pay attention to any sign of swelling or inflammation or anything else. When something of that happens, treat it with what is necessary until it heals, and the bone of the leg will be restored in thirty days or thereabouts.
Chapter Seventeen.
On fractures of the bones of the leg and toes.
The ankle is not prone to fractures of the splint, and the bones of the leg are prone to fracture, and the toes also rarely have fractures, but rather they are exposed to bruising in most cases.
If the bones of the leg are exposed to fracture and you find that those bones have overlapped each other, then put the injured foot on the ground standing upright like a pillar, then you should put your foot on what has protruded from those bones and press them in.
Until they return to their places, then take the padding and the bandage from above and place them under the sole of the foot like a small cushion that has two flat surfaces, then bind the foot tightly after wrapping it with bandages and other things needed for it.
If three or four days have passed, then release the bandage, and you will find the bone in its proper position, whether it was fractured or dislocated. If some fingers are bent, straighten them and adjust them according to what I described to you about adjusting fingers of the hand.
Then apply a splint to the fractured finger along its length, and let it be slightly elevated above it. Then place under the foot the board that I described to you, and fasten it firmly, especially if the break was in two or three or more bones.
Put a splint on each finger, proportional to its size, wrapped in a linen bandage, and fasten the board at the bottom of the foot, with each head of the board protruding outside the sole of the foot to hold it in place properly.
And beware that you do not forget to observe all that we mentioned to you in other fractures from the symptoms that we mentioned, and deal with each symptom according to what is suitable.
The 18th Chapter.
On the fracture of the clavicle in women and the collar bone, and mentioning the man.
When a woman's collar bone is fractured, put her in a recumbent position, then incline her slightly towards her back, and hold it from behind, then fasten the clavicle with bandages until it is fully covered and becomes like a ball in her chest.
Then, gently move the woman and raise her back slightly, for that bandage will come out until it becomes like a ball at the chest opening, and the fracture of the bone will be restored. Then, put a pillow on her back, so when she wants to cough, remove the bandage with care until she coughs.
And return it to the shape you initially formed, then return it to its original position. Do that for seven days or so, and it will be restored. If you fear that a pus collection may occur, insert a tube into her mouth and introduce the entire collection into her chest.
Then, you should insert the tube with force until it reaches the interior of the anus, then the fracture will return to its place. Then, bandage with cotton and apply a regimen as we have described until he recovers. And if the bone of the hip joint of a man or woman is fractured, it should be treated in this manner.
And you should treat it as we have described for the thigh bone, and do not hide from yourself the correctness in these strange fractures that rarely occur and are not well-known to those who have some experience, and he who understands this book of mine will be excellent, because the fracture itself will guide you in most cases.
You should proceed correctly in its treatment and bandage, and understand. And if a man's thigh is fractured, take a poultice of colycynth and insert it into the anus, then apply a dressing made of wool and bind it with a ligature, and leave it for three days or thereabouts until he recovers.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
On the treatment of fractures of bones when they are with wounds.
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, and it is not hidden if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the arm bone, that you should hasten to treat it from its time, so that you may be helped by the conditions of treatment as we have mentioned.
If the wound is pouring out blood, it is necessary to hasten to its treatment by applying a hemostatic powder, if you do not have anything else, then proceed to treat the fracture on that same day and do not delay.
If there is no severe inflammation, and if severe inflammation occurs, then postpone treatment until the ninth day, until the severe inflammation subsides. Do not touch it on the third and fourth days, for it will bring about bad consequences.
If the fractured bone is protruding out of the skin, it is necessary to reduce it and set it in place with your hand gently and gradually. And if you are unable to reduce and set it in place with your hand, use this instrument, which is a tool made of iron, its length being about seven or eight fingers. The Treatment of Wounds
Therefore, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them according to the need of treatment in each type of fracture, and let them be slightly tightened so they do not loosen when pressure is applied during operation.
And let its extremity be sharpened with a curve at its tip, and its upper part be towards the tightness, and from its middle to its lower part be very thin, and this is its shape.
And it is called by the Greeks ' ', a small instrument; it is necessary that its sharpened curved extremity be placed on the fractured bone, and pressed upon it gently until, when the bone returns to its position and settles somewhat, the fragments of the fracture are adjusted to each other.
If the fractured extremity is thin and the instrument does not grasp it well, it is necessary to cut through that bone until the instrument can grasp it firmly; if you are unable to return the bone to its position as we described previously, then cut it according to the sections we mentioned.
Or, if you are able to do so, extend the bone with one of the forceps in a way that is possible for you; then scrape off what remains of the roughness and thin skin from the bone. If you have returned the bone and found it still painful and very tender after its return, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you are able to return it to its natural position, then do so; for you will have achieved a great benefit and relieved the patient of a great pain. If you have completed your treatment of the bone, apply a dressing with a black, sticky bandage in the summer, and do not put anything on the wound that would cause it to become inflamed.
So that putrefaction and corruption do not occur, then use the bandages when you have finished treating the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, applying the compress with a suitable pressure according to the size of the wound.
Beware extremely of tightening the bandage with the splint, for many have done that and caused harm to their patients, resulting in either death or gangrene or abscesses, and let not your tightening be contradictory to the tightening of other splints.
If the wound is weak or a large wound and you fear some severe complications that we have described, and you find pain in the affected area, then it is not advisable to put splints on it and make wrappings with stiff linen at the place of the splints, and tighten them with it.
If, after a day or two, you see the wound has started to suppurate, then remove the linen that was applied with the dressing, and use the lancet and medications that are part of our custom to treat wounds, such as the quartic ointment and its like, and it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage.
And examine the wound every morning and evening until it becomes swollen and heals, and it is necessary to position the limb in a way that the pus flows down easily. If many days have passed for the wound and it has not become inflamed nor has the pus ceased, then know that there are small bony fragments.
And it is necessary to probe the wound with a sounder, and if you find that some of those fragments are loose, then extract them and remove them. And whatever is not loose will cause pain in the limb and create discomfort, so cut it off and extract it in every way possible.
If the wound shows signs of gangrene or abscesses or another type of putrefaction and inflammation, then it is necessary to confront each of these signs with the treatment that we have presented and described in its chapter.
And it is necessary to beware of stopping at the joint and to fix your mind on it, if you have fractured a large bone, such as the femur or the humerus and their like from the major limbs, so do not neglect its treatment nor delay it. Many cases of this type are presented where death occurs, but it is delayed until the patient becomes worn out, and then he often dies twenty or thirty days after the accident.
Sometimes you may find a suitable place to treat the wound, but if not, leave it alone.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
On the treatment of complications that arise after some fractures.
Many cases of this complication arise after fractures, especially near the joints, and it may even disfigure the limb or deprive it of its natural function.
I have tried and found that if the complication is mild, I use medications that constrict, such as sabur, laban, mar, anzurot, aqaqiya, and their likes, taking some or all of them and mixing them with a constricting drink or egg white or vinegar.
And apply it to the complication with a compress, and bind it tightly on it, leaving the binding for several days, then removing it and repeating it until the complication disappears, God willing. Or, you may bind onto it a poultice made of solidified lead.
For lead has a property that dispels every evil that occurs in the organs. If the complication has become entrenched and intensified, and the inflammation has moved to its vicinity, then make an incision above it and cut off the affected part or ligate it with some of the ligatures until it disappears, and treat the wound until it heals.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
On the treatment of fractures when they are consolidated and the limb remains weak after that, not returning to its original condition.
If a fracture consolidates and the limb remains weak and feeble afterwards, that is because of many reasons. Some of these reasons are the abundance of humors, the binding of the joints in an unnatural way, or the excessive tightness of the bindings, until the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb, or the abundance of unnecessary movement, or the movements made at the wrong time, or the scarcity of blood in the body of the patient, which leads to weakness.
Here is the translation: The nourishment is restored in it and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of a fractured bone, if it was set with a bandage and its action was delayed until what is desired.
When a member is presented for treatment after it has been set following a fracture or dislocation, or the bone was broken and its shape was altered. Except that the member did not lose its natural function, so it is not acceptable to accept the statement of those who claim that the member was broken from its root, and many ignorant physicians and surgeons in our country have done that.
And this action is very blameworthy, leading to great harm and corrupting the treatment, but if the dislocation and breakage were slight, it would be acceptable to use the water in which the crushed herbs such as wormwood, colocynth, and king's cilantro have been soaked.
And it is treated with crushed herbs such as diachylon, or the root of wormwood is taken and pounded with chicken fat and rose oil, and it is applied with it, or the figs of Dasmur are taken and crushed with the sedge of the bath, and similar medications that are called analgesics.
And when the breakage is treated with the constant gentle traction that is done with a bandage, and the movement of the member is attempted in all directions at all times, if the dislocation has become strong and stubborn and requires the application of iron for its treatment.
It is necessary to split it open and release the connection of the bone, and to cut what remains of the breakage or bone with gentle sections, and to use gentleness in that with effort and care, then to treat the wound with what was mentioned previously until it heals.
The Thirty-Third Section.
The tonsil is a displacement of a joint from its position, which hinders movement and deforms the shape of the limb, causing severe pain and aching. When someone suffers from tonsilitis, it is necessary to hasten to treat it in order to return it to its place.
One should not delay, for if he delays, the swelling of the affected area will increase and it will be more difficult to return the tonsil to its place. Therefore, one should not delay, nor should he hesitate, nor should he be sluggish in treating it, because it often causes severe pain and aching.
But if it happens, one should hasten to bleed the affected area, then let it settle until the swelling subsides a little, and then pour warm water and oil on the limb, and finally return it to its place with gentle manipulation, treating each limb according to what is appropriate for it in its position.
And I have also arranged the sections on tonsilitis according to what has been mentioned above, from the top of the body to its lowest part.
The Forty-Second Section.
On treating tonsilitis of the lower jaw.
Do not let the tonsils dislocate except in a gentle and gradual way, for they may be on one of two surfaces, either slipping out of their position with a slight relaxation, or completely dislocating with a complete relaxation until they settle. Towards the chest, until the patient's saliva flows and he cannot hold it back, nor can he bear to move his jaw and articulate with his tongue, for if its dislocation is slight, it often returns to its original position with minimal effort.
And if the dislocation is complete, it is necessary to hasten its return with speed and not delay, and that is by having the servant hold the patient's head and the doctor inserts his finger into the mouth on the base of the jaw, inside the cheek, if the dislocation is on one side.
He should enter the fingers of his hand, if the fracture is from both sides and the rest of his fingers are outside, he wraps them with it and orders the patient to bend his elbow and let him go to each direction, and the physician wraps the fracture and pushes it until it returns to its position.
If it is difficult to reduce, and it does not return to its position even if both fractures are complete, then use the compress with warm water and fat until it becomes easy to reduce them, and do not delay reducing them, as we have mentioned. If they return to their position and settle, and the patient's mouth is not dislocated, then at that time put on them a splint of leather strips made from tanned skin and fat.
Then bind it with a bandage, and let the patient sleep on his side with his hand elevated between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor does he strain at all, but rather keeps still, and makes his food light.
Until, when the pain goes away and the fracture is consolidated, let him eat what he wishes, and do not use a bandage, nor should he hurry to open his mouth while eating, drinking, or talking, until the fracture is consolidated and healed.
If it is difficult to reduce the fractures, and they do not return to their positions at the right time, but rather become dislocated, then many bad consequences occur, including chronic pains and constant aches, and perhaps the patient's belly becomes swollen, or perhaps he suffers from severe and frequent relapses. If you see that, then know that it is a failure.
And many die within ten days due to this condition.
Chapter 25.
On reducing a fracture of the wrist and forearm.
As for the wrist, it does not dislocate from the inner side because of its connection to the chest, and it dislocates outwardly, which is apparent to the sense, and its treatment is to lay the patient on his back and extend his arm.
Then press the area with your finger, pressing firmly, and then apply the bandage and the compress, and tighten it. As for its end that is near the collar bone and connects to it, do not loosen it except on the day when it should be loosened, for it may become inflamed and return to what we have mentioned.
Then apply the bandage and compress, and tighten it, and order the patient to rest in bed until he recovers. With this treatment, specifically, the end of the collar bone is treated if it has also deviated from its position.
Chapter 26.
In the treatment of a fractured collar bone.
Know that the collar bone is fractured in three ways: one of them is that it fractures towards the armpit and downwards, the second is that it fractures towards the chest, and perhaps it fractures above the collar bone, and that is during the recovery period.
It does not fracture towards the back of the shoulder, nor does it fracture towards the front of the nerve, and most often it fractures and exits downwards towards the armpit. And that is especially in those whose humerus is short, because it exits quickly in them and enters quickly.
As for those whose humerus is long, it is the opposite, meaning that it exits slowly and enters slowly. And perhaps some people suffer a blow or fall that causes the collar bone to become inflamed, and the doctor thinks that it has fractured, so it is necessary to examine it carefully until its soundness is confirmed.
So when you advance to its treatment, and you examine the fracture if it is downwards towards the armpit, you will find that the fractured collar bone and the healthy one have a clear difference. You will find that the head of the collar bone is deformed and under the armpit, upon palpation, you will find that the head of the collar bone is like an egg.
The patient cannot raise his arm to his ear, nor can he make all the necessary movements, and if he bends towards his chest or upwards, you will find that obvious for the lesion which is not hidden.
And this fracture can be reduced if it was a recent one or the patient was a young boy, and you make your assistant raise his arm above, then you will bend your fingers under his armpit and lift the joint with force upwards to its position, and the assistant raises his arm and stretches it above.
Then he puts it down below, and if it does not return quickly as we mentioned, and the fracture was several days old, it is advisable to bathe the patient in hot water and use a poultice that is relaxed and soft, like one made from the roots of plants, and the King's plaster, and it is used in the water.
Then the patient lies on his back and a ball of cotton is placed under his armpit, being moderate between softness and firmness, then the doctor puts his finger on the ball and holds the patient's arm with his hand and stretches it downwards.
And he presses the ball against his side, and if it does not return to its position, and you want to reduce it in this way, which is to prepare a longer splint than the patient's leg and attach it from the side of the thigh and insert its end under the patient's armpit and raise his arm above until the patient is suspended in the air. And another assistant pulls the patient's arm downwards to his abdomen, and if the patient is weak, it is advisable to hang another thing on him to hold him fast, so that the fracture returns to its position, and it may also be reduced in another way.
And it is that you fix a long, straight stick in the ground, its head being rounded in shape like a pestle, not too thick nor too thin, then it is placed under the patient's armpit after placing a soft cloth on the head of the stick and the patient stands upright along the length of the stick.
Then, you should extend it to the bottom of the other side and also extend its base from the other side with strength, for the joint will quickly return to its position. If the return is difficult, use this treatment: take a splint about two fingers long. And shape it to be four fingers wide and two fingers thick, with a rounded head, so that it is easy to insert into the armpit in this manner.
Then, tie a smooth ligature on the rounded head so that it does not hurt the splint. Then, place it under the armpit and extend the entire arm onto the splint down to the bottom, and tie the splint to the upper arm and forearm, and the extremity of the hand.
Then, place the forearm on a pillow. Straighten it out and extend the arm down to the bottom, and let the rest of the body hang from the other side, for the joint will enter its position. If it is possible to enter it in this way, it may be placed under the armpit with a moderate-sized cushion.
Then, he should carry the bandaged arm with the cotton and egg whites on all the joints as it rotates from above, then tighten the cushion firmly under the armpit, and fasten the bandage on top of the arm, and suspend his hand to his neck.
And let him not move his arm for seven days, and it is desirable to make the splint's nutrition a little until the member becomes strong, for it will be quicker to heal. Then, remove it after seven or five days and exercise it with movement; if it has stuck and did not become loose, it has healed.
If the joint was dislocated frequently due to weakness or another cause, it is desirable to use the method of three splints as previously mentioned in the chapter on dislocations. If you do all this and remove the bandage after seven days, but the joint did not stabilize.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
When the fracture is near the chest and the ribs, and towards the back of the patient, it should be treated with bandaging and medication until it heals. All harsh treatments and remedies are to be used until it mends. If after healing, a swelling appears in the limb and movement becomes difficult...
The patient should be made to use the warm bath repeatedly until that swelling subsides and he returns to his original nature.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of elbow fracture.
The elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty, and it does not dislocate to all directions, nor specifically to the front or to the back, and its fracture is not hidden from you, for it occurs under observation and under palpation in any shape of dislocation.
And if you find the elbow joint fractured and in its correct position, it will be clear to you by the apparent curvature of the joint, and he will not be able to bend his arm nor move it from its prominence, and it is necessary that you should reduce and set the fracture quickly before it becomes complicated and inflammation occurs.
For if it becomes complicated and inflammation occurs, it is difficult to reduce it, and perhaps the patient will not heal, especially if the fracture is at the back, for it is the most difficult of all types of fractures and the most painful, and often death occurs with it.
And you should force it, if possible, to return to its position, by extending his arm with the palm of your hand and his forearm bent, while the doctor's hand is above the elbow and below it, and he is pushing the joint with the fingertips of his hand all together or with the base of his palm, until it returns to its original position.
And if the fracture is at the front, it can be reduced by bending the arm once until it meets the base of the palm, which is opposite to it. If the fracture does not return to its position, then a strong and very forceful extension should be used, which is to extend the arm with great strength.
The bandage is also put on the limbs when they are dislocated, and then it is extended to each side after being wrapped around the limb with a rolled or folded compress; and if the doctor's hands are placed on the joint, he should massage it gently so that the joint may be restored to its proper place with ease.
Then the joint is manipulated strongly until it returns to its place, and after its return, it is necessary to apply the compress that contains vinegar and rose water and which has been cooled with ice, and to bandage the limb from the armpit of the arm and to leave it for a while.
Then, if the joint is fixed in its position, the bandage is removed from it and left alone. And if you see that the joint has not been restored properly, you should reapply the compress and bandage and leave it for a while until it is restored, then remove it. If pain occurs after the joint's return and removal, ...
And if there is difficulty in movement, the treatment should be done in the bath and with gentle massage and kneading until it becomes soft or makes the joint supple like a sole of leather. Then, bandage it and leave it for a day and a night, then remove it and put it in the bath. If it becomes inflamed, treat the joint with a moderate treatment.
Then, repeat the treatment on it several times, along with bathing, until it becomes soft. And if you want to make a poultice of cow's dung, mix it with rose water and oil, and apply it to the joint, doing that repeatedly, so that it becomes soft and returns to its original condition.
Chapter 28
On the Treatment of Fractures of the Clavicle
The clavicle is frequently fractured and its fracture is easy, unlike other joints, but it is necessary to hasten the reduction of the fracture at the time of fracture before the place becomes swollen or an abscess forms.
Place the surgeon's thumb on the wrist and bend it, and let the doctor place his fingers on the joint and bend them until they return to their original position, for it is necessary to examine whether the fracture has returned to its proper alignment.
Let him place the outer aspect of his hand on the wrist during flexion and extension, and if the fracture is displaced to the outer aspect of the hand, let him place the inner aspect of his hand on the wrist so that the doctor's hand falls on the same joint; if it returns to its position, then secure it with a suitable dressing for the swelling.
Do not leave it without dressing, for it will not be stable and you will not be able to reduce it after a few days have passed, unless the joint remains in its place and does not harm the hand, except that the hand has been stretched out and you were unable to grasp anything.
Therefore, you should know that the nerve has been severed or crushed, and there is no remedy for it except to use a dressing; perhaps it may be beneficial, and perhaps it will not benefit at all. If the fracture has been reduced, then put on the dressing that we have described, and secure it and leave it for five days.
Then remove and exercise the hand, for you have restricted its movement and presented something of stiffness in it; so soak it in warm water and massage it repeatedly until it becomes supple.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of fracture of the fingers.
The fingers may be fractured in any direction, so when a finger is fractured to the outer or inner aspect of the hand, bend the finger and reduce the fracture with your thumb until it returns to its position, then bind the top of the finger and suspend it towards the direction from which it was dislocated.
Leave it for two days, then release it and bend it until it becomes straight on that day. If it is at night, bind it in the same way, and do not cease to loosen it during the day, exercise its movement, and bind it at night; do that for several days until it becomes stable.
And you should do the same to it if you had detached it from inside the arm, and attach it to its own site, and deal with it as you dealt with it at first, until it heals. And also, deal with it similarly whenever you detach it to other sites.
Chapter Thirty.
Treatment of fracture of the vertebral column.
When a fracture occurs in the vertebral column of the back or neck, and the vertebrae are completely dislocated from their positions, there is no treatment for it, because death quickly approaches the patient.
And the sign of that is that the patient's breath comes out without control, and often some of his limbs become paralyzed, either his legs or his arms or one of them. And if one vertebra is dislocated from its position, it often becomes dislocated.
And its dislocation is to four directions, and the one that dislocates backwards is called a curvature. And as for its treatment, it is that you should examine, if the curvature has occurred from birth, there is no treatment for it, nor any remedy for it; and as for the one that occurs from a fall or a blow, and so on.
The ancients mentioned it with various treatments in lengthy discourse that does not return much benefit, and I have shortened from that what is sufficient to be of little benefit from much of what they have brought together for clarification and explanation.
I say that the curvature that occurs from birth in the chest, there is no remedy for it, nor any treatment for it. And likewise, the one that occurs to the two sides as well. But I do treat the one that occurs in the back specifically, and that is by placing the patient on his face.
On a mattress, laid out on a level surface near a wall, and spread underneath it a soft cloth, so that he does not hurt his chest. Then you place a straight stick, fixed in a hole in the ground at one end of the mattress, near his head, and another stick at the other end of the mattress, near his legs.
The servant holds the scalp and another servant holds the other one in that position, then wraps around the patient's chest and under his armpits with soft and tight bandages, and extends the end of the bandage to the scalp at the head and ties it there.
Then he ties another bandage above his hips and above his knees, and at his ankles, then gathers all the bandages together and ties them to the other scalp at his legs, then each servant pulls their direction of the scalp with the bandage, without loosening the two scalps from their fixed positions.
But they are not fixed as we have mentioned, and the doctor places his palms on the scalp with force until it returns or he puts a spatula on it, then he presses on the spatula with his knees until it returns; if it does not return with this treatment, he takes a spatula whose length is approximately three cubits.
And he makes an incision in the scalp we mentioned, near the patient's chest, a place where he inserts the end of the spatula, then he puts the middle of the spatula on the prominence and the doctor places his legs on the other end and pulls strongly until the scalp is pulled out.
And it returns to its place, and if you want to secure it with a wooden board that is tied with a rope, which is to insert into the ground at the head of the patient, at the end of the two scalpels, being a cubit in length, and also at his legs, at the end of the two scalpels.
And there should be a separation of a finger's breadth between each scalp, and a hole is made in each scalp through which the wooden board passes, and all the wood is firmly secured in the ground, so that the patient does not move at all, and a curved rod is inserted, which is the wooden board on which the bandage winds around the two scalps.
On the side of the wound that has been sewn with a long suture, as is done in the two last mentioned limbs, then tighten the bandage that was applied to the chest at the joint near his head, and the bandages that were applied to his legs at the joints near his feet.
Then, a servant stands at each joint, twisting the bandage with the twisted thing that is twined around the joint, and the doctor makes the pressure on what we have mentioned, and this is the picture of the joints and the bandages and the chest.
Then, after the suture is completed and the area is settled, it is necessary to apply the compress, which is a compacted cotton pad, then the splint, and then place on top of the compress a small cushion made of leather, its width being three fingers or thereabouts, and its length being suitable for the area of the pressure.
And on some of the correct sutures, then bind with the necessary bandage, and use a light diet until he recovers. If there remains some numbness in the area after recovery, it is necessary to use the medications that soften and relax, along with the application of the leather cushion we described at length.
And a copper plate may be used for that, and numbness may appear in the last sutures of the back, and it is feared that it will become a superfluous bone, and that would be a bad consequence, so do not neglect him with this treatment lest death occur.
Chapter 31.
On the Treatment of Hernias.
Know that the joint of the groin and the joint of the shoulder, only dislocation occurs to them, and nothing else occurs to them from the lesser injuries and sprains, and the joint of the groin dislocates in four ways.
And that is because it dislocates inward, outward, forward, and backward, and most often it dislocates inward, and rarely it dislocates forward or backward. And the sign of its dislocation inward is that if you compare the healthy limb with the diseased one, it will be longer.
The fracture of the kneecap is more severe than the straight one, and the patient cannot bend his knee when it is in a position that is above the knee, and the location that is above the knee becomes swollen and painful before the head of the thigh bone has reached that point.
And the sign that indicates to him that his knee is displaced outward is that he stretches his leg on the mattress, but he does not bend it without pain being in the kneecap; and if he attempts to walk, he cannot do so until it is reduced.
And he feels heaviness in his knee and numbness in his leg, and when walking, it is as if he has a weight on his hip; and the sign that indicates to him that his knee is displaced backward is that he cannot stretch his kneecap nor bend it before bending his leg, and his leg is also shorter than the other.
And the leg is relaxed and the head of the thigh bone is at the position of the buttock, and as for the return of this type of fracture, it is that you should look: if the fracture was old and had adhered to its companion and did not try to reduce it, and it remained in its condition, then there is no treatment for it.
It is not advisable to show it to him, and as for the one whose fracture is recent and was of any type among the four types of fractures, you should hasten to manipulate the joint, stretching it inward and outward, and moving it gently from side to side.
If it does not return to its place with no benefit from treatment, then if it does not return in this way, it is advisable to put strong wooden splints on his leg from below, either with his hands or with a bandage tied above the knee and another splint that extends from above.
By inserting his hands from under his armpit, then tightening the bandage to settle on the basis of the thigh, and holding the end of the splint with another splint, which is the third, and it extends either from the front near the knee to the hip, or from behind to the back.
And they bandage each of them with a single bandage until the swelling goes down and the limb remains suspended, for this type of bandaging is a common type for the four categories. If you return to what we mentioned earlier, then it's not necessary for each category to have a specific treatment.
But the specific return, if the fracture is inward, it is necessary to place the swelling on its correct aspect, then to apply compresses at the base of the thigh, between the head of the thigh and the point below the pubic area.
Then the bandage is extended from below the pubic area to above the abdomen, up to the region of the navel, then another strong servant takes hold with his fingers and presses on the thick part of the thigh, and tightly bandages outward, so that it returns to its position.
And this type is easier than other types of treatment that involve the return of this member, so you should not hesitate and should not be reluctant to enter into this type of treatment, for it is necessary to bandage the entire limb with a strong bandage, so that it rests on the ankles and knees.
And each one is at a distance of four fingers from its companion, and the upper limb is extended more than the other by two fingers, then the limb is suspended on a wooden beam that is in the house, and it is at a distance of two cubits from the ground.
Then you order a strong servant to hold the head of the thigh and suspend it with another servant, and the other servant holding the thigh with strength, so that the joint returns to its position quickly. But the specific return, if the fracture is outward.
It is necessary to place the limb on the pillows according to what we described in the owner of the curvature, and to tighten the bandage on his upper limb specifically and on his chest, then to place one wooden beam at his ankles and another at his head, then to place an additional wooden beam in the middle of the pillows, strongly secured.
Here is the translation of the excerpt:
Here is the translation:
The physician places the palm of his right hand on the upper arm and presses with the other hand, and with that he makes the pressure extend downwards towards the area of the elbow, and if the dislocation is behind, it does not necessitate that the upper arm be extended downwards.
He should be elevated above the ground, but it is necessary that he be placed on a solid pillow, as it is necessary that his hip and knee be bent outward according to what we mentioned about his positioning on the operating table, and his face and bandages are stretched.
As we mentioned earlier, it is necessary to use the cupping on the affected area also at the site where the joint was dislocated, so if you have successfully reduced the hip joint as necessary and the sign of its reduction is not hidden from you, it is that you extend the thigh of the upper arm.
If you find them aligned and the upper arm flexes the thigh and extends it without any trouble, then know that the limb has been reduced as necessary; thus, at that point, bring the legs together and apply the bandage with a strong tightening, not allowing the hip to move towards any direction.
And bind the upper arm. Keep it still for three or four days, then remove the bandage and dressing, and massage the thigh with the other, if you find them aligned in proportion, then know that the fracture has been set, and release the upper arm for walking; and if you find any relaxation in it.
Then return and bind it, and tighten it as you tightened it at first, and leave it for three days, then remove it and walk slowly on it for a few days until it becomes strong, God willing.
Chapters Two and Three.
On the treatment of fractures of the elbow.
The elbow is dislocated in three ways: inward, outward, and downward, which means toward the back, and not forward. The sign of its fracture is that the upper arm is unable to flex its thigh towards its hip.
If the bandage does not stick to the thigh, then know that the knee is fractured, and reset all its facets so that the patient lies down on his back with his leg stretched out, and if it is strong enough for that, he should lie down with his leg bent behind him, and his hip should be slightly turned towards the back.
And stick your back to his face, and put his leg between yours, then bind his knee with your palms, and interlace them with your fingers on his knee, then constrict your palms on both sides of his knee with strength, and another servant stretches out his leg until the knee returns to its position.
And the sign of its return is that you stick the leg to the thigh in a straight line without deviation, then constrict it and stick the leg to the thigh, then bind them both together with a bandage for three or four days, then release them, and do not use it except for a little walking every day until it gains strength.
If you are unable to return it with what we have described, then use strong stretching with the bandages that we have mentioned and described for treating fractures, until it returns.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On the treatment of ankle fracture.
The ankle may become dislocated, and it may break on the calf, and its fracture may be either inward or outward, and the sign of its fracture is that you see the ankle swollen and deformed towards the side to which it was broken.
So, the treatment of its dislocation is to stretch it gently with the hands until it returns, and if it breaks on the calf, it should be treated by lying down on his back with a strong servant holding him from behind his back in his middle.
Then you hold with your right hand his foot from above, and with your left hand from below the foot at the ankle joint, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand, twice, then stretch it with your left hand and push the upper part of the foot with your right hand towards the leg without twisting.
Make it firm as we described, then insert the sole of the foot into the leg in the third position, and you will find that it has been bent with the ankle, but if you return to this position or make it so twice, you will see the foot is straightened, unless you repeat the process on it, for it will revert.
For if you are unable to restore it as we described, then put the patient on his back on the ground and thrust strongly, making sure to place it between his thighs, and wrap a bandage around it so that the patient does not feel discomfort, then the servant will hold his thigh.
Then another servant will stretch out the man's leg, either with his hands or with a bandage to bind it to the patient's neck, then each servant will pull in the opposite direction of his companion and stand upright between the patient's thighs, holding him so that he does not jerk his body downward when stretched, then the physician will set the fracture with his hands.
And another servant will hold the healthy leg downwards, for the fracture will quickly return to its place. If the fracture returns and you see that it has returned to its proper position, then apply the pad and splint, and tie them with bandages and straps, and bind the foot with a bandage downwards, and beware of the nerve that is above the ankle from behind.
So that the bandage is not too tight on it, then leave it for two or three days; if the bandage becomes loose, tighten it and release it on the third or fourth day. And the patient will refrain from walking for forty days.
For if he walks before this period, it is feared that the fracture will be dislocated and become worse, and it will not accept treatment afterwards. So, it is necessary to warn him of a severe penalty, and it is necessary to use in calming him what we have presented and described in another place of treatment and restraint until he recovers.
Chapter 34.
On the treatment of fracture of the fingers of the hand.
It is necessary to straighten what has been bent from it with a slight extension without exaggeration, and it should not be difficult but rather easy. If the fracture was in some of the toes of the foot, it is necessary to put the bandage on a level place on the ground.
Or on a board, and stand like a masseur, then put your foot on what you want from those joints, and press it with your foot forcefully until it returns to its place and appears in its original position without deviation.
Then put under the sole of his foot a board that takes the entire foot, being raised at both ends, and bind it tightly for three days, then remove it and prevent him from walking for many days until he recovers and is safe from relapse, God willing.
Chapter 35.
On the types of fracture that occur with a wound, or with a bruise, or with both altogether.
When something like this happens and its treatment is neglected, it often leads to death.
And therefore, it is not proper for anyone to undertake the treatment of such a case unless he is experienced in the craft, has had long practice, is gentle, cautious, and careful, not hasty or negligent, and uses in the beginning only medications that calm the painful swellings and adjust the bandage.
You should not hasten to do anything for the patient until you have ensured his safety from the injury, with a lightness of the disease and a sign of hope appearing in it, so that you return him to health from the first hour before the painful swelling occurs.
If the limb returns to what you desired, then use the management that calms the painful swellings and treat the wound with what benefits it from dry poultices. If the fracture was with a bruise and there were splinters in the bone, then remove them. We have mentioned in that which we stated concerning the simple wounds what is presented in their locations.
Exert your effort and free yourself from entering into the way of ignorance according to what you have presented and arranged for yourself, thus it will remain for your sake and be safe for your presentation, if God so wills.
