Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, for the completion of it, and for its consequences, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you have compiled it for yourselves in this treatise, which is a part of my operation, so it is surgery.
Because the operation of my mother was prostrated in our region and in our time, totally deprived, until they feared losing the science of it, and its vigilance is outdated; and there remained no remainder of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the most and endevour to avoid those errors and hesitations until their intentions are closed and its force is elongated.
And it seems to me that you will vivify this mother in the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes into the forms of the ferraments of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, as is necessary for the addition of the declaration, and for its preparation, which cause is necessary.
The reason why no artificial hand was found in this our time is because the art of medicine is long, and it covers the whole actor, denoting that it should be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen understood until he knew the juvenation of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and had knowledge of the osseous, nervous, and cartilaginous, and their number, and their dimension; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their issuance.
And for that Hippocrates said that a name is moved, more in the small work, and greatly in the art of the hand.
We have already said that about him in the introduction of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not evacuated from falling into error, for which many men die, thus you have seen many of them, because they are formed in this science and get away from it, and their experiences.
Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has attempted to incise an scrophilous aposteme on the neck of a woman, and has cut some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed out until the woman almost died in his hands.
And I have seen another doctor who pretended to remove a stone from a man's bladder, which had progressed in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone in a tube of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And you have already called it foolish to extract that, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and because of the disposition of the patient's thighs, which conduced under him, he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he made a cruel incision on the black crust which was devouring his fracture in the thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, above the plague, with pulvination and astelation in strong structure, and did not leave the plague to breathe.
And then I followed according to the wishes of the sick ones, and then I relieved, and then I left it for some days and commanded that we disband the ligament; and it was thus until the thigh and the foot were apostematous, and I came to ruin.
And you have foolishly called it to him, and disband the ligament, and achieved tranquility and thus also alleviated some of his pains.
But the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to walk corruptly in the limb until the patient suffered.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous aposteme, and it was ulcerated for several days, until the wickedness of it was magnified in the lord of it.
The reason is that the cancerous tumor was pure melancholic humor, then it did not cover that it would come to him in entirety, but rather it was a member that suffered from everything, as if it had been hostile.
And for that, sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation of my mother was divided into two devolutions: one is an operation associated with health, and another work in which there are major dispositions.
And you have already existed everywhere in this book where I found operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to keep that and leave it, so that the foolish ones do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And therefore take your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your maladies are facilitated and are strengthened.
And you have used the better way by the grace of God to obtain health and laudable success, and you have left the terrible maladies of difficult healing, and you have kept your arms from that which makes you afraid, so that you may establish faith in your heart and in your name you are not evasive: because more remains in your glory, and thus it is established in the world and in the end among your sanctities.
Sometimes I diagnose in certain clear signs: "Do not mistreat a sick patient, so that bad doctors are not named."
"And I have divided this book into three chapters."
"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first partition." "The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the furnishings of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation."
"The division of the second partition." "The second chapter, on scission and perforation, and on cupping glasses, and on poultices, and on extraction of arrowheads and on similarities to those, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on treatment of torsion and on similarities to those; chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments."
"I know the quality of the youthfulness of that cautery and of its instruments, and in what complex situation it is prohibited to use cautery."
"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the youthfulness of cautery and of its instrument is long and prolix, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and to me it suffices a small part of their sermons, fearing prolongation."
"Therefore I say that cautery universally comprehends all complex situations, whether it is a matter or several matters, except for two complex situations, which are cold complex situations without matter."
"In the cold and dry complex situation with matter, they disagree; for some said that cautery is youthful in that, and others said the opposite of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is due to quality and dryness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that cold and dry illness is healed by cautery."
"And they say that one who says the opposite of that, that by cautery youthfulness is made in all cold and dry illnesses that occur in men's bodies, because when you compare men's bodies with the humidity of them to the complex situation of fire, you find men's bodies are fragile."
"And I say through the sermon of that one, that I have experimented and already discovered many times at my own expense."
"Moreover, I do not know who can come up with something about that which has already been experienced and exhausted in the chapter of cautery through previous exercise, and has known the diversity of complex situations of men's bodies and the disposition of illnesses in their measures, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those."
"Moreover, in the other complex situations, it is not about your fear, and especially in the fragile and humid illnesses, because all doctors have agreed on those, and do not disagree about the youthfulness with cautery in those."
"And you know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery is fire and its goodness, so about cautery I bring combined medicine, because fire is simple, whose action does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not reach another member unless adjusted with a small benefit."
"Moreover, the action of combined medicine penetrates to that one in the members where it is adjusted, and strongly makes it come into the diseased member with difficult healing and strongly helps."
"Moreover, fire, by its sublime limit and goodness of its substance, does not make anything except to overflow. And it is already known to us through experiment and length of service in studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that I have excused the length of the sermon. And if it were not that it is not read in my own book in this passage to you secret hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion by which it expels illnesses, a demonstrative philosophical sermon, which would be acute in your writings."
"And you know, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to use cautery and pause at the best time of spring."
"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the youthfulness of that which I have with cautery, and especially if cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fixed, which do not suffer tardiness so that it is feared by those who come with evil, which is greater than small harm entering at that time."
"And it is not seen in your writings, or, sons, that which they do not esteem except the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that at that illness which is healed by cautery, there is no return to all time, and pause at that consequence."
And the cause is not so obvious as the one that alters the complexions and dries out the humidity, which is the cause of the pains.
Perhaps emperor's cauteries are excessive in medicine, wanting to demonstrate the value and truth of his operation and greatness of his lordship.
And it is possible that his illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and its truth, and what has been prepared in his body by the aggregation of excesses in him, and what has happened to him in his acquisition of vices and similarities to those causes; but that the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in some members with few excesses and humidity, thus as cautery for toothache and similar to that, it is possible that in him it does not return that pain, rather it becomes less.
And the common speech is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, since they believe it is not a cure that advances with medicine nor another cause that advances with cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not so when we administer various methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause we administer thus cautery, and advance thereby. And from here on, I cancel the idea that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
And they said that gold cautery is better than iron cautery, and they didn't say it except for the equality of gold and the limitation of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a break, as if it were not absolutely true, because you already have that probed and experienced that it does not make that except in some bodies with others, and cautery in that is good and better than iron, as they said; but when you do cautery with gold focus, it is not declared to you, since it depends on the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and prepare to receive frost; and if you adjust over the igneous surface, the gold melts from the focus, and sometimes in the focus some layers are formed so that the artisan can occupy himself with that.
And therefore it is done to do iron cautery more lightly and more profoundly in relation to the rectitude of operation.
And I have now ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that one can easily find what one wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the affected part of the body, which is the cause of swelling and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the divisions of the veins and arteries, and multitude of sleeplessness, and toothache, and gum pain, and universally all illnesses that come from coldness, as well as paralytic, apoplectic, and similar in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to evacuate the medicine from the head, for three or four nights, according to the truth of the patient and his age and custom.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then make him sit between his thighs on a heated bench and place his hands on the floor of his feet.
And then place the razor in the palm of your hand, then put your fingers on the razor between your thighs. Perhaps, as the finger of my own place has arrived, it signifies that place is tender, and then ignite the olive oil cautery, of which this is the form.
And then place that on the sensitive spot, in a way that descends, as if my finger is constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
And then lift your hand lightly and regard the spot, and if you see that some quantity of the head has been discovered, thus as the quantity of grain of errors, then lift your hand, and if it doesn't return to your hand in that iron, another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by the eye what I have told you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it over the spot and leave it there for three days.
And then place it on the wrapped cloth in a bundle and leave it there until the crust of the focus is destroyed. And then cure the spot with four-part angel's hand until it is healed.
And they said that when the Roman plague bursts, so much better gets the arm, because it is better and more youthful.
They should burn some of those that need to be cauterized on the outside of the bone, and hold the cautery inside so that it is burned in some part of the bone's structure.
Then return to adjusting the bone, and then take care of the cure.
They should also make others who apply the cautery from behind, so that it penetrates deeply into the bone to strengthen it, and this is the way to alleviate small weaknesses. They should estimate from that place where the vapors of the head expire.
It should be held in the open wound for a long time, and then take care to consolidate it.
But I have not seen these two special kinds of cauteries in total, but only in some homes according to the way of fear; and therefore, you should tell me, it is better for my health, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity with the aforementioned, as we have testified in the other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the first kind of cautery is most safe and better for me; and from that house and that work, I am healthy.
Following chapter.
About the cautery of the head.
When the entire head is affected by chronic and long pain, and it is in prolonged illness, and uses remedies and poultices and applications and implants and girdles and cadels and galenas and similants, and especially if it has been cauterized with a cautery that recounts and does not provide relief from any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not fragile and atrophied with much fear, then that cauterying should be done with another cautery below that one. And then cauterize above the crown of the dry head with a cautery so that the bone is divided. Cut the bone and discover the quantity of the os that we have recounted and cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called "vas" — and it is that place where the wind is paused. And lift your hand in that way, and do not discover the bone, because the patient suffers greatly from various pains different from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And you will direct this cautery to its place, because it is known that the cautery is the one that cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the way of it.
Chapter three.
On the cautery of non-ancient migration.
When you find pain in the head's part, or it is a standing pain within the vein, evacuate with mondifying medicines, and administer another cure, which you have stated in the deviations of the illnesses; and if not relieved, then cauterying is done in two ways: either cauterying with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
A cauterying medicine that burns is that you take a dollop of alum, and scrape it away and bind the extremities of it with both ends of the heads. And then incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet into the bone so that it is in the very same place below the bone, so that it is hidden.
And then strengthen it above with a stopped constricting bandage, and leave it like that for three hours; and then remove the alum and extract the lancet, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then pause on the submerged bone in a bath until the place forms a scab.
And then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you want, I will give you some burning medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
A cauterying with iron is done according to this method: ignite the iron for cauterying, of which this is the form.
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is like a form of nail in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small prominence.
And then pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the acidity which is beneath is not burned — and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it that is burned by the structure of the bone is as much as the marrow of it, and lift your hand so that the artery is not burned beneath, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then soak the bone in salt water and pause it on the place, and leave it like that for three days; and then pause the bone many times in a bath, and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you want, cautery the extremity of the cutting instrument according to the cautery, and beware of incision of the artery in this non-ancient migration properly.
Fourth chapter.
On the cauterization of old migraines.
When you treat migraines in the way that we have said about previous treatments, and what we have said about the divisions of illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes for the illness that does not respond to what we have said about the first cauterization in medicine or of the cauterization with fire, then you should ignite the cautery tool until it is white hot, since it indicates on the line of the long duration of which is the greatest pain, or somewhere; and pause your hand for a while and strengthen that until you incise the artery and penetrate to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the continuity of the jawbone, which is weakened by chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves that give bad signals, so that there is no spasmodic contraction.
And it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is affected, because in the affection of it there is fear, and more so for those who ignore what they do and are not skilled and experienced; and thus the operation begins in it at the beginning.
And you will find the reminder of the regulation of blood flow in the artery according to the usual manner, in the same place of this book.
And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the same place on the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the stretching of arteries with cautery having two points, and it is a better cauterization than this one and more convenient.
Chapter five.
On the cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is treated with laxative causes and another treatment which was said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then ignite the cautery, and it is this one that has been named pointed, of which this is the form.
And place the point near the ignition, and it should be aimed at the environment of the whole ear, just as a wheel is turned around, or in the circle of some things if the pain is somewhere. Also, you have the cautery of the root of the ear, little by little, because you should feel the place with your finger.
And if you cautery several points on the whole ear, and that is it, and then cure the areas until they are healed.
Chapter six.
On the cauterization of sciatica.
Sciatica which is treated and with cauterization is not only of the species that come from fluxion, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
It avoids cauterization of the species that originates from dryness or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that species of sciatica with herbs and capypurgi and guarguarismes, and it does not respond to your treatment, then you should cauterize the illness with three cauteries: the first is at the root of the ear, the second a little below the same temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And pause your cautery on the contrary part of the affected area, because mollification is only seen in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the ear's extremity, slightly above the horn of the head, and in another temple, the length of which is according to the length of the aforementioned pain, and pause your hand on the cautery until the quantity of the greatest pain of the specific code is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of cutting, the form of which is described in the table. However, more subtly it is that one should not be so vehement; and it is necessary to cut in it with excessive roughness a little.
And then cure the area with what is described as a process until it is healed.
Chapter seven.
On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and it does not respond to your medicine and the illness has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the same place on the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the neck. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more serious; and then it should be cured with what proceeds.
Chapter eight.
From the cauterization of oblivion made by weakness.
Because they give to the patient in the beginning great and pill-like servings of significant mondification.
And then you shave the whole head of the patient and pause on the nape of their neck in this described implant in the treatise of implants.
And stop those somewhat vague things, because that is the manner of cautery. And do it according to that method in order which I have already said.
And therefore if for those healthy aspects; and if not, then make three cauteries on the back part of their head, which descend from the upper part of the head down to the back of the neck. And stop between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then take care to make the cautery as it is proceeding.
Perhaps if you find the patient is tolerant of that, then make the cautery in the same place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cautelize over both horns.
Then take care that it enters so that it may be healthy; and let the olive-shaped cautery be according to the form given beforehand.
Chapter 9.
On the cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Because you should proceed in mondification of the head with jars and as we have said; and then shave the patient's head, and then make a cautery on the same place on the head, and make a cautery over all the horns of the head, and make a cautery on the back part of it, and make three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of softening of the body of those who are tolerant patients and the illness is strong, then make a cautery with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make a cautery until it is combined from the codeina motion of it, and elevate the same hand. And then take care that it enters so that it may be healthy, and let this olive-shaped cautery be.
Chapter 10.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not a case of cauterizing the epileptic, but rather that epilepsy is due to flux.
And therefore, since you mondify the brain of it from the beginning with years and another cure which we have dictated in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of medicines.
And if it is an infant who does not suffer from medicines, then administer gentle purgatives and mastigators of the serving mondification, beforehand for some days, with good benefit of the food.
And then shave the patient's head, and then make a cautery on the same place on the head according to the previous manner, and another cautery on the occiput of it, and on each horn of the head there is a cautery. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then make a cautery on it with the cauteries that I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the olive-shaped cautery be according to what has been preceded.
Perhaps if the patient is an infant, then pause with a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and gross weakness, then make a cautery on it with the cauteries that we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous decline into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them something that mondifies their brain according to what has been preceded in the division.
And then shave the patient's head, and then make a tortoise-shell decently made of them over the circle, and then place it on the same place on the head.
And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let them be held firmly from all parts.
And then pause with a liniment; and it is more worthy of healing old wounds. And heat that over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which the patient suffers when it is mixed in them. And then put that on the same place on the head of it in the circle, and let it enter until it is refreshed.
And do that with the patient for a whole week, once a day, another regimen of it is good until it is healthy; or if you want, make a cautery making small points according to the size of it, but you should have your hand on a cautery thus ordered: this is a special type of cautery which humidifies the brain in equality.
And then pause that cut into healing or in greyish tints of gall.
Chapter 12.
On the cauterization of waters descending into the vein.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the veins through the senses which you have divided into sections, then it begins and gives a bitter taste to the patient's mouth, which shows the head of it, and guards that from all humidity.
And make that sweetener in a bath through certain daily journeys.
And command it to reach the dry head, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water in two veins, or one side if it is the beginning of water in one vein.
You will cauterize all the veins and arteries, which you have placed on the spine; and you will place the cauteries in that long longitude at the latitude of the temples.
And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, or apply some medicine, which is possibly available to you.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and their excision, and beware of the fluxes of blood.
And some veins are cauterized in the neck between two bones with two cauteries, producing immediate results.
Chapter 13.
On the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.
When the tears of the veins are ancient and assuaged through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head before, and it is verified that this is a superfluous flux of phlegmatic humor, then cauterize that with a pointed cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the veins, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on the temples, and with two cauteries between two bones. And if you need to induce addition, then cauterize that on the entire side of the vein above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small pointed cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the Cauterization of Foul Odors of the Nose.
When you medicate that with water which we have said in the division and do not hasten your medication, then prepare it and give it to the patient to drink for three nights; and place the head of it, and cauterize it with a pointed cautery or with an olive-pointed cautery. And then cauterize that with a keyed cautery or with two cauteries on the two eyebrows below the hair, a small one.
And beware of the artery that you do not injure it.
And this is the form of the keyed cautery.
Chapter 15.
On the Cauterization of Softening of the Eyelids of the Veins.
When the eyelid of the vein is softened by disease or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery or with this lunar cautery; and this is its form.
And if you wish, cauterize that above the two eyebrows, a small one, with two cauteries in the entire affected area, and thus lengthen the temples. And let the longitude of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Chapter 16.
On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Vein when the Skin is Converted into the Inner Parts and Pounds the Vein.
When the skin of the vein is converted into the inner parts and pounds the vein, cauterize it in two manners, because either a hot iron or a burning medicine is applied.
If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to sit in front of that which liquefies the skin thus as those which are mundane, until they are prolonged and swollen; and if you pound that vein with its own force, then strengthen the veins of it with a bandage so that it is not weakened until the skin is born.
Since they are born and swollen, then pause the head of the patient in the tender seat, and place a sign above the eyelid of the veins of it with a tent, as a signal which is according to the figure of the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the proper signal of the skin.
And then pause with a cotton cloth in an album of veins or in a poultice of powdered salt above the vein.
And then ignite the cautery, which is its form.
And then cauterize above the figure which is signed, little by little, in well-veiled motions, until the surface of the spine which is thus as a leaf of myrtle, entirely and properly apparent.
And the signal of health in this work is that you see the eyelid of the vein already constricted and the skin of it elevated from the puncture of the vein.
Then raise your hand and let it rest for three days, and then place a bandage over the affected area to reduce the inflammation. And then treat that wound with an ointment until it is healed.
But if the skin returns to its original state for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then do another pass with the cautery over the entire area as you had done previously.
But if the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its natural place and is equalized, so that the skin does not touch the wheel.
But the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift the skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a template of paper in the form of a leaf of myrtle.
And then take a gentle grasp with a living vein and a hollow reed. I apologize for the mistake. Here is a revised translation: Or that water, and then mix those causes well, and do that fasting for so long as not to be harmed; and then spread it over the paper which was made thus in the form of a myrtle leaf, and place that on one wheel of two; and place below the wheel a gut encased in albumen, and the head of the patient is in the tieu seat.
And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little and not too much until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for the sting is in it like fire.
And then as you perceive that the sting is felt, then release the medicine and touch it with your finger; then as the sting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the wheel with water; and then consider if the eyelid has been lifted thus as it has been washed free of constriction or incision, for then it is well; and if not, return to that point of the medicine where you did not apply the medicine and do not deny until your operation is equalized and the wheel is constricted.
And then place on the affected area with a bandage until the code of the adjustment is eradicated, and then treat that wound with a definite ointment or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, from your operation to keep diligent vigilance that no residue of the medicine falls on the wheel, and if the eyelid after some days is softened and some cause of the skin touches the wheel, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly thus as you did at the beginning, and then send it in to be healed.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you know that the wheels of men are diversified according to magnitude and littleness, and thus according to what is done your contraction.
And it will not be misleading the way of straightness towards that which is studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
On the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with water that we have said in the divisions of the illnesses and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place their head in the tie seat, and hold the head of some minister between the ties more in such a way that it is neither moved nor agitated in the tied head.
And then place the affected area in an album of skin or in a poultice of ptilli over the wheel of it.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
Which should be conical, thus as it is the form of a reed or a feather's point, from one extremity to which the cautery is made.
And if you see, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want it to come out thus as it is held.
But especially that which is burned is better for the tied work.
And then take the fistula if it is opened, and draw out its liquid and dry it. And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and take care that the tied hand is a little away from the cautery of the wheel at the parting of the nose, so that your hand does not err or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the wheel and corrupt it.
And then at the beginning of the tied cautery, perceive into the bone, be it; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and let that thus for three days, and then place on that affected area with a bandage and send it in to be healed.
But if they have passed eleven days and it is not healed, then place on the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the sixth chapter.
It is another manner of cautery for fistula, which the first wise men discovered: then in the place of the fistula and make a pause in that fissure subtly as it forms; It is made with a quantity of one ounce of lead melted; and you hold your hand firmly on it, so that the lead does not penetrate to the depth of the ulcer; and cover it with albumen or egg white, or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it marvelously.
And if the fistula is healed in the water that we have spoken of regarding the cautery and the cure, well; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula to its original place in the nose according to how it will come into its own location.
Chapter 18.
On the cautery of the fracture of the toes.
Warts that grow rapidly and produce fissures on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures in the way that we have spoken of in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this form that is shown:
And it is the conquest of it (the disease) according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Then pause that initial cut deeply in those fissures until the cautery penetrates to the root of the fissures.
And then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth an aposteme is formed and then it breaks, and then it becomes inflamed, and then it becomes chronic, and correct the break and make a fistula, and then you treat it and do not deepen your treatment, then cover it so that you ignite the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that ignition in the channel of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron ignites at the root of it, and afterwards make one or two applications; and then treat it with water as we have spoken of regarding the cure until it is healed.
And then if the wound is abscessed and healed, well; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the location and lift the corrupted bone according to how it will come into its own chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cautery of teeth and softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are weakened, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide, then pause the head of the patient in the correct position, and ignite the cautery in the form that will come out, even so that you pause the cotton on the tooth and insert it into the ignited cautery firmly, and hold your hand for a little while until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
And then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to how you want.
And then the patient should hold his mouth full of salty water and keep it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the weakened tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is fortified and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter 21.
On the cautery of toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or if there is a worm or vermin, or does not respond to medical treatment, then cautery it in the following two ways: either cautery with a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in a copper vessel, and then take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the instrument, and then immerse it in the boiling horn, and pause it on the aching tooth firmly until it is cooled.
And then repeat it several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge the cloth or instrument in the aforementioned horn, and pause it on the aching tooth, and pause on that ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the root of the conquest of the tooth.
Moreover, the emperor's cautery with fire is that you attend to the quantity of iron or copper, and it should be in the core of some gross matter and the acuity of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form that will come, and pause it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; and do it several times because the pain will be alleviated or on that day or on another day.
And it is good that by impression of that cautery the patient holds his mouth full of good horn and keeps it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And you should cauterize at the point where you feel the most extreme pain, as far as it is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
On Cauterization of Deformed Limbs.
When deformed limbs are of a weak flesh and cold humors and do not obey the digestion through medicines and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form that is this following, having two extinguished extremities so that you may apply the smoke to the other extremity, and place that ignition over that aposteme once, and another if it is necessary for that, until you reach the root of the aposteme.
And if the aposteme is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and let it stay there for three days and place it on the swollen area until what the fire has consumed is removed.
And then heal that which is wounded and bandaged and dressed until it is healthy.
Chapter 23.
On Cauterization of Ulcers of the Voice and Constriction of the Wings.
When humidities come over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is accompanied by a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that which is the root of the ulcer in the predetermined place.
And beware that you do not bring the cautery to the ulcer nor burn the coding of it, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the joint of the spine in the upper vertebra of it. And the cautery of it should be made firm in the same way as before.
And then heal that which is preceding until it is healthy.
Chapter 24.
On Cauterization of Diseases of the Lung and of Coughs.
When coughs and diseases of the lung are of cold humidities and the patient has no fever nor tiredness and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the predetermined places, and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be made firm according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cautery be pointed with the cautery that is called a point, the form of which is described in the punctuation of pain of the ears.
And let them be points until they reach those; and then heal that which is wounded, as it is described, until it is healthy.
And now the cautery has three ranks because the cauterization is in that: you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter 25.
On Cauterization of the Tonsils, which is the Head of the Helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidities and does not remain in its place at the hour of its return, until it returns to its usual custom, and then by a small movement it is displaced, as we have testified, then it is necessary first to reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be reversed on their back or side; and then lift the coding which is in the partition of the citillic to the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the upper parts.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the coding until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
And some times it is adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
And then place over the cautery a cloth soaked in salt water, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a firm cautery or with many pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healthy.
Chapter 26.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
When cold and many humidities enter the stomach to the point that it extracts its completeness and is multiplied in it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not contradict, then it is necessary for the patient to be on their back raised, and extend their hands and their hips, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger's length made firm, and two cauteries below the two sides of the cautery, until the figure of the triangular cautery appears; and elongate between those who are not adjusted so they will make a poultice.
And if the depth of the cautery equals the amount of the two tender spots on the greatness of the codena.
And the figure of the cautery is added in this form, And if you wish, make a great cautery in the middle place of the stomach according to this form; and let it be a cautery according to the circular form.
And the stomach is cautery-pointed at that which of this cautery is frightened: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the amount that you wish to hold, and then cautery that with the cautery in the points; and then cure that with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
About the cautery of the fat foot flesh.
When there is pain in the foot due to cold or humidity or gross ventosity until it deviates from its normal complete complexion, and it is cured with the remedy that we have said and not comforted, then it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on their bed, and feel held by three cauteries according to this form and quantity, measured on the foot below the hip-joints, where one perceives the decubitus of the home.
And let the space be which is between each cautery according to the greatness of the digit, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery motion.
And if the amount of water that is absorbed is equal to the amount of the majesty of the speciosity of the codena, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their thighs, and lifted their own arms.
And it is possible for you to cautery these cauteries with a cautery cutter, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed excessively in the cautery, and let the speciosity of the entire codena be absorbed so that it is absorbed throughout the whole body and reaches even into the intestines, because the codena here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
About the perforation of an abscess of the foot with a cautery.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel grave attrition and sharp pain.
And if it is in the tunic of the foot, then the pain is greatly sharpened and many times the doctors fatigue themselves with the cure of it.
Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned over onto their back; and then feel the place of the abscess with attention; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a rake, in the form of which has been described on the other page. And cautery it with that cautery until the entire codena is consumed, until it reaches the siphac, until it does not remain sane.
And then cure it by curing other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in those who have many maladies anointed; more I have experimented with some veiled things being said about this operation, more however I leave to you, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
About the cautery of plague sores.
The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology for plague sores are made according to this manner of being a doer, and it is this that you take from the roots of Aristology a long dry root which is found, and let it be of the greatness of the digit.
And then submerge it in oil and heat it at the fire, and then cautery with a cautery in that place which is between the continuity of the furcula and the neck; and make two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and make two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the cisterna, declining slightly towards the back parts; and make another cautery in the middle place of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries of the back parts; and make a cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and make two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And it is not necessary that you comprehend your hand with the cautery, but rather let it be in the manifestation of the codena in work.
And thus I have described the ancient customs that are of the men who use iron cauteries resembling a ray and ignite it, and place it in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach the abscess and heal the sanity, just as we have said about the abscess of the foot.
More in this perforation, a cautery is not its remedy, because it can cause more harm than good by accelerating the flow of bad humors to the affected area which does not heal.
Chapter xxx (where xxx represents a chapter number)
About the cauterization of the spleen.
When you treat the disease of the spleen as we have said about the treatment in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are direct, one of which is to make three or four linear cauterizations according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
And let there be between each cautery the width of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as we have said about the cautery of the foot, in accordance with the guideline.
And do not comprehend your hand on the cautery; and the disease should be alleviated above the two kidneys.
And there is another way of cauterizing, so it is that you should ignite the cauteries having two vertiments, which causes we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the codena which is at the end of the spleen where it perceives the jaundice of the sinister disease.
And let your elevation be the one that elevates the codena according to the length of the body, so that you make several cauteries according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two vertiments, ignite slowly, in that interval where they penetrate the codena on the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus you will make four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vertiments.
And then you should cure the cautery afterwards, so that it does not remain stuck for three days, because it is more comfortable than the other causes preceding in the treatment.
Chapter xxxi (where xxi represents a chapter number)
About the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteries are not made on dropsical patients except in certain specific places.
When you treat a dropsical patient, the methods of treatment are those which we have said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the foot, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the specific condition of the codena.
And then leave the cautery open so that it does not remain stuck for a long time.
And do not evacuate the disease from treatment then with the cautery as it is necessary for that to be added to the two intentions, and it will be fastened to the other healthy helper.
The shape of the cautery on which the belly is cauterized should be club-shaped according to the shape of that which precedes, and it is that on which the back is cauterized olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Chapter xxxii (where xxxii represents a chapter number)
About the cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are afflicted with dropsy and are full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot at night, in a place that is between the auricular and the anular, and elevate your hand on the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it at all, because the stagnant water recedes.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on both thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a cautery is made at the extremity of the cautery, cutting instrument. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: one is below the knee and the other is in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And leave the open plague untreated for a long time, so that some water recedes from it.
And then cure the hands according to those causes which we have said.
Chapter xxxiii (where xxxiii represents a chapter number)
About the cauterization of the body and belly.
When the body and belly are cold and humid, so that they debilitate the vertebrae, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured according to the methods of treatment and do not confuse, and sometimes the suffering disease exhibits a cautery of virtue, then cauterize it with a great cautery on the navel of the stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four cauteries around the subtle navel, with a subtle club-shaped cautery; and a cautery on the alcatin above the great kidneys, or two cauteries.
And if the patient's excessive moisture is exhuberating and they can tolerate it, then cauterize above the navel and above the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, for it is a perfect cure of juvenile gout that does not err.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that corrupts or moisture that corrupts, and they are cured with what has been said in the division and do not confer quick cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus below the small triangular spine, and with a cautery above the navel on both sides.
And if you suspect that their stomach is inflamed and their food is not digested, and their face is often spotted, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the thigh, and another on the middle of their back with a clave-shaped cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time open, and thus cure them from within so that they are healthy.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of atheyl for the removal of them.
When you remove atheyl, then you ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row. Then insert the ignited cautery into that removed atheyl, and finally, place your hand inside so that you reach the cautery to the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make it one or two, for if they are many, then cauterize each of them according to what has been recounted, and thus cure those who confer health to their joints from within so that they are healthy.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the shoulder, it is more beneficial in juvenile gout.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the nature of the patient's divided parts.
When the nature does not obey the work that has been recommended in its place, and the patient is despaired by it, then heal with a cautery.
Therefore, when you have a fistula in the patient's nature, and it is ancient, corroding their health with corrupting moisture, and therefore it is more worthy that you cover it with a subtle probe, and then determine the quantity of its depth beforehand mentioned probe.
Then ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row. And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity by which you introduce the probe.
And iterate over that cautery until you consume those corrupted bodies entirely, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not make it so unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
And thus cure the place from within so that it is healthy.
And if the place is sealed, and you have removed from it the materials, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely cured.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of their corrupted bone, or thus one of those causes which will bring remembrance to its place.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of the kidneys.
When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or gross ventosity, and thus the side of the patient's thigh is weakened, then cover that which you cauterize above the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney with a clave-shaped cautery, from which proceeds remembrance.
And strongly cauterize them in the second small space, so that three lined cauteries will come, and thus they will be more beneficial in juvenile gout.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that in the lower part above the bladder, where the skin of the navel begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of notes of the foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And let it be clave-shaped cauteries as previously described.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the matrix ( uterus ).
When cold and moisture come to the matrix ( uterus ), and thus it is prohibited from conception, and its menses are corrupted, and it is delayed in provoking them, and there is pain due to the hindrance of them, then cover that place which is cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let it be clave-shaped cauteries.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of a dislocated ankle.
When moisture accumulates and is retained in the ankle joint, and it causes inflammation of the surrounding tissue, and it seems that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is revealed by the boy's cries.
Therefore, it is advisable to cauterize the patient's ankle joint with a circular cautery, since you will have felt it in the circuit of the joint thus, and for that reason the joint returns to its proper place within the circle.
And this is the cautery which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present for you, then cauterize that man with three olive-shaped cauteries.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and then cure that interior so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is cured with what we have said and not contradicted, and that which is ancient, then it is advisable to free the patient from gross humors through foul-smelling pills or artificial ones; and then cauterize accordingly.
And the manner of cautery in that is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that it cauteries the patient's ankle joint with three triangular-shaped cauteries in this form; and do so with good depth. And the space between each cautery is according to the quantity of the thickness of the digit, and so the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Sometimes it is necessary to place the cautery on the proper spot above the head of the ankle because there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle in which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the ankle's dislocation, there where the circle contains and burns the inspection of the entire code.
And this is the manner of cautery in every case when pain is adhering to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize that man with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient's pain is; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers' breadth below the affected part.
And if the cautery is cutting, and its depth is according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
And if the patient finds that the pain is extended into the proper place near the toes, then cauterize accordingly with three points or four, or even more if it is necessary for that.
And if the patient finds pain beneath the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize accordingly with a cutting cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not exceed with the cautery so as to burn nerves or large arteries, and that for this reason you are above the patient's evil or contradiction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the hip and ultimately in the cauterization, and the inflamed tumor inside which reached the foot, and fire perforated and corrupted the entire foot. And then a strong solution of wormwood, and then death follows.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And I will describe the wise men in the cauterization of ankle joints, which is this manner: make a circle of iron like a ring of which the circumference is the width of a palm; and it should be about four fingers' breadth or a little less.
And let that circle be another inch; and the space between them is the quantity of the knuckle of the thumb; and those circles are used for two parts; and their length is one or two inches, and make the iron margin decently apparelled in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then ignite it in the fire until it becomes red-hot and sparks appear, and then place it on the ankle joint, the patient holding onto the thigh with their hand. And thus cauterize that man with three red-hot cauteries in one go.
And then leave it like that for three days; then apply a poultice to the patient's wound and leave the ulcerous plague for many days; and then cure the patient with an ointment until they are healthy.
Here says Albucassis: Oh, sons, of this species of cauteries few have used for the terror of the regard of it, and for that reason few have found those who regard it above all.
More of the cauteries are applied to him who suffers, and it is necessary to remove them from that place.
More cauteries are medical adhesives that you make two circles with a perforated armula in which you insert the hinge of the iron door; it is the length of the partition in the nausea of their signs or those aquelines.
And if the space which is between almost the quantity of the thickness of the digit; and they are opened above and below, and they contain themselves among their following this form:
And then stop on the partition of the water which the patient is sitting on, and comprehend your hand on the partition of the water; and take hot water and put it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be warm little by little, and hold it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the moderation and adjustment of it — because that moderate warmth thus from fire — until the moderation ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and evacuate the hot water from all of the water into warm water.
And then leave it like that for three days and stop on that border until the blackness of the adjusted remedy remains, and leave it like that for some days, and correct the purification of the putridity; this is the last stage in the treatment.
And then cure him who is wounded until he is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make him stand in it containing water according to what is done in the warm bath.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkaline and cause not extinct of two names one, and crush them and stop in a new vessel of which the partition below is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the rule.
And stop below the bottom of another vessel enveloped, and gather above that alkaline and cause living water which covers those for one digit, and since you comprehend those with your good compression, and leave the hole that separates from the sharp water in the partition below to the enveloped vessel.
And then adjust all that water, and gather it above another living cause and other alkaline renovating, because at that time it will be of much stronger acuteness, which is administered in many operative operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
And thus of the medicines some are those which are cauterized deeply, thus like Tezizic and Mel Anacrat and cause are known in that way, so they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and cure in which he cured pain of water and sciatic vein, and magnified much to be of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healed for a while thus as recommended, because the strong one enters into banishment and thus I know of that.
And it is that he takes certain vert green, and if it is not found vert, take recent fig; and much is triturated in a few gray ones and placed on the water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and bind.
And let it sit for a quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
And then put him in banishment and thus when his body is enraptured, bury him in the ground, because the pain ceases and he is healed.
And you know that it does not cover that some use of cauteries in these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
More, Escorides says that when an opening of a goat's vein is cauterized, it will make him well; and it is the cautery in him according to this method: take wool and dip it in hot oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
And then take a dry goat's opening and inflame it with fire until it is made into charcoal; and then stop him above the wool and leave it until it is stretched. And then repeat this, and do not stop until the sentiment of moderation penetrates into the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cauteries is called cautery of goat's horns.
Chapter 42.
On the Cauterization of Pain of Teeth.
Some teeth pains are due to multiple causes, such as decay or percussion or excessive evacuation, and similar causes, from infusion of corrupt and humid matter.
And cauteries are not effective except in this sole species which is made by effusion of corrupt matter.
Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with fitted pills and similar to them, which are made on the teeth where the pain is three lines according to the latitude of him, because you have ten in each line or cauteries or more, according to the quantity that is seen from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of him.
And if it is necessary to make a pointed cautery on the surface of the foot.
If you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries on the middle clavicle in this manner:
Chapter 43.
On cauterization at the beginning of gout treatment.
Moist heat is applied to this sickness in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it settles on their little arms and legs, causing elevation and movement.
And it starts in the posterior spinal vertebrae of the back and ribs, which begin to overcome the other vertebrae.
And then when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize with a cautery that is circular in shape according to this method: that takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine, including.
And if you want, cauterize around the circle of the spine with a pointed cautery in two lines or three. And place the points properly between them.
And then heal the area inside so that it is healthy again with what we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter 44.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And then how gout caused by cold is cured in a manner of cure and the pains are not relieved, then they are relieved with cauteries.
And it is that you cauterize with proper evacuation around the circle of the foot joint with several cauteries.
And this cautery is olive-shaped, of which this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains go inside to the teeth or to other joints, and there is much moisture, then cauterize with an olive-shaped cautery on each tooth with three or four cauteries of the entire affected part.
And if many cauteries are needed for this cautery to be necessary, then cauterize and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, but only surround the affected area of the codena.
And if the pains go inside to the tooth and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
And if the pains are only in the jaw, and it is called sagra, then point around the circle of the teeth thus as they revolve, point in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point around the circle of the teeth on each rib and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains go near to the joints or to the muscles, then cauterize the affected parts of the joints.
And do not evacuate the sickness with good regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done with good regimen and evacuation is done with this cautery, it will be healthy, God willing.
Chapter 45.
On the cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the veins and the intestine comes out of its cavity to the genital area, and this is the beginning of the problem, then it is necessary that you send the sickness to its own consumption on the seventh day and that you use lenient causes so that the wound is closed on the seventh ventre.
And then follow the sickness between your hands over the seventh back, and command it to hold the seventh wing inside so that it is not visible or apparent in the cavity or intestine.
And then return it to the ties of the fingers and hold it in tension over the bone of the little finger on the sign of the rupture, similar to the circle at the subordinate parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is its form:
until it is very red and has many sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then stop the cautery on that sign with your hand on the cautery stand upright, and thus it enters into the bone of the little finger within the middle of the two; and afterwards, if you have not succeeded in the first attempt, try again another time until you succeed.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during your cautery, that you do not harm the intestine so that on the sickness it does not come into death or another great evil.
You should know that when you hold the cautery, do not touch the bone, nor confuse your operation.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their age and measurement.
Then treat the area of the cautery for three days by keeping it wrapped so that the crust of the burn is removed.
And then treat those with other ointments until they are healed.
The patient should sit on a soft cushion for forty days until the area and the wound are sealed.
And it is necessary that the nourishment of his body be regulated according to the length of time of his treatment, which will reduce the emptiness of his belly, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And then when it is desired to get up after forty days, administer the decent food gradually, and hold him back for another forty days.
And he should be moderate in labor and in replenishing with food and drink, and of violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of healing, they will entirely be healthy.
And you will direct the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want that there be no delay, then cautery the rupture with a red-hot iron according to its quantity, and it is that which is expelled from the codena thus as the third part of it; and then treat him who has said this, and do not adjust.
And you will discover some first principles that the rupture should be cautered with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is signified by a tent.
And it is a paused line that goes for the latitude in the lattice above the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a keyed cautery, but the first cautery is more light and better.
Chapter 46.
On the Cauterization of the Torso.
When pain is fixed in some members by fall or by percussion and it persists for a long time and does not yield to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cautery with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery of each member is according to its size and smallness, and its purity and development, and location of torso and pain of it.
Then if it is healthy through the first cautery, it is good; and if not, then iterate over it with the cautery; because it is customary for those pains to be punctured from member to member, approaching the one that is closest to you, so that it is necessary to continue with the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
Chapter 47.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some lepers are wounded by cautery for great judgment, and it is better if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And then when you want to cautery that, consider if the leprosy is common and as it can be cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor is this, and fear about the patient that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his complexity, then cautery that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and one on each side of the forehead to the ends of the hairs; and two above the ears; and one behind, above the nape or service.
And finally place your hand with the cautery a little inside so that it impresses a small impression on the bone, and from it the scorpions are dislocated, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from him; and cautery on the mesentery according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cautery with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each shoulder blade, and two cauteries on each vertebra of the neck, and six cauteries on each vertebra of the back, and one large one on each vertebra near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on each thigh, and one on each knee, and two on each shin, and one on each ankle, and two on each foot, and one on each toe; and cautery on all the joints of the said parts and feet, and on each talon of the aforementioned feet, and on the soles of their feet.
And beware of the nerves that are above the talon so that you do not harm them.
And some wounded are cautered with a cautery on the bone of the thigh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more you adjust cauteries, the more they are judged and conferred; and you should know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, thus as they have said, because the body of him is already stupefied.
It seems that the medical treatise is describing a procedure for treating joint pain or gout.
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation: Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Here's my translation: Here's my translation:
Here's my translation:
Chapter Three.
About cauterization of wounds and other similar ones.
Moth-eaten wounds appear on the affected parts of the foot afflicted by what is called a nail, and it is a gross, deep-seated cause that afflicts the foot; and cauterization is done in two ways, so it is done with fire and it is done with hot water.
The cauterization with fire is that you ignite the cautery iron similar to a burning branding iron, which is made of iron according to the quantity it holds of the entire affected part, and has subtle margins.
And then stop the burning iron on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery in a circular motion around the nail until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the nail. And leave it like that for three days until it begins to form crusts. And then apply a plaster made with soothing herbs mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, because it will eradicate its roots.
And then heal the place where the cancerous flesh is generated until it is healthy.
And if it does not convert, and moth-eaten wounds appear on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer to those a cautery with hot water, and it is that you take a small tube of iron or of fire or of branding iron, and stop it on the nail; and then pour a small quantity of hot water into the tube, and hold your hand, and you rotate it in compression with your whole hand, and it is pressed against the margin of the tube on the root of the nail, and the hot water flows through to the root of the nail; and wait for the patient a little while the biting of the hot water per hour, and then remove it, because the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do the same to those and then to the other until you come upon all the ones that are in their place in the body.
And then heal those whose roots of the nails are eradicated, and the flesh that was generating them is healed.
Chapter Four.
About cauterization of trembling.
When there is a trembling due to cold in the nerves or because of fever from a cold cause, or another similar cause, then it is necessary that you cautericize it with four cauteries or five over the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and apply a cautery on their chest, and on their stomach, apply a cautery on the olive-shaped part.
And the trembling of it is relieved and the health of the affected cold is restored.
Chapter Five.
About cauterization of sudden accidents to the body.
When the body is suddenly afflicted, and pus-filled wounds appear which are made of gross, corrupt materials; therefore it is necessary at the beginning to appear, that it be cauterized over the entire head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended in fire; or with roots of long-lasting unction; or with a slowly-releasing cautery.
And the same wounds are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and not swollen, and the superfluous flesh is dispersed, and they are healthy.
However, it is necessary that this be done with evacuation through bloodletting.
Chapter Six.
About cauterization of bloody fluxes caused by accidental incision of an artery.
Moth-eaten wounds appear with bloody fluxes from the artery that is cut by the wound which appears beforehand, or by the incision of apostemes or cauteries of the limb, and it seems difficult to stop that.
Then when it happens to those, then you should grasp with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop on that place until the blood flow stops, so that the moths-eaten wounds are stifled until the bloody fluxes cease from that place, and do not come out.
And then stop in the fire the olive-shaped cauteries, few and large in number, for many wounds, and blow on them until they are extinguished.
And then take from them a small or large one according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly, so that you may reattach the severed tie, and apply the cautery until it is closed and restrained, and the blood flow is restored.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you reattach the severed tie and remove the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from among the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and thus do not cease to apply it until the blood flow is restrained.
And beware that you do not touch the nerves that are here, and that another evil comes upon the affected part.
We know that when the arterial flow is healthy, then it is not possible to restrain the blood in those who are restless, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four manners: either with a cautery as I have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of my veins are burned they are restrained and the blood is repressed; or that it be tied with a strong ligature, or placed on top of medications which restrict the blood flow; and thus they are strengthened in a pulvine constriction.
Perhaps he who administers a decent restraint to his ligature and strictness in the drops or by position of causes that burn and of similarities, does not compare but is bitter.
Perhaps if he endeavored to remove the medicine, and there was no doctor present nor medicine, then he would have made a pause in the indicated position over the orifice of that vein, as I have said, and intended to constrict greatly within so that the blood would be stopped from the superior part of the plague, and above the artery it is not renewed; and above the artery it is aspurgated with abundant water of great coldness within so that the blood would be congealed and thickened; and perhaps he should have cauterized or applied necessary medicine.
Of incision and perforation and vesications and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similarities.
I have said in the first chapter all about the malady in which cautery is convenient and comburent medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for its forms; and I will order the chapters according to the subordinate nature of the head until the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter by that method, so that it may be clarified to the one who seeks it, then above that which he will have demanded.
And therefore I begin here, my dear son, to learn that in this chapter it is for fear of what is in the first chapter of cautery.
And for this, my dear son, it should be with great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuated matters are involved, such as evacuation of blood from the vein or incision over the aposteme or perception of exosture or purification of the wound or extraction of a splinter or beginning of a pyre and their similarities. And all these things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the end of their matters death.
And I warn you that above you do not fall into the situation in which there is stagnation, because some evacuated matters are causes of many manners of men with many manners of maladies. And of them it is clear that they flee from their malady and fear death, and thus for the vehemence of what they find in their malady, and for the length of their malady, and in the malady is the fear which signifies death.
And of these it is what I give to your son to have and to say, you hoping for that health, and the following malady is pernicious.
And therefore do not think that you consent to that which comes from what is in this manner; and your caution should be greater than curiosity and your rashness; and do not presume any cause over what is not certain science, which verifies what comes from you, and at which point you will have a successful outcome.
And you will be established in the cure of all your maladies with prognosis and indication of what is converted health, because in that you are helped by acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspire your understanding and not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinctly into chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be clarified to you what you demand of it and of what you have need.
First Chapter.
On the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
We know that this malady has many evacuated matters in the infants from birth and when the nourishment strengthens the head of the infant, it vivifies.
And some evacuated matters come from a hidden cause which is not known.
Perhaps I have not seen this malady except in infants; and all those whom I have seen are touched by death, and thus it is to me a sad and mournful work in them.
And I have seen that an infant whose head was filled with water, and the head of it was magnificently enlarged until it could not support itself because of the greatness of its head, and perhaps the humidity made it increase until it died from the fire.
And this humidity or is added between the codena and the bone, or is added beneath the bone above the siphac.
Because the operation on that man is between the codena and the bone and the apostema is small, then it is necessary to make a hole in the middle of the head in a fissure in latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two inches so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula.
And so if the humidity is more increased and the apostema is larger, then there are two fissures here according to this manner.
And if the humidity is below the bone, it seems that you sometimes close the commissures of the head opened from all sides and the water is squeezed out when you compress it in the same manner with the parts divided into sections and it is not what you are looking for. It is necessary to make three fissures in the middle of the head according to this manner.
And then extract the entire humidity; and then strengthen the fissures with draps and plumassols; and then introduce water above in six days, and then dissolve the liament and cure the plague in tenderness and inflammation, and strengthen the head in equality; and nourish the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another manner of incision, which considers how to appear the magnitude of the apostema and the collection of water, because some veins are more in the occipicii, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and so attend to the incision to appear the apostema and the replenishment of water, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid fluent flows of blood and more, lest the patient die from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter following.
When there are many catarrhs or rheums in the eyes or chest, and it is antiquated water, and it does not confer on that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision of those two arteries.
And so it is necessary when you want to incise those that the patient's head is swollen, and then strengthen the location with a sharp drap for so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some drap; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the locations of each one above the locations which are near the ears, and they hide themselves in some homes.
And then place a sign above the artery in tension, and then incise each one with the spatula of each part affected by the incision penetrating into the bone, and it is so for the latitude of the head.
And if you want, introduce the spatula below the artery and cut into it to make incisions in the parts above.
And let the length of the incision be two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood is ejected with pulsating egress, which bursts forth frequently.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then it is necessary to measure from the ear the quantity of the space of three digits, and then place a sign in tension, and make an incision into the bone.
And it is necessary to extract from the blood a quantity of six ounces. and strongly hold that it is not gotten from the patient more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and from the replenishment of the artery of it.
And then consider the plague, and so if there remains on the bone some cause of the ciphac, then incise that so that no apostema is cauterized.
And then strengthen the plague with plumassols and liaments of drap from it, and then cure that in inflammation until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When there are many accidental migrations of ancient or chronic catarrhs, due to humidity and quality in the lacertz of the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing, and it is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine and that does not confer, then we have progressed to these maladies extraction of the arteries from the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient's skin is lifted from the places which are in the temples; and intend to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by the sieu pulse, and is hidden only in few homes due to vehemence of friction.
And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some drap; and then rub the location with a sharp drap or evaporate the location with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then you take the spatula of which this is the shape: And then you scrape the codeina in a way that facilitates its entry into the artery; and then get it out of the ontium and extract it from the superior parts until you extract it from the codeina and discover it among the tunics which are already there, from the whole affected area.
Maybe the artery is subtle, then envelop it with the extremity of the instrument, and then incise that one part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and constricted, and there will not be a flux of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not flow at all.
And then evacuate the blood from the vicinity. up to three.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you ligate it in two places with a double thread of hemp or with cordons at length, and do not allow putrefaction to occur within the consolidation of the wound and prevent the flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone with a cuticular cautery until the extremities of it are incised, and stay in place of that same great work.
And it is a better work if the patient has fever or is of complicated composition; because cautery is among those causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in healing.
And it is necessary to extract the arteries that occupy the place of the ancient cut, and they are paused decently on the pillow, and then be cured with secret medicines that make the flesh and calcify within until it is healthy.
And if meanwhile you are working on another wounded area and blood flow from the artery occurs, then you must stop that blood, or use a cautery, or occupy the place of the cut, and strengthen your hand until the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the tieu on the place until the blood is congealed, and wrap the place with water of vehement coldness until the acute pain reposes, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
And what is more suitable in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cotels, because you have touched the two places with tension, and pause sometimes, not much, until they penetrate to the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that it is elongated what is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And it is the acute pain of the two cotels together. Maybe however it is better to mend the acute pain with two cotels, because if they are agitated together with two cotels close to each other, and do not incise the flesh quickly.
So since there is some thickness in those, it has held the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is absorbed more lightly.
And this work is better in all works and more lightly.
And it is the space which is between two cotels, according to the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Fourth chapter.
On the cure of bodies of acute and acidic ulcers of the eyes.
When the eyes are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the forehead before, and there is no confidence in any cause of medical cure, and sometimes the face of the patient already enrogesir and feels in the sieve front of walking thus as if it were a walking of ants, and the eyes of that one are extinguished, humiliated thus that already their hair are conoduted, and the eyelids are scalped by the acuteness of tears, the ancient masters agree in the cure of those with this operation, and no one remembers that cure in space.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair which are in the sieve front, and then incise on the forehead three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure falls into two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third part of another side.
And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two layers, and elongate your hand from the continuation of both the mandibles. And if the space of each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three digits exactly.
And if you have a piece of spongy apparatus or secret threads that absorb the blood excessively.
And then insert the spatula of two acute extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: That it is of the partition of the temples entering into the second incision. Extract the entire cord which is between two incisions at the cleft which is above the bone, and then make a point of the minor incision entering into the second incision. And then insert a spatula into this space and enter the first incision with another instrument which is called a cutter, having one part and not having the other.
And stop the latch of that cutter which detaches the annexed flesh from the cord, and the latch of the iron enters the bone, and embeds it so that it reaches the minor fissure, and absolves all those veins that descend from the head to the heels.
It is better to continue the incision up to where the cord appears, and then make a point in the minor fissure entering into another fissure.
And then correct the flow of the blood in equal quantity, express the places of the passages of the congested blood.
And then stop in each warm fissure of the hot oil, and stop above those swollen veins that are inflamed with wine and oil and wine, and beware that there does not develop a post-operative abscess.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a great infusion of hot water or decoction, and then cure with basilicon ointment and rose oil and other things that the wounds may be healed.
Chapter 5.
On the cure of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending from the partitions of the head.
When you have catarrh coming and continuing, and sometimes the thighs of the patient are slightly extended, and already their eyes are weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and because of this the skin is rough, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and consequent inflammation, then you will know by this accident that the materials and catarrh do not come except from many veins descending from the partitions above.
And the best cure for this is: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that place at the middle of the forehead, a small one for the latitude (and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right temple; and it should be an incision into the bone; and extend your hand over the lacrimal ducts of the temples which are obstructed by mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Dry out all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then replace it between the two lips of the incision with hot oil or a dry cloth. And then strengthen below with swollen veins that are inflamed with wine and oil, so that there does not develop a post-operative abscess.
And when you see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until it reaches the new flesh, and then cure with a regiment of drying treatment which makes the flesh numb, thus if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colofania and mix them, and make an emplastre and administer it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Chapter 6.
On the cure of what falls into the ears.
The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus like iron and vein, or it is from a plant thus like cese or fava, or it is a fluxtible cause thus like water and wine agree and its semblance, or some beast.
And then when peyra falls into the ear or another similar cause among those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if it is peyra, then distill in some cause of violet oil or sizami, and then administer the extraction of it, and make a snuff with conditi, and open the nostrils to receive the benefit of the snuff. And then stop in the circle of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts below, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not evacuated, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtle of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten in gesti, good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument subtle of little duplication.
And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a tube of iron and insert the extremity of the tube into the tract of the ear and close the environment of the tube with wax and oil mollified so that nothing gets in except the tube. And then extract it from the tender vein with strong attraction, because many evacuated matters are gathered together as if they had been recounted.
It is better if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alum water or prepared vessel according to which the wings of a small quantity are pressed, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then wrap around it with hot decoction paused decently. And then insert the instrument into the tract of the ear to facilitate, and then extract the ear from humidity.
So then if not all the causes that we have recounted are forgotten, then you should touch the tooth with your finger to detect whether there is an abscess or spasm.
And the manner of touching it is that you at the beginning sense the patient's vein pulse and extract the blood according to the manner of their vertigo, and then make a circle between your fingers and convert the ear to the lower parts, and find a small fissure in the root of the ear where the veins of it are premised. And it is the lunar-shaped fissure that leads to the stone, and, the stone being obstructed, you can use an appropriate instrument there; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
And if the cause resides in the ear is one of the fats that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your own judgment, then take a subtle spatula tuned according to this form: and administer to that the abscession of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do that when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause in many places, and prepare to extract them with the fingers or gestures subtly, or without incision as we have said, because the extraction of it is alleviated.
But in the water that has entered into the ear, because the patient uses sternutation at the beginning, and fills the entire ear with a lot of fluid, and pours over that ear where the water is, and if it is forgotten, well; and otherwise, then take three or four fingers' length according to the longitude of the finger, and heat them in a focus for a short time, and the patient inserts one of those into the tract of their ear and sounds above one side of that part and percusses with another stone on the stone that is inside the ear. So, do not cease until all the water has been forgotten.
So, do not cease until all the water has been forgotten. And then the water will be forgotten in this way that you take pieces of paper or of cotton. and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end to the focus until it is burned by the bad humor of it.
And then put another cotton and do it so many times until all the water is forgotten, and remove that with a cannula as was said about the extraordanary stone.
But in the extraction of beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, thus pierce and to its likeness, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes pain at the time of movement, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and fingers, and the cause of it is put less serious than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
But in the extraction of worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water that we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to sunlight.
And then if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle fingers, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula straight and descending from the width of which this is the form of it: And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can suffer; and then suck it with strong suction, and do it many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if you do not obey your own judgment, then operate and close in the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experienced by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And it is your effusion which you pour out the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form: And make that of silver or of bronze, straight, in which there is a small hole, and place it thus.
And then it is as they fill what is in the cavity of the cannula, to continue here where it will be necessary. And if you want, take the rod and envelop it decently in the extremity of it, and then put oil in the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines in the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with a warm compress of it until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping.
And what is poured into the ear is already scaled in a focus for a short time. And beware that the cause which you distilled in the auricle is not too frequent, for auricular medicines do not suffice for this.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of obstruction of the ears.
Some blocked veins in the belly of the mother are not perforated, and that is why it happens in some homes, an obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a plague or carnation in that; and this obstruction occurs in the prominence of the ear canal which does not receive the transmission, and some blocked veins are in the partitions before.
And that which happens in its prominence, which does not receive the transmission, is in the major dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that which receives the transmission, you should hold the ear of the patient to the sun and gaze into it. And thus if an apparent obstruction occurs, observe that with a subtle spatulum of which this is the form.
If the extremity of it is where the latitude is small, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatulum should be of two soft leon layers so that it does not cause harm to the ear.
And thus if the obstruction is due to a birthmark in the ear or in its middle, then you should use subtle and vigorous incisions to facilitate the entry of the instrument so that all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the prominence of the ear, then take a subtle iron rod and heat it over fire for a little while, and then place it into the middle of the ear.
And thus if you have felt an obstruction in that which the patient has facilitated, due to the gravity of the humor, it forces out the oppression of it; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And then stop in the ear a drop of the oil according to the quantity of the width of the tube which you have involved in the Egyptian ointment; and do it for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and infuse it into a saucepan, and pulverize over the already tritured and use it; and if the ear has been apostemated, then you should extract the water and permute it with another water which you have enveloped in wax that is well-roasted, until it is an apostema-free cauterized spot; and then cure it until it is healed.
Moreover, if a flow of blood occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use another remedy that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
On the treatment of athelial ulcers that occur in the eyelids.
Athelial ulcers which occur in the eyelids of the eyes, some blocked veins are humid, some blocked veins are dry.
Then you should hold those with tenacious or onion-like medications, and anoint them with their root extracts, and then apply it to the affected areas thoroughly triturated.
Moreover, if pain occurs with a flow of blood, then you should cauterize those with a subtle lancet-like cautery.
And the best cauterization is to return the incisions and many blocked veins when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment of cataracts that occur in the eyelids of the eyes.
Some blocked veins occur in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause which is assembled with greatness in its strength and hardness, and thus it is called cataract.
And it is an addition of thick humidity in the upper eyelid and underneath.
Then the operation on them is that you should consider then if the cataract is proceeding in it from what appears on the eyelid and is moved to the entire part; and the cause of it is laziness.
Then make an incision above it with a width, and then scrape off the entire affected part to facilitate evacuation, and then suspend it with an onion-like medication and absolve it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that which the anguish of it restores and incarnates.
And if the cataract is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the superficial deep parts, then remove the eyelid and suspend the cataract with an onion-like medication, unless you indicate an incision, and prepare it for the entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, then it will not be noticed in any case.
And apply the treatment, wash the wound with salt water; and care for the area in which it becomes enclosed so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 10.
About the treatment of abscesses under the eyelid.
Abscesses are grayish in color, which are generated in the membranes of the eyelid, and worsen especially in children, aggravate the eyes of those who have it, and cloud their clarity of vision; and they cannot gaze at the brightness of the sun because of the great pain that afflicts them.
And thus you find that they often shut their eyes during the day, and sleep with their eyelids half-closed, which have covered the inflamed membranes, and imminent danger of approaching cataract appears in the eye; and when you press on the place where the veins are, you feel an encroaching abscess.
And a certain method of operation is in that patient who pauses his evil humor in the vein where it is, and then pause to draw out the fluid and its warmth, and make a circle according to the quantity that contains the entire affected part, and then pause on that area and press on the veins of the entire circle so that an abscess may be gathered in the middle of the circle, and then finish in the middle of that humidity at the spot incident on the fissure, and the fissure is not greater than the one made in phlebotomy.
You will find in the preceding cavity that you close the entire code entirely so that you may reach the abscess, because in the most disposed processes an abscess forms through a fissure according to the form of white grayness.
Then extract that fluid which you have enveloped between the veins of the affected parts before and revolves between the right and left hand so that it may be dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust on the fissure so that the spatula does not reach the eye and damages it.
But if the abscess does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, but you adjust on the fissure with a small facilitating instrument so that it may process the abscess; and then extract that fluid as we have said; and then submerge the fluid in water and vinegar and place them over the area and strengthen those poultices.
And thus you will find that they draw out salt and pause on the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is removed.
And then heal it so that it may be healthy.
But if there is a post-apostemic ulcer, then treat it with applied poultices so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 11.
About the methods of touching the eye.
When the eyelids of the eyes are naturally naked and antique, then they are close to the eye and become accustomed to methods of evil habits such as excessive tears and mollification of the eyelids and webbing, so that it is a cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching of the eye, and it is treated in four ways: either by cauterizing with a focus; or by acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cauterizing; or by making an incision and suturing; or by cantharides as you have heard.
And then you pause the head of the evil humor in the vein where it is; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, well; and otherwise, insert a needle in that place where the faith of the affected part is beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate into the faith underneath, and that is — near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are — near the hairs, and pull the faith to the upper parts beneath the eyelid, and convert it into a ray.
And then finish in the affected part beneath the eyelid, adjusting with a spatula incident on the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal; and then extract the faith and pause beneath the eyelid with small poultices of cotton or cloth, and then place a bandage over the eyelid, taut, so that it may be like a figure of a myrtle leaf.
But it is necessary to make the figure according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because that has been diversified in many ways, so that it is the one which indicates that a great quantity should be incised from the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
And then finish with the spatula over the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the major lacrimal to the minor lacrimal. And if the fissure is near the natural hairs, thus it is like the largest root of the king.
And then place the ounce in one of the two angles of the code, and then excise all of it, and then adjust with a suture the two labial lips with thread or fine wool, and remove the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the lips above the two eyelids for some envisioning causes, if you want to do so, and otherwise, do not cure.
And you should leave the stitching of the wounds for three or four days, and then take care to heal it.
If you want, leave the wound's stitching, and take care to dry and constrict it, because the eyelid is elevated from the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; a better stitching is thus achieved by avoiding the toxins.
It is more often solicited on the patient, and it is a good operation, and it is not in fear.
And it is another manner in taxation, and it is that you sense on the eyelid figure thus as a mirror of myrt, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches separated and gathered according to this form:
If it is not possible otherwise, take the inches, and it does not get entangled, then take a needle in which there is thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and enter the other vein near the larger lacrimal, and the vein according to the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between the tissues of the veins equally, and then elevate your hand with elevation, elevate the entire code above which it is sensed thus as I have recommended.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound to stitching, and take care that it enters so that it may be healthy.
But if there is an abscess from your incision or your fissure, then that abscess is to be removed and it seems similar, and it is of the same nature.
And some veins are seen on the eyelid that seem to be converted, so cover them with something of what we have said about incision; but stitching is sometimes more artificial.
To avoid toxins in this manner: and it is that you convert the eyelid and dissect the figure that is deeply seated according to what I have recommended; and then by skillful art make two channels or two subtle threads of which the longitude is according to the longitude of the eyelid and the latitude of theirs is smaller than the latitude of the spatium. And you have already made incisions in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Then add subtlety under what superfluously flows from the eyelid of the wheel, and constrict the channels of certain divided parts with strong structure, and leave it for some days, because the code for the strict morbid structure will be denied and will be buried until it is seen that it will collapse.
But if it is delayed, then break the crust of the tumors, and then take care to heal the wound until it is healthy.
Then when it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not puncture.
And this is the method of making two channels which you will do according to this form: and it has the quantity of longitude and latitude neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
On the elevation of punctured skin on the wheel with a needle when the skin is hard.
When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and punctures the wheels, then the operation on it is that you take a subtle needle and pause in that vein of cedar subtle and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move subtly in some manner. And it is the longitude of the veins of a quantity of one palm.
And then you compose another subtle vein below it briefly, and numb the extremities of that if you want.
And then stop the patient's blood flow in the vein there, and it is proper of the sun for which your work is declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted skin which has need of ingenium, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract it from under the natural skin.
And then pull the skin until underneath and introduce it into the alloy, and they are one or two or three skins and no more.
And then pull your hand until the skin is separated from the alloy in the eyelid with the natural skin.
But if it is stuck to the alloy and the skin is not freed, you will stick the alloy to the divided parts below with the vein which you have composed in that, until it is freed from the alloy of the superior trauma.
And look at it in the vision of the wheel, because then you will free the alloy and the vein, and cleanse something and lock the wheel, and leave the lock for two days or three, until the skin adheres to its own place and grows over that good flesh.
And if it is shorter the skin, then you adjust a long skin of natural skins, and it is elevated in that, or it remains until it is lengthened then to some space, and then you elevate it.
Chapter 13.
On the treatment of extracting what is seen in the eyelid underneath.
When the vein in the eyelid is constricted, and it is countered by the eyelid being contracted in itself, either on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of the wound or of the burn or of the cautery, and it is called leporina, and this constriction is natural or accidental, and it is done for consolidation of the wound or of the burns or of the cautery, or for resembling their bad mixture.
Maybe the method of operation is that you make that consolidation and separate the lips from it, and pause in it what is between them a piece of cloth, and bind them together so they are healthy.
And do not think that you use the cure of it from the causes which are outside, constraining; because if you do so returns to the worst condition, much worse than nothing has been done.
Use in that cause which softens thus with fenugrec, and immerse the water in which are cooked altea and essence of it, or enguient dyaquilon, which is liquefied at the alcove of the joints, and submerge it in that, and cure it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate everything so that nothing is consolidated according to the form that you did at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is not but some rectification of the bad mixture that does not return the form of the place according to what was before.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of bad mixture which is done in the eyelid below.
This bad mixture which is done in the eyelid below, which is named vertadieramente bad mixture; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
The accidental bad mixture is done by wound or by burn or by cautery or by other similar things.
And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and you place it in the flesh, and you make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates into the two extremities of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into the spatulum abundantly. And then if it returns the shape of the eyelid as it was, well; and if not, take the thread and pause it in the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
And they are the extremities of the two fissures at two angles of the incision, which has been made so that they converge, and it is from their made angle that when they gather together, it forms the figure of them.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then lift the flesh there for the quantity that is the thickness of the lower part of it, so that you sew the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of flax; and then cure them with what we have said about the softening medicines and poultices, until it is healthy.
And if the bad mixture ends up in a fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure over the skin of the eyelid as it has been preceded. And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the cure of bad mixture whether it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of bad mixture, and that is in the form of various diverse motes.
And the skilled craftsmen always prepare everything in whatever way is possible to return it to its natural form, or near to that, and that bad mixture according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter 15.
About the adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or with the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many people in such a way that the eyelid is solidly stuck above on the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you introduce the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it upwards, or stretch it with the nail.
And then you insert the adhesion with a subtle spatulum, which is not sharp enough to make incisions, having obtained a small opening so that the bad mixture is not disturbed during the operation, and remain with the spatulum that does not lead the eye to its sharpness.
And it is your incision that extracts this adhesion with facility until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then you put in the eye salt water in which you wash; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of it, and pause over the eye flax infused in egg white, and then use three days of causes of consolidation until it is healthy.
Chapter 16.
About the inflammation of a nail and prominence of flesh around the eyelids.
You know that a nail is according to two manners, because it is nervous, and resembles a subtle, dry cicatrix; or it is non-nervous, resembling a white, congested humidity, which when touched, or is forced to take hold of the onion, is abscessed and the onion does not stick to it.
And both species do not start but from the largest tear gland, which goes little by little covering the sight and prohibiting the light and movement of the wheel.
The manner of operating in the inflammation of the eye is that the patient holds their head back in the chair, and opens their eyelids, and elevates the eyebrow with their own hand, and then collects the nail on the edge of a little double container, and extends it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert it into a hair of horse or ox or water, or similar, or strong thread, or double the extremity of the small needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with strong thread; and extend it to the upper parts, and extract it from the skin at the side of the nail, which closes the pupil. And thus you will follow it through the skin into the back of the eye.
And then you will inject the medication into the root of the eyelid with a subtle spatulum or small forceps, and remove the flesh of the eyelid naturally so that by injecting it there will not be continuous flows of tears.
And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot is extended or strong, thus we have said, and then it will be excised with a lion's spatulum, from which this is the form of it.
And beware that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the spatulum and that it does not rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then the inflammation goes into the wheel a little of triturated salt or of clear wine, and let it stay there another day; and then cure it with water that covers it so that it may be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put in the needle, nor is it fixed on the onion, then many times this species of nail is cured with medications, and it is healed thus, as I have said and recommended in the division.
And if you want to operate on it, then open the wheel of the patient and take a subtle lion's spatulum of acute freula according to this form. with subtlety. And if sometimes it is rarefied and confused and embedded in the root, then distill from your hour in the wheel of clear wine or strong oil or triturated salt, and open the wheel another day.
And then iterate over that operation until it is completely removed from it, so that the contrary abscess does not remain in the wheel, because then you will leave it, and cure the beginning of the abscess until it is healthy.
And then iterate your operation over that reason until it is healthy.
The prominence of the eyelid flesh, if noticed in the wheel for great annoyance, is suspended with an onion; and inject it from that one part, and do not ultimately inject it so that it does not inject flows of tears.
And then distill in the eyelid with strong oil and clear wine until it is healthy.
Chapter 17.
About the inflammation of ulcers and of what is born from adjusted flesh in the wheel.
Some ulcers in the wheels of the eyes are born from red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the upper parts before and is assembled like a rose of a balustrade.
The operation in it is that the patient holds their head back in the chair; and then open the wheels of that and collect all that flesh on the convenient onions; and take hold of it with a forceps or a chest; and then inject the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished in the incision, and beware of the wheel that you do not leave it to deviate from your operation.
And it is your injection in which you inject those or with the spatulum which we have recommended in the injection of the nail, or small forceps which are collected according to what will be seen in the form of it, then see this chapter.
Therefore, when your injection is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wheel with triturated salt, or distill in the red powder and similar to that of the corrosive medications, and put it above the wheel beforehand like a book of hours until it is assured against abscess.
And if some cause of ulcers and it is lorded over with holy caution, and fears abscess, then leave the wheel and cure that abscess with water that falls on that abscess, and iterate over that operation until it is healthy, and similarly make a just adjustment in the flesh which accedes to the wheel of this species.
You should always try to cure the entire treatment of the damaged foot through natural or accidental means, taking iron in hand, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently prepared for that operation.
Chapter 18.
About the collection of pus in the foot.
Pus that comes out through the veins which are placed on the foot and prevent its healing, and they delay the foot's recovery for many days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the foot in which there is pus is strong and there is no other ailment besides pus, then you collect that pus.
And it is that you order the patient to raise their leg up high, and suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle double filtration in this form:
or two ounces gradually in a container according to this form:
And then collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and purify the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being cleared of the foot and being restored.
And beware that you do not lead the foot to the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not insert except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then distill on the foot a clear green or red liquid, so that the sharp corrosive quality that is removed from the pus.
But if it is not possible for you to collect it all at that hour, then apply a plaster with all that which reduces the pain of it, and leave it like that for some days until the pain of it is calmed and assured against posthumous abscess.
And then iterate over it according to the method of manual manipulation until it is healed.
And this is the form of the poultices:
Chapter 19.
About the reduction of aristocratic nose injuries.
When you treat nose injuries with a cautery or acute medicine, according to the narration that precedes it and it is not healed, then it is not engendered in it except that you place on the abscess until the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the pus until the bone is discovered.
And then when the bone is discovered and there is corruption or blackness in it, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named an asperry head, and it should be made of iron indeed, and the head should be rounded thus as to scrape what is pointed by lime or alum solution for subtle punctuation (thus as it is in the following form).
And stop that on the corroded part of the bone, and then revolve it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corrosion is reduced.
And then some evacuations are made, and then restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Then if the place is consolidated and it is in good flesh and it is separated from the body of the wound and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not abscessed and it does not fall into an accident, then you know that it is healed.
And otherwise, then it is not in the engendering except to reduce the fissure according to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you discover with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take tribute according to this form:
It is the extraction of the triangular iron, and its handle should be primarily extended until the extremity, thus as it is sometimes thus.
And then stop that on the bone, and it is that of the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little from the foot, and then revolve your hand with the tribute until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels for as long as it reaches to there where you place your hand.
Then restore the place with astringent medicines that dry thus as they are customarily used.
Then since the flesh and the place are indurated, then the matter which was poured out to the affected parts before returns to the nose, therefore it is less painful for the patient.
Chapter 20.
About the reduction of the swelling of the foot.
When the foot swells in its entirety and does not fall into numbness or diminution, then you should cure the patient, and then follow it, and then place ventoses on the sensitive scarifications and suck for good suction; and then apply on the foot a liniment made from acatra and aloe and essences and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster over the foot with many poultices.
And the manner of the poultices is that you take many layers of cloth, and each layer should be divided into four pieces; and make them from those cloths.
And then stop those on one another according to the quantity of which has been needed by the vein. And then apply strengthening remedies to those areas that are drained of strength during the severe constriction; and later use cups on the affected scarifications; and then remove the cups and let the vein flow strongly during the day and night.
Maybe sometimes the ligament is softened, then it's necessary that it be strengthened.
And then remove the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
And if sometimes the vein has been reduced, well, then, it's necessary to apply the plaster to the pulses and constrictions and cups until it is healthy.
Chapter 21.
On the inflammation of the prominence of the tunicate vein.
When you make an incision in the tunicate vein, and then it becomes prominent and proceeds outward beyond the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape is rounded for that purpose, and you want to insert it, then the operation is as we have recommended, that you introduce the needle at the root of the vein on the lower part below, and then place the other needle in the double layer of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and let the first needle follow according to its disposition; and then insert the location of the double layer and lift it out from the part of the vein in the circle of the needle, and strengthen it strongly.
And then extract the needle and place it on the vein's languid infusion in a bath of warm water, and let it enter until the thread is in the vein.
And then treat the vein with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
And some vegetables gathered from the entire affected part around the circle of drained matter until the vein is greatly prominent, and then it should be perforated in the subtle spatium that comes to the vein's surface, and correct the albuneous humidity, and descend the vein and enter as soon as possible.
And then strengthen until it is healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of ulcers.
This ailment that is called ulcer does not exist, but rather it is a sane vein similar to descending water and it is not that.
Maybe the manner of operating on it is that you make the ulcer sit upon the prepared and straight seat, and then take the dry cap in your hands more than two parts and mau it until you see the health coming to the lower parts, and then it is dried and does not descend, and it remains in the light, and the ulcer sees the causes as it was seen.
And if it doesn't descend below, you know that it's water.
Maybe if the descent to health is not prepared with water as we have said, then make the ulcer sit between your hands and take a subtle spatium and spin it over the panniculus surrounding a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva in the corneal tunic in the crown (within the place where it can be seen), until the health is forgotten.
Then when it is forgotten, then you distill in the vein of hot water, in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugrec and honey.
And then it will be cured for other causes until it is healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of descending water from the vein.
We have already said the species of water in the division and what is convenient to perforate in a declared sermon, then that according to the health.
Then it's necessary that you make the ulcer sit between your hands over a warm tile and lift the vein strongly, with a very strict motion.
And then stop near the eyelid of your left vein, if the vein in which is the water is the left vein; or with your right hand, if the vein is on the right.
And then take with your right hand the almond, if the vein is on the left; or with your left hand, if the vein is on the right.
And then stop the extremity of the almond near the crown for the greatness of the radius in the bath of the vein on the part of the lesser lacrimal, and then peel the almond in a circle and roll your hand around it.
And then penetrate into the bath of the vein and feel that the almond has already arrived at the cause of the veil.
And it's necessary that the measure of the path of the almond is taken to the measure of the space which is from the pupil into the end of the blackness, and it's the crown of the vein; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the vein through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then stop the almond into the place where the water is, and then you will attract it downwards once again, and so if the water descends soon, then you will see the ulcer just above where the vein's view is soon, and the almond in the vein.
And then rest for a little while; therefore if the water has descended, then you stop that other vein before the alum reaches the affected area.
So when it is stagnant and does not descend, then you extract the alum easily, and revolve with your hand a little by little, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt gemstone and in that wave the whole dentition; and stop for a while the whole coton or infused oil of rose and album of wolf's claw and ligature around that whole sore.
Perhaps we, those of our time, place above that wound a compress saturated with wolf's claw album.
And if you do not obtain your alum within the instrument of the wound through its hardness — because it is a quality of the homes where the wound is very hard —, then take the spatulum which is named the aluminum scraper, whose form is this:
And then pierce at that conjunction, and do not push your hand into the tract, and it is not so that you make a way to the alum location subtly.
And then introduce the alum as we have said.
And give completion to your work, prepare the patient's dormitory decently made in which they sleep on their back with two pillows in a darkened room, and prohibit all movements.
And wait on the nature of that water to clarify its nature, and do not move your head to the right or left side at all.
And be the ligament according to its disposition within three days.
And then dislodge that in that darkened room and expose the fresh air, and do see some causes, and then return the ligament within seven days.
And do not think that you make this at the time of the cures or almost then introduce the infusion. You have thought that you remove this water for so long that the water can flow strongly and vehemently with great regard.
Perhaps you will find an abscessed aposteme, then you think that you dislodge the wound within seven days, and correct that which has given up the abscess.
Then you absolve the sight of it and stop on the face of its orifice for which the evacuation of its feces is regulated for some days, existing in the darkened room.
And then you will be freed from that darkness gradually and converse with its causes.
And you know that in the slate it is not excused to omit some veiled things, and then you will be ardent about the operation.
And now we have arrived at some of those which are according to the Artach, and some said that they make fire in the Ayroch magazine, perforating with which the water is succeeded.
Perhaps Emperor, I have not seen anything like this in our land which has perfected water, nor is it written in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of Ayroch magic, so that they are above those which ignore them:
And they are made of iron or their own proper material, and they are the extremities of their love in this subtle triangular shape, the sharp extremity thus as it is the form.
Chapter 24.
About the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are diverse flesh growths adjusted to some of which is a cause assembled like a scorpion of many feet, or a many-footed polyp; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that foot represented. And of them is cancerous flesh, rough, of dark color; and of them is that which is not flesh of lion's color, not dark.
Therefore in that which is among these lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you think that you make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and open their nostrils, and pierce the tender spot once in that flesh. And then extract that from the forementioned parts, and then inscribe what you have comprehended of those with a subtle spatula of one part within which you know that all the flesh is removed; because if it remains any cause from which the abscess is possible, then you will remove that with one of the subtle instruments facilitated within which none of the causes remain. Perhaps you will find an abscessed aposteme, then you stop at that which you think; or it is one of the malignant apostemes, then you touch and cauterize that within which it is abscessed healthy and all the cavities are removed.
And then be cut in the nose, then make an incision with agreement of water or wine. Perhaps the nose is opened and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Perhaps the humidity does not penetrate as you think, then you know that it is flesh wounds in the purulent bones of the nostrils which have not reached abscess.
Therefore, when one perceives that the patient's fever has reached a certain greatness, and there is numbness in their limbs, and pause between each movement to gauge the amount of pain or discomfort, and examine the patient and insert an extremity of the limb into the vein at the wrist or ankle or another possible cause.
And then it will be seen that the aura has been made, which attracts the evil odor into the channels of the nostrils, and settles over the affected gums, because very many times this semblance is similar to that of children in schools, and it is a lighter cause for those who do not want to do it.
And then pause the two extremities of the limb, one extremity that lies on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a gentle closure of flesh in the limbs that are in the limb, and make it enter so that you know that the flesh is already in the limbs of the limb.
And then extract the limb, and pause in the nose to extract the blood's abstract, a kind of watery substance, and make it so for three days or more until the corrupted humor is entirely removed from the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose a tube of lead for several hours until it is healthy.
More frequently used methods of cure that exist, use those instead.
And this is the form of the instrument to make a cupping device that makes distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils:
And make it of silver or copper, which resembles a small lamp with a bent tube, and the middle part similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument to make a cupping device is flat, uncovered; which is handled in the back of it, with which you hold that when you scrape out oil or what you want from the juices and causes that are extracted.
Chapter 25.
About the cleansing of the extremities of the nose.
Many times it is necessary to cleanse the extremities of the nose, and it is magnificent and praised for several days until one sees the improvement in it.
And because of that, you should insert that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all of that. And then pause on the spot where the cautery or burning medicine is, which was in the place of it.
But if the insertion is delayed until it is magnificent, then consider if it is lapified, hard, of dark color and of little sentiment, then do not touch that iron instrument because it is an aposteme of cancer; because many times it is inserted to remove the great malice from the body which had it.
And if the aposteme is of a tender touch and not of dark color, and sometimes the insertion is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert it without fear, and cure the spot with what exists and constrain until it is healthy.
Chapter 26.
About the stitching of the nose and lips and ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by similar things.
You know that when you achieve solution of continuity in one of these cartilages, few confer with each other in that operation except in certain homes.
Therefore, when you encounter one of those causes, consider if it is fresh plague with the healthy juice, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague to stitching, and then cure it until it is healthy.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you extract some part of its apparent code until it becomes healthy. And then adjust the two lips to stitching and strengthen those, and on those sprinkle healthy dragon's blood and three times, and pause on the powder a piece of thin plaster for a day, or of another of the consolidating plasters, and leave that tied for two days or for three, and then dissolve that and remove the plaster and leave it until the flesh is well-absorbed, and then cure with an ointment until it is healthy.
But the manner of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with threads as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity to the limb as you and make it known.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts.
Exhausted people are fed a mixture of home remedies in divided portions according to their damaged lips and ulcers resembling fat errors, and sometimes they are smaller and sometimes they are larger.
Then you should convert the lips and wounds into each of those hard toughnesses throughout the entire part, and then make an incision with a full scalpel at the place where the blood flow is restored, and then wash with wine and treat the area with a styptic, until it is sanitized.
Chapter 28.
About the incision of adjusted flesh on the gums.
A great many exhausted people place over the adjusted flesh of the gum, which the ancient doctors called albucus, therefore you should suspend that in an onion or hold it with a fork and pierce it with its own root, and let the healthy blood flow.
And then apply a pause to the place where the blood flow is restored, or other styptic or excitatory powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
About the reason for teeth being iron-hard.
When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts and those of the forehead and between the adjusted gums there are rough, scaly, and blackish spots, and some exhausted people are corroded and have citrine or green vertigo until the gum is corrupted and the loose teeth are corrupted.
And then you should make a separator between your hands and pause the head of it in the tie, and scrape the teeth where those rough spots appear and cause them to resemble arena until none of their roots remain, and that makes the blackness and citrinity and other things disappear so that they are mondified.
Then if it is established that this is in those of the beginning of the reason, well; and if not, then you iterate the reason over those to another day and to the second and to the third until it reaches the last statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have needed various forms of roots and figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And for this reason the roots are such that the tooth is rooted in the divided part is other than the root which is ras between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots are thus prepared as you will see soon.
Chapter 30.
On the eradication of teeth.
You should cure the tooth of its pain with entire intelligence and slowness in the entire eradication of it, because there is no cause that surpasses the exhaustion of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance until it is excused in the eradication of it.
You should be careful when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, because firmly you must be certain what the painful tooth is, because many exhausted people deceive the pain and think it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Then how do you certify what the painful tooth is, and what you know well, then you should scarify around the circuit of the tooth with spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of the entire part, and then mau that in the teeth says, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until it concusses.
And then apply a strong force with big tenacities for good loquacity or strong estuption, and pause the head of the patient between the teeth that you hold so they do not move, and then draw the tooth according to rectitude in many ways so it does not tremble, nor to the major pain of the patient no harm is done.
And then if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, and place that there throughout the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it thus it is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then you should complete the drawing of that trauma and strengthen it at the extremity of the subtle root so that it is not trapped during your construction on that with tenacities.
And you should operate with expertise in the scarification around the entire circuit of the gum and guard much your strength so it does not tremble and remains parted from it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the primary pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what the ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity about the eradication of them, it is not that they administer what we have recommended; because many exhausted people come to the bad homes with great difficulties that are more trapped, and the roots of them remain entirely, or some of those, or that you extract those from the osses of the mandible thus as many exhausted people have testified.
And then administer an ablution of his saliva by washing his mouth with warm or cold salt solution.
If fluxes of blood flow for that reason, thus with moving veins, then try to expel a certain quantity of evil humors and aspersion upon the plague, and if they do not confer that evil humor, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and holding them subtly is what helps to extract the tooth at the beginning, with a long handle and short, thick fingers, so that they do not become doubled when one has to operate.
And thus it is with thick-fingered hands that enter so that when one has them extended, they are not doubled, but rather short and extricated.
And thus it is with iron instruments from India, expertly crafted to extract teeth, and in the extractions of those there are roots that enter into each other and converge by constriction, making a strong hold, and some veins of extraction have the shape of a bird's beak, which is called ciconia, so it is guaranteed, and they are of strong construction.
Chapter 21.
On the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones from jaws affected by gnashing.
When you need to eradicate a tooth that is gnashed for some reason, then it is necessary that you pause on the spot where the border is tender for a day or two until the spot becomes mollified; and then insert the instrument or hold the extractions with which they are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia or guarantee, the form of the forceps:
The extractions of theirs are expertly crafted teeth, thus with files or scouring stones.
And if they do not obey your examination with these forceps or instruments, then it is necessary that you operate on the root and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever of which the shape is this:
And let it be a short, thick extremity, small, and not be bent so that it is not gnashed.
Therefore, if the root is forgotten, it is so; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extraction in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a subtle, pointed extremity.
And thus you will be helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form, suitable for the following: and with other instruments which precede in the root of teeth; because judgment is made with this instrument which is assembled on a large hook, and this is the form:
of the triangular extremity twisted or short, which has some thickness, and is not bent so that it is not gnashed.
And other wisdom that the instruments of teeth move similarly and resemble the other instruments.
The skilled craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, attaining mastery through the meaning of the operation and various ailments; for they are among the ailments which the ancients did not distinguish or pause to create proper instruments, according to the forms of diverse species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of other bones in the mouth is gnashed, or if it is decayed, then it is necessary to operate carefully on that spot where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form:
And let it be with some small thickness, little by little, and let it be held or tied in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the entire bone is forgotten; and then restore the spot with convenient medicines adapted to that.
But if there is small decay in the bone, then remove that from the decay and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 32.
On the care of teeth prominent above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course in shape, and more so when they grow in women, and more in venerable old people; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not adjacent to another tooth, and it is not possible to file or smooth it, then extract it; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you separate it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a pig's jaw, and let it be made of Indian iron of sharp extraction.
And let your incision be in the place where you separate it in three days for the durability of the tooth, and that it is not joined to another of the teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to filing, then file it with a file of Indian iron of which this is the form:
And let it be all of Indian iron and marginal essence; and let it be with many small points thus with a file in which they are expertly sharpened, on which the tooth is filed little by little in many days with facility, so that there is no other tooth joined and fallen. And also apply those lines on the faith, and scratch them with scissors-like tools.
And if it is a tooth that has become loose and the tongue feels it, then take care to remove that which is infected from that fracture so that it does not fall out nor the speech becomes corrupted.
Chapter 33.
About the restoration of decayed teeth with gold foil or silver.
When teeth fall out due to concussion and removal by percussion or by chance, and the patient cannot hold onto what they are eating, and you have treated them with medications that stop the bleeding, and your treatment has not been effective, then so that no evil is generated in those that are strengthened with gold foil and not silver, because silver turns black and also falls apart after a few days, but gold never decays.
And it is the gold in such subtlety and grossness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the gold and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuousities of the gold between two decayed teeth, or one or more, until it reaches the web to the healthy tooth of the other part. And then iterate the treatment until the affected part is restored, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom so that it does not become decayed.
And it is your strictness in which you strengthen the gold, removing the roots of the teeth that do not evacuate.
And then you incise the superfluous extremities of the gold with forceps or scissors, and add those to whatever place is suitable, and convert them into occult things between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not harm the tongue. And then let it be thus strongly established, like a Roman column.
Moreover, if it is dislocated or broken, strengthen that or those with other gold in such a manner throughout all its time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two decayed teeth, thus as these are bound together:
And when it happens that one tooth or two are returned to their place, and they are firmly reattached thus as we have recommended, and they remain.
And do not do that unless you are a skilled craftsman and knowledgeable.
And some ivory is suited to a certain cause of the cow's bones, and it is made in the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which is beneath the tongue sometimes has veins or is naturally connected to the one that men nourish, or accidentally and suddenly struck by a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation on him is to open the mouth of the patient, the existing scalp in the tie being; and elevate the tongue, and then incise that nervous ligament according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its confinement.
Moreover, if there is some hardness or denseness, and that has been standing for the consolidation of the wound, then you cut with an edge and separate it along the latitude until you have incised the ligament and the denseness is dissolved.
And beware that there is not made a fracture in the pincer of the flesh and that you separate here artery and vein, and there comes a flow of blood.
And then wash the remains of the incision with warm water or wine vinegar or cold water frequently; and then pause beneath the tongue, thus it is necessary for you to hold the patient's tongue in any new way so that it does not consolidate another vein.
Moreover, if there is a flow of blood, pause over the vitreous place treated; moreover, if the blood comes out, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that is convenient for this. And then heal it with the other causes until it is healthy.
Chapter 35.
About the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Sometimes it happens that beneath the tongue an abscess forms, similar to a small boil, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and for this reason it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on him is to open the patient's mouth in front of the light and examine the abscess.
And if you find it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancer.
And if it has declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onguent on it, and incise it with a subtle spatula, and incise all of that part; and if blood comes out during your operation, then you pause above the treated place, thus it is vitreous, until the blood is restrained.
And then return to your work within, so that you have treated him in a complimentary manner, and wash him in warm water and salt; and take care to cure the other affliction also, so that he may be healthy.
Chapter 36.
The extraction of abscesses from both ears and from that which is nothing in the gullet and from other abscesses.
When you find a swelling in the gullet, it is glands that are assembled together, which are called abscesses, and are named both ears, which when you treat them with what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron for the flow of blood; beforehand let it mature within, and then you can operate on it, or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is of white color, thin, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what needs to be incised.
And the operation on it is what you consider, during your operation, if you have already repulsed the abscess with a complete repulsion or if it has diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient sit in the sun, and let their head be in the warm place, and open their mouth, and the servant takes between their hands before their tongue to hold an instrument of great nobility, which is the form of this.
And let it be made of silver or copper, and let it be subtle with a sharp edge.
Then as you press it against the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and you see above that warm place, then take hold with your nails and fix it in the amenla, and pull it towards the divisions of the abscess as much as you can. Or another thing that you pull out some cause from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form.
Or another thing that you pull out some cause from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form. and it is assembled to forceps, although the extremities of it are curved, thus that the orifice of each one of those is in the end of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron indeed in a hidden way.
But if this instrument is not at your present, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: Let it be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
And after you have incised one vein, incise the other according to this same method of incision, and then apply the incision to the patient who gargles with cold water.
But if there is a flow of blood, gargle with water of decoction of sage or of mint leaves and similarly to those of the stipptic causes so that the flow of blood may be restrained, and then take care to cure it so that it may be healthy.
And some veins are hidden in the gullet and other abscesses besides those of both ears, and incise them according to what you have said and done in the incision of both veins simultaneously.
And you have already medicated a woman with an abscess which was born in the gullet of hers, which abscess tended to dark color, of little sensation, which had closed her gullet, and the woman breathed with great difficulty, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and had been perverted unto death if it had stood for one day or two.
And the abscess had pushed so much that it had made two ramps within, so that they would issue through two tracts.
Then you carefully examine the fistula and find it in one of their nails, and pull it out, and extract from its great portion, and then you incise that which you comprehend of the other tract, and then you open their mouth, and comprehend their tongue, and then you fix the nail in that abscess.
And then you abscess a great part of it, and there does not flow from it except a little blood. Then the gullet of that woman is absolutely free, and she begins to drink water, and then you prescribe a diet, so you do not cease to incise that abscess many times for a long time, and successfully incises the abscess in its place, which incision prolongs it.
Then you will heal it and cauterize the gullet of hers, then you will stop adding; and then you walk around and do not know that God did that good deed for me.
Chapter 37.
The incision of a hernia when it is abscessed.
When the hernia descends to the groin, and it is abscessed and long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part below, then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and you do not contradict your cure, and sometimes it happens that the abscess is cauterized because it has been removed from it and is subtle, then it is fitting that you incise that which is aggregated round; and if it is at its length, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not in its sentiment, then it is fitting that you perform the incision of it, because there is fear about the patient.
When you want to follow the method of manual therapy that you have heard about from the expert on white and long diseases, which makes you examine the patient and press their tongue with an instrument that processes its shape and then places it in the new nail, and pulls it down below and inserts it into one of the two instruments, which are mentioned in the description of two fingers.
And beware that you do not insert it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term of its additions, because if you insert it in a bad way, you will ruin the speech.
And then the insertion, use that which we have recommended in the description of two fingers, and heal it from within so that it may be healthy.
But if the patient is frightened by the insertion of it, beware that you use gentleness in the cauterization of its fear, and the manner of the cautery is not only acute water, and it is that you place the head of the patient on your thigh, and then press their tongue with the instrument which we have said, and then take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and confirm that the cause is living, and pause there neither too much nor too little, and fill the concavity of the instrument in the form:
It is the extraction of the intestine from the cavity in which the medicine was placed, like the intestine of a ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the valve, and the patient will spit or evacuate saliva or mucus from their mouth for the internal medicine, so that it does not descend into the gut of the patient and that it is led away from there.
And then put your hand on the medicine, and express it onto the uvula for a space of half an hour within which it will be dissolved and settled by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and envelop it around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and then put the ray with the cotton into a canal above until the cotton adheres to that canal, and do so many times within which you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
And if you find that the medicine is not entering, iterate it, and then the cauterization will be sterilized in the circuit of the grape with cotton wrapped in border, and manifest what is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and it will be washed with cold water, and it will be cured beforehand by embrocation, and you will eliminate the bad humors so that it may be healthy.
And this species of cure is more safe than insertion and less fearful.
Some wounds are cured on the uvula with what is more subtle than cautery and insertion, because it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of them, into a bowl, and they are submerged in vinegar for seven days, and boiled; and the bowl should be well sealed, and it is placed in a hidden place, on top of which is placed an instrument made of silver or copper according to this manner; it is made of silver or copper.
And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula through the canal, so that the uvula is not too obstructed.
And then iterate on those many wounds until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the arrival of abscesses, because it would too much adjust in the abscess, and you should not do that, but rather declare the abscess of the patient to be cautious.
But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of the patient's body near their throat, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the closure of the throat prohibits the vapor from entering the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of spines and of what adheres to the gut and other causes.
Many wounds adhere to the gut or spine of the feet or some other cause.
Then beware that you extract what is apparent from those, upon which the sight falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument alone in the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the gut.
And what does not appear and is occult in the gut, beware that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the gut will be forced out by vomiting; or that the patient takes a piece of bread or radish or lettuce or a dry biscuit; or take a piece of dry marine sponge, and tie it strongly with thread, and then pass the patient through it, so that as they perceive the place in which the spines are extracted, then it will be forced out. Either take a small file and bind it firmly, and let it be placed on the table and carefully extracted; or take a porr (a type of metal tool) and carefully extract the swelling from the middle and carefully from the inside.
Maybe it is not forgotten that those causes which have been said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And let it be thicker where a small one is needed, and at the extremity of it let it be curved which you will insert into its throat to facilitate.
And hold the elevated head of the instrument in them, and beware that you do not touch the bone of the throat with it, so that you do not injure the body or pierce the bone or the spine, or that the doctor puts his hand on it.
Perhaps the patient will insert it themselves, according to their knowledge of the location of the cause and the pain they feel, and they will pull their hand back with the instrument in them, as much as possible according to the quantity that is prepared until it is forgotten.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood from the affected vein.
When bloodletting is medicated with what has been said in the division of the cure with medicines and not comforts, consider then the vein of the patient at sunrise, since you have comprehended the language of it with an instrument which you have recommended.
Then if you practice bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the vein of the patient, and place a ignited iron in the cavity of the cannula, and do so many times (until the bloodletting is dead and separated from the vein) and abstain from giving water to the patient all day.
And then take a vessel full of cold water, and place the mouth of it in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not transgress from any cause and let the water stay for an hour, then again with your hand, because the bloodletting is still sensitive to the cold water.
Maybe it is not forgotten that which has been recommended, then suffumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida through the instrument which has been recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Do it thus, so that you will have four remedies.
And it is another manner of operation in the suffumigation of that, that you take a vessel in which there are ignited coals and the vessel is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a tube; and then put it under the suffumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that the suffumigation has reached the bloodletting, because the bloodletting still falls short.
And if it doesn't help, then you repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from giving drink to the patient, and eat salty foods and garlic, and don't drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
And this is the shape of the instrument with which bloodletting from the vein is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it is in some curved shape: which is placed on the vein, and its extremity is similar to a beak of a stork, which is curved, in which there is a hole for a lancet, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not escape.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the sermon on the perception of abscesses and their sections.
The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to what you will remember about them, from each one in this book.
And they are diverse in their perforation and section according to two manners, of which one is for the species of abscesses in their mettle; and for that which you comprehend about the humidities.
And the second manner is for the places in which the accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that occurs on the head is different from the abscess that occurs on the buttock; and the abscess in the fleshy place occurs differently from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each one of them has its judgment for operation.
And maybe some abscesses are those which need to be matured, not perforated, but rather the ripening of the sap in them or their complement.
So other abscesses are those which need to be pierced when they are crossed, and do not mature according to their complement, just like abscesses that are put near the joints, because an abscess when it is put near a joint, its essence is prolonged until you can pierce what is in its circuit, and forcibly corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it makes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the piercing of it until it is matured, you will not harm the principal member; or it is near the buttock, then pierce what is not matured; and do not need to pierce a crossed, incomplete digestion, but that which is near the buttock, so that you do not prolong the pressure of it and it becomes elongated to the deep parts of the buttock, and becomes a fistula, or it is made in the term of it which is not healthy. It's more important that you know the time of the rupture of the abscess, and this is when it matures.
You know that it's matured when the pain and fever cease, and then there is a decrease in rigor and pulse, and sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And for that you know that the rupture will occur in the place where the pus has accumulated beneath the abscess and from which pus comes out in abundance.
And rupture sometimes occurs through the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the divisions of the hands or feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, later, in all swollen places where there is no reflection; because in those that reflect, use rupture according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it's better to delay the rupture of it until digestion is confirmed according to the compliment, as I have said; because if you rupture that then, it prolongs the body of the pus and increases its foulness, and strengthens the lips of the wound so they are indurated and deep.
Some abscesses are ruptured according to the latitude of the flesh or body that needs it, or according to what the affected member indicates.
And you know that you administer small ruptures, and in large abscesses a large and ample rupture or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses are those in which you know that the code (or hard skin) is conquered and enclosed, when it's done thus and it's done in term of "ja stigua" (I think this means "already stitched"), thus like one who accumulates in drops of dubility and buboes.
And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus like the figure of a leaf of myrtle, thus like the abscesses of the angle-bones.
And of those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar to those.
But that one which is not capable thus as are superficial abscesses of the lion, you know that you rupture that with a superficial rupture, or plane only so.
And you know when the abscess is large and has already collected much sania, that you rupture it and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted from it a part, and then you open the abscess again another day, and then you extract a larger part, and then you make those many evacuations according to graduation until it is forgotten.
And especially if the patient is of fragile virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit is much resolved by the exit of the sania, and it strengthens the death of the patient, and you open them.
Be careful with this chapter, and then make your rupture in which you rupture these abscesses, knowing that you will clean the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or is a flat section, then you administer the remedies of oil or antidote; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the rupture are many, then you know that you pause in some traction until they come together.
And if in the abscess a part of the code (or hard skin) has been removed or has concaved into the circle, then you know that you complete it with very oily cloth or thread made from the fabric of oil, thus as when one treats ulcers or razors, their humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then you process it and cure what you know of the wounds until they are healed.
But if you accumulate a flow of blood during the hour of your operation, then you administer cold water and wine in those which mix a cloth of oil, and pause that over the place of the flowing blood many times.
But if you preserve the flow of blood, then you know that you administer regimen and cure and powder those which have been recommended in many places of our book and division.
But if it's in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you know that you apply powders in wine and oil, and pause those over the places.
And if it's in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you know that you pause powders moistened with water and oil or wine and oil, and all that is cold until the third day, as I have said, and then you dissolve the abscess and clean it and administer in the cure of what is convenient for it to be healed.
And thus it is necessary for the cognition of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said about each abscess in which manner it is the way of its cure, specifically by chapters.
Chapter 41.
On the section of abscesses that come on the crown of the head.
In the small head of the shoulder blades, there are special knots that contain tunics that are their own doing; and the species of them are very many.
And theirs are swellings, and those that contain humidity similar to lime. And those that contain humidity similar to poultices, and they resemble them; and those that are lapide, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, just as the extraction of those does not make contrary arthritis.
And the operation in the section of those is that you separate them with an instrument in the form of which you approach thus, which is called entromes, until you know that it contains.
Since it is known that it contains humidity, then you separate that in section according to the longitude for superficial section according to this form:
And it begins in the section of the line .B. until the line .G. Then, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excavate that which contains that humidity, and do not leave any of that entire cause, because many worn-out returns, if they remain from that entire cause.
And then submerge it in Egyptian ink, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that plague and leave it until another day, because I think it corrodes all that is scraped from that skin.
And then iterate over that spot with Egyptian ink secondly and thirdly if it is indicated for him, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the plague with Egyptian ink until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you incise it according to this form: in the section having the form of a cross, and cut between two labia of the section and scrape all that part, and exert your virtue in the extraction of the tunic which contains it.
Perhaps if your arthritis makes counter-contradiction, then do so that you first recount primarily.
And similarly do in the lapified abscess of section and of cure according to what you have said; and the section on the lapified abscess is less grievous, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And some old men are some of these abscesses which are in the head of some men who have none of that humidity; this causes it because you will incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and will thoroughly investigate the abscess thus with a rough, harsh, white, which could not be touched, and if someone touches that, they will plague it.
Perhaps in the other accidental abscesses on the head another chapter is not this capital, thus like the abscesses that come to the heads of children and have their roots in the ears, perhaps the section of all these should be superficial.
And stop the perforation of those from the lower part of their skin so that the body of the patient is alleviated at the lower parts.
And then heal those in water that converge to that for cure.
Chapter 42.
On the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Many worn-out lumps come to these abscesses in the neck and in the axillas and in the armpits; and some worn-out ones occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all scrofula of those is denting its own tunic, and thus like in the nodes and abscesses of the head, thus as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofulas are many, because among those some are lapide, and among those that contain humidity, and among those that are malignant which do not obey cure.
Then in that one which you see of good disposition in the Tocament, from which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the codena, and it is mauled in all part, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arthritis, and it is not swollen, so that you incise that in superficial section of the part above to the part below the body from line .G. until line .B., and scrape that from all part, and extend two labia of the codena on one side, or many small ones if there is need of those, thus as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
And it is the space not much agitated, that does not adjust to your hand in incision, or that it troubles the patient, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or artery and prohibited yourself from your operation, then pause in the vetriol plague treated with other powders which stop the flux of blood, and strengthen the plague, and leave it until it repauses the acuity of the abscess and the plague is mollified and begins to be putrid. When the blood is removed.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then investigate whether there are any causes of the other small scrophulae, and cut into them and clean them out.
And if it is in the root of the large vein, beware then that you do not cut into that vein at its root. Be careful that you do not make a double fold too strong and that you loosen it until it falls off by itself.
And then fill the wound with a lot of oil which you have already submerged in Egyptian unguent, and then cure it.
And if you cut out the entire scrophula, then beware that you adjust the two lips of the wound and cauterize as much as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
But if you see that there has remained superfluity because of the greatness of the scrofula, beware that you understand how to cut at the root of it, and separate it and administer a suture, and do what is said.
And those scrofulae that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation there where it appears to you the place of maturation, and pause the perforation of what is the worst pus at the bottom of the body, as we have said.
And then administer perforation, with a warm unguent and similarly to those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And then when you see the wound is already clean, then you cure it with an unguent of generating flesh until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
On the section of the pill of the accidental aposteme that is next to the gullet.
The ancient doctors wrote about this section in the epilhot, and we do not see anyone in our land who has made it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
But in the men who have equity, beware that the extraction of the epilhot is avoided, since for what it is not done gently, so that all the veins and major parts of the malady are not affected here.
But in those who have apostemes caught in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the malady is not in the cane, beware of using the section of epilhot to flee the loss which is done by perforation.
Then beware when you want to do it, that you cut the epilhot below three circles of the circles of the epilhot, or four with a small section for the latitude in which it is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in the cuff, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for cutting, because it is deprived of flesh and the veins of blood that nourish it.
And if the patient is weak, beware then that you extend the cord of the gullet with an onion, and then divide the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoid the veins of blood if you see any of those causes.
And then cut the cuff according to what we have recommended; and it is significant regarding the section of the canal for the flux that is from that exit into what is of the disorder and for the removal of the void.
And then leave the wound open for some time.
Then when the hour is reached in which the perforation is tempered, add the two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew it only with the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
And thus says Albucasis that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, is only an exposition that you see that some of these apostemes have already operated on the gullet of the malady, and the malady has come to a mortal point, and its wing is between the ribs, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the malady breathes over the place of the wound for some respiration, and it is saved from death.
And for this reason, I command to leave the wound open until the malice of the malady is consumed; and its malice lasts for three days; and then I command to close the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen through my meteors, is that a servant held a knife and put it in the gullet and cut out a part of the cane of the lung, and I was called to cure him, and I removed the mucus thus as it is removed from the dead, and discovered the wound and removed the blood which was issuing from the small wound.
Then I confessed that it had not cut into a vein or guide, and the wind was issuing from the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
And I did not accuse the servant if he did not return to the void, and then some days returned to the administration of his own dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilhot there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
About the section concerning an abscess that occurs in the groin area beforehand, and it is called a hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
And it is according to two manners, because it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, it is not possible to cure.
And the accidental one is according to two manners of which one resembles swollen nodes, and the other manner resembles an abscess that is made by inflammation of the artery, and in that there is fear. And it does not cover the swollen area with a warm iron except in the case where it is small. And you probe that and investigate with the aforementioned method, and if you find it resembling swollen nodes, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise thus like the nodes, and extract the fluid that contains the pus and bursectomy; and otherwise, then the whole wound is carefully examined, and afterwards you heal the place with a cure that is introduced until it is sanitized.
Chapter 45.
About the section on the species of nodes.
There are many species of nodes and I have already mentioned all the species of them in the division.
And it covers how I recommend distinguishing between a node and an ulcer, as well as making a doubt about the difference.
Therefore I say that an ulcer is a quality of heat and fever and violent pains until the inflammation of the excess is reduced; and it is a complete putrefaction that then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
But a node is not heat or fever or pain, and it contains a hidden humor that is in its own proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a cold and it is made thus like a vacuity, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, because some are fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
Therefore it covers, when you come to the cure of a node, that you expel that and inquire into its beginning with the instrument which is called an introstrument, according to what will be seen in the form in the chapter that is about to come.
And it is the manner of inquiring into abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place where you find humidity in the abscess, and you turn the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cavity.
And afterwards you place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and afterwards you extract the introstrument and consider what is left in the residue of it.
And if the running humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise on the surface section according to what I have said about other abscesses.
And if from the residue of the introstrument there is no humidity, then you know that it is fat.
And it cuts around the limb in a section having the form of a cross according to this form: Thus you should instruct, and suspend that limb in a way that is convenient, and excavate the cavity of the entire affected part, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extract the sania from the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract the sania, and many veins are found there, and then you extract it by pieces until none of it remains.
Because if none of it remains, little or much, the node returns according to its nature.
And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the application of some corrosive powders and strengthen the application, and pause over that which is a cautious abscess, and cure it with another cure until it is sanitized.
And if it is a large node, then you sew the two lips of it and cure it with what covers it.
But if the pulse is against it, or non-pulsating, then you bind and fill the place of seven threads that are vetriol and let it stay for two days or three until the plague is cleansed and the inflammation of the vein is reduced; and afterwards return to incise what remains of the node.
Chapter 46.
About the forms of the necessary instruments in section and perforation.
About those are the forms of the introstruments, and they are of three species, one is large, one is medium, and one is small.
The form of the large introstrument is this:
The form of the small introstrument is this:
Made of iron, of alloy, of well-shaped extremities, in order to hold the instrument firmly in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of experience, and they are not named explicitly, and one of those is called fervent.
There are three species, because two of them are great, greater and lesser.
The form of great experience, the form of it:
The form of milder experience, the form of it:
The form of slight experience, the form of it:
It is suitable that these are caused by abscesses and exits and fistulas and swellings, so that among those are those of the bones and other causes.
And these are roots, thick, rough, thus with large needles like those that are embedded in the seats, and they are treated with citrine iron, or iron, or copper, or silver. And the worst is when they are treated with citrine iron.
And they are the experiences of black lead, which ones are accustomed to believe that through those the abscesses burst out in the cavity of which they are reflected, that are reflected with their lightness in those reflections.
And there are three species, because some of them are long, and others are milder, and others are brief, according to the quantity of the matter of the abscess and the strictness of it.
The form of great experience of lead:
The form of milder experience of lead:
The form of slight experience of lead:
The forms of the ulcers are from many species, because some of them are simple ulcers, which ones have a single curvature only, and there are three species: great, slight, and milder.
And some of them are round ulcers, and there are three species.
And some of them are ulcers having two curvatures, and there are three species.
And some of them have three curvatures, and there are three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The form of a slight simple ulcer, the form of it:
The form of a large ulcer having two curvatures: The form of a milder ulcer having two curvatures: The form of a slight ulcer having two curvatures:
The form of a large ulcer having three curvatures:
The form of a milder ulcer having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels which are those that cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and there are three species, because some of them are great, milder, and slight.
The form of a large scalpel:
The form of a milder scalpel:
The form of a slight scalpel:
The extremities of those are those that make a sharp section and the other extremities are not-sharp, and not so paused in such a manner, but rather because they are made newly in the excavation of the nodes, fearing the insertion of a vein or nerve, and for those to be healthy the patient and to bring tranquility a little for the adjustment which brings away the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of emollients, and there are three species: great, milder, and slight, thus with true veins.
They are treated with iron and similarly to the way that they make a kind of decoction.
And it is in the punctured extremity hidden in the spatula and in that corrects the divided parts together and beforehand, when you wish, thus with veins.
The forms of spathes, which ones are hidden between the fingers for the perforation of the abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and there are three species: great, milder, and slight. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of bleedings which ones stop the flow of blood, and there are three species: great, milder, and slight; the forms of it:
They are treated with citrine iron, round ones with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is necessary that these species of bleedings are great, milder, and slight, because for those stopping the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you first apply them, it is not medicine.
However, one does not use those to stop blood in every part of the body, and one does not use them except in fleshy places, thus in the muscles of the arms and legs, and in the muscles of the breasts, and in the muscles of the belly and genitals, and similarly to their fleshy muscles.
Some wounds are caused by other small instruments similar to thorns, according to this form; for which the blood is removed when it is done for phlebotomy, or there is an incision of a vein or artery.
Some wounds are round and flat according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's breasts which are similar to those of women.
Some wounds are swollen in the breasts of some men who receive the compliment of sleeping with women as if they were pregnant, and thus their breasts are swollen, and thus similar to those of women, and we Roman doctors reject this.
And to the one who has this, cover that you make an incision in the affected area according to this form, from line B to line G, and then remove all the ugliness, and then fill the wound with incarnated medicinal plaster, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with cosideration, and cure the one who is inside so that he may be healthy.
But if the breast declines to the lower parts and is softened by its greatness just like in women, then it should be divided into two lunar-shaped sections, with each one containing the other, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. And then remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the bleeding, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure until he may be healthy.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which is necessary to cut for the quietness of the patient, and for flux of blood, then you should fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive oil and let it corrode what is rough from the grayish matter, and then cure the one who is inside so that he may be healthy.
Chapter 48.
On the perforation of abscesses that come from below the nipple.
These abscesses that come from below the nipple are of the species of scrophulae, hard, which contain a skin that is sacred.
And of those some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity it is necessary to incise them with a lunar-shaped section: from line G to line B. And when everything is evacuated from what is in the abscess of the sanity, then you complete the wound with much cotton and leave it inside for another day.
And then the cotton should be left in place and treated conveniently with what is suitable, until he may be healthy.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and scrophulae, then you should section above it as we have said in the section on scrophulae, regarding the incision.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes putrid, then administer to it a cautery according to what we have previously said about it.
Chapter 49.
On the incision of abscesses that occur through an artery or a vein.
When an artery is broken, and the cord which is above it is consolidated, then many wounds occur with abscesses. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is through an artery it is long aggregated in the forepart of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in the veins.
And that which is through a vein is round at the surface of the body.
And incision on this abscess is erroneous, and it is especially so in those who are below the ribs, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary that its cure be eschewed, and one who is in the extremities, or at the head, should avoid it.
But concerning one who is suffering from inflammation of the orifice of the artery, incise in the cord section at length; and then open the section with an inch and then dissect the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
And then put a thread on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the artery with a double thread in two places, — which causes you to have a double vision of extracting two arteries that are in the temples.
And then push the place which is between two ligaments apart until all the blood that is in it is evacuated, and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer a cure in which it is generated poor until the ligaments fall; and then treat him conveniently with what is suitable until he may be healthy.
And if it is an abscess by incision of a vein, then you should hold the vein with your hand as much as possible from the abscess in the cord, and then introduce the needle below the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and it should be in double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligature according to what you have been told about the ligature of the grapevine, which has two parts in two extremities of the thread.
More frequently, if you remove the thread, then insert the fiddle-shaped instrument at that angle below the entire aposterium, and stretch the four threads in four places.
Then return the aposterium to its proper place within so that when it is seated, you examine the redundancy of the code, and thus you will see what is connected to it.
And then place a poultice over the affected part which has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with warm blankets and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter on the aposterium which affects through twisting of nerves.
Thus it affects the aposterium in the arteries and veins, and similarly it affects the nerves when it affects their percussion or excessive tension, and by resemblance.
And it is frequent in the places of the adjustors or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are weakened.
And it is a severe aposterium, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is in the greatest dispositions of its own habit, and when it is stricken with vehemence, it feels like the patient has a similar stupor.
And it is not an aposterium added to the chest of the body, and thus it is below the code, and it has weakened all parts and does not go to the anterior or posterior parts.
Therefore, since it is in the joints, it does not seem that it is invested with iron, because the strong contraction of the limb is opposed.
More often, that which is on the head or forehead falls into a spatula-shaped code. More often, if it is a slight aposterium, then you have the forces and remove that from its roots.
And if it is great, then you suspend it with an onion, and scrub that, and then remove it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter four.
On the section of aposterium which affects the skin that affects the abdomen.
It happens to some people who have moist and damp abdomens and in other parts of their body that they are called fungal because of their similarity to fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head of which is large; and already their lips are altered, and it is of those who are small, and it is of those who are very magnificent.
And I have seen one, and in their abdomen there were two sores that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of small root.
And already their lips were turned inwards and split, and humidity flowed from them all the time.
Therefore I examined them and attributed it to the one in whose feet there were 18 ulcers. and the other who had six ulcers.
And the operation on their examination is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the skin is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you examine it with a broad spatula, and you are in your presence with cauteries in the focus, because many damp matters of its section are expelled very sanctified; and if you want to sanctify it, cauterize that.
And if the patient is weak and timid, beware of examining with iron; more often then take a recently made leaden fiddle-shaped instrument, and stretch it on that skin, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it there for two days.
And then adjust it in the structure of the leaden thread; therefore, do not stop stretching the large leaden grain downwards into the skin, until it is removed and falls out by itself through its own effort.
More often, if the skin is of thick roots, then in its examination there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the abdomen.
More possibly it is that you examine the quality of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then heal it until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to examine the skin that is of dark color, of little sensation, of lax regard, because that is almost cancerous.
And I find it in remembrance of cancer and also similarly.
Chapter five.
On the cure of prominence of the navel.
Prominence of the navel is made for many causes; or for fissures of the ciphac which is above the abdomen, and thus the fabric or intestine bursts forth according to the other ruptures; or for a sanctified flow of vein or artery as has been said before, or for a constricted ventosity in it.
More often, if it is for a fissure of the ciphac and for bursting forth of the fabric, then the color of the aposterium is similar to the color of the body; and it is a lion-like pain, and then appears in diverse situations. And if it is for an egression of the intestine, then the situation of that in the body which we have recounted, of more vehement diverse variety, and as you press that in the ties it is occulted, and then returns; and strongly it is in the body thus, and it is magnified very much from the entrance of a bath and vehement effort.
More is done through humidity, then it is lion-like and not hidden when you press on your hand, neither is it constricted, nor is it created.
And if it is due to bleeding, then there appears an abscess with signs of decay, declining towards the black area.
More if it is due to flesh wound, then it is a severe abscess, large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity.
More if it is due to windiness, then the touching of it is lion-like.
And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to bleeding of the artery, or of the vein, or due to windiness; then it is necessary to prohibit the cure of it, because in that there is fear and anxiety, just as it was said in the chapter where it was written about the abscesses due to the artery and the vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then it is necessary to command the patient to hold their breath, and be standing extended; and place a sign on the circuit of the entire navel, and command them to stand turned between their hands above the back, and surround with a spatula flat in the circuit of the navel around the area where you felt the tension; and extend the magnitude of the abscess to the upper parts in an equal manner; and place it in the circuit with a strong or soft thread according to the decent method of the liar.
And place the skin of the extended abscess on the ligament and insert the aforementioned tieu in that index finger and it will turn out the intestine; and if you have not touched or guarded by the ligament, then you extract the excess and push the intestine back to its proper place in the belly.
And if you have touched the membrane, then take that one out; and remove its excess fluids.
More if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that word, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit which you felt around the abscess in a manner of crossing, which makes them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the area inside where the extended flesh can fall back into place; or remove that which is subtle and falls away, and then cure that one which needs to be cleansed of the ulcers so that it may be healthy.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh wound in it or humidity, then it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then cure that one which needs it and consolidate the area.
Chapter 53.
On the Cure of Cancer.
We have said, in the division, of a type of cancer and in what manner it is possible to achieve the cure of it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid the cure with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said that cancer is generated in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
And I will tell you that some ancient doctors said that certain types of cancer are in a location where it is possible to eradicate it, just like removing the cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and similar to the members allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it begins small.
More when it is ancient and grave, it does not matter that you appropriate it to him, because you cannot heal from that cancer nor have I seen another, nor has it been perpetrated to that.
And the operation on it is what is allocated as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile certain evacuated, and then bleed that one, if it is touched with evident replication.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which place is located for operation, and prohibit in the narrow uncis those that need to be done for that; and concave all parts of the code so that good perexcrutacio is made so that no root cause of it remains. And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that lightness, and express the places, and abstain from the thick blood all to your hand or to an instrument with which it is possible for you to use among the instruments.
More if you have made a contrary flow of thick blood in the vein or artery, then cauterize that so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure that one with another cure so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 54.
On the Cure of Hydropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, the species of hydropsy of water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not except the species of altithas alone, and it does not approximate with iron to the species of tympanistris nor to the species of hypochondriac, because that is mortal.
When you have medicated this special type of hydropic timpanist medicine and it does not conform to your medication, then consider that if the patient has achieved debilitation, or it is another bad hydropic condition, and thus as it is in all the joints and resembles a belly ache, then beware that you do not give them iron, for fear of exacerbating the condition.
Perhaps the patient has an exuberant vertigo, and it is not another bad condition but only hydropic, and neither infant nor old, then the manner of operation is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister places their extreme end on the belly with their hand, inserting water at the parting of the pentinilh, and takes spatum spinos according to this form.
It is of two sharp points, of sharp extremity thus as spatum; perhaps meanwhile it is in some brief smallness little by little, so that in the operation nothing passes into the intestine, and that leads to that.
And then consider if the generation of hydropic is from part of the intestines, because then it is necessary that you have sectioned alone at the navel for the quantity of three digits to the parting below, in the right direction above the pentinilh.
Perhaps the generation of hydropic is due to badness of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary that your section be on the ribs above which you want to chase the pain away from that place, so that the superfluities do not corrode at that free location.
And then perforate with the instrument the entire codeina, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatum between the codeina and the siphac, and you excavate that; and if it is the quantity of an ounce or around.
And then perforate the siphac until you reach the spatum at the desired location, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or golden tin, at which in the lower part of it there is a small tube, and on its sides there are three tubes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is shaped like a feather's extremity according to the manner of plumage, thus sometimes.
And in the upper extremity of it there is a armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it draws upon the instrument, thus evacuating the water at the proper time and quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it does not converge at the hour, thus strengthening the bad condition by resolution of the animal spirit's siege, or hastening to the quintessence that is approaching death.
Perhaps evacuate that according to the quantity of the vertigo and according to what the dispossession of the bad condition of the vertigo of the pulse and goodness of it signify to you.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because thus it is retained by the codeina which retains the tube that is above the siphac, of which I recommend to you that you perform it according to that manner.
And then iterate the instrument another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do it for several days above fear, and beware of error lest you don't remove enough water.
Perhaps you fear about the patient, and let go of a great quantity of water, then cure that one who is buried in hot sand, and move him to a bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until he is healthy.
And cauterize above the stomach, and the spleen and liver regarding the extraction of water, according to what you have recounted in that which is preceding.
The end.
On the cure of children who are born with non-perforated urinary locations.
Some born children are thus from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or has a narrow tube or is not in its place).
Then it is necessary to perforate with an instrument as subtle as possible, according to this form:
And then pause in the tube with a subtle key of lead and tie it, and you will be successful for three days or for four.
And when one wants to urinate, it is retained and held back; and then return that.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes above the location will not release this clarity.
Perhaps that one whose tube is narrow is medicated with a lead key, thus as we have said, for many days until it is amplified.
Those who have the hernia in their location, so leditz, which causes it because of those, that which is born and the tract is from the head of the bladder for they cannot urinate to the divided parts, until they elevate the bladder with their hand to the divided parts below; and it is not to their generation, for so that the sperm cannot penetrate to the majority according to rectitude, and it is a great malady often lagging.
And the manner of operation is that the hernia should be placed on the back of the two seats, and then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand in a vehement extraction, and insert the head of the bladder at the site of the perineum with a spatula-like agut, as if it were an insertion of feathers, or that you do not grasp any part, so that the meatus of the bladder appears like the head of the bladder and the tract falls in its proper place according to covering.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times it happens accidentally; and stop yourself at the moment when it absorbs the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 46.
About the white ulcer that occurs on the perineum at the head of the bladder and of corrosion and blackening and adhesion of the perineum to the head of the bladder.
Many times it happens that this white ulcer occurs on the bladder and is a sign of great worn-out flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend them with a subtle hook and absorb that until it disappears completely; and then stop above the underlying skin with an Egyptian ointment; and then, cure the wound with a dialectic ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color, then it is necessary that you administer cautery at the site of it and the root of it.
If the ulcer is on the perineum of the head of the bladder in an uncircumcised person, and one part of the ulcer is inside the perineum and another part is outside, then it is necessary that you remove the ulcer which is inside from the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer part, because when you cure the inner part, it is not assured that it will not be injured.
And it often happens in the genitals and in the blackened and corrupted perineum, therefore it is necessary that you conquer all that which has been denigrated and that which wants to corrupt or that which is corrupted; and then apply liniments over that with good mel, which is concocted from flour of scorched millet and of errors and triturations and crivellations.
And then cure it with the other curation until it is healthy.
If there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
because juvenile cautery is in two dispositions at the same time, thus it is a flow of blood and a wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the bladder is corroded and destroyed completely at that hour, then it is necessary that you introduce into the middle of the perineum a tube of lead so that the hernia urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the perineum to the head of the bladder (and this adhesion does not happen except in that one whose perineum is sound, and on it no circumcision has been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the bladder is freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to disentangle those exquisitely, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula for any cause of the head of the bladder and of the perineum, and thus it is because the perineum, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety lightly.
And then separate between the perineum and the head of the bladder with a subtle drizzle, which has already been softened in lukewarm water so that they do not adhere again otherwise.
And then it is cured with a stipetic wine until it is consolidated.
Chapter 47.
About the purification of children and the cure of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity thus like the other wounds: but however it is of our operation and of our will, and those of that are properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and a more gentle perdusion for their health.
Therefore it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use them in their writings, and it is only because they have acquired it by experiment, which cause is that they have trodden the major part of the artisans and barbers using circumcision and purification with a novacula and with torture; and they used ligament with faith and incision at the nail.
And you have already tried all these methods and did not get better, I lament that the inflammation has become worse, because many times the code of the prepucii under two tunics, and the tunic is removed, and it is forced to go to another insertion and pain surely. And in the inflammation that is caused by alphabetic, and it is digital, which uses the sabatiers, it does not guarantee the insertion of the extremity of the virile member, because it enters into its own trouble.
Maybe in the operation on the nail, it obstructs the iron and corrupts your operation. And the code of the infant is brief by nature, and many times seen in such a way that there is no need for inflammation, and you have seen that.
Maybe from the inflammation that is made by forfexs and I lament in good faith, experiment describes it to me, because the forfexs are of proportional insertion, so that the acuteness that is underneath is also as the acuteness that is above; and thus as you press your hand so proportionally on both sides, and insert accordingly with a comparison in one time; and it is made by compressing the faith in a figure containing the code of the entire partition, in which no error can be caught.
And the way of the first operation is that you make the infant stay in a major position if it is one of those who understand a little, that you do not make except to place the faith in its own partition just so, and that you let it enter into another day.
And then you will be happy in all that way which is possible for you to receive its intelligence. And then make it be between your hands well prepared, and do not let it be seen; and hide the forfexs in your hand or above the foot, so that the infant does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the partition of it and blow on the code, and pull that out so that the head of the partition is seen, and then inflame that which is added to it from the filth.
The form of the forfexs in inflammation, this is the form:
Some are external and not-taloned and the others are taloned, so that it is not seen the branch of the claw, and it is the length of the two sides equally as the length of two manual extensions.
Maybe the error in inflammation is because it strongly rejects the entire internal code, or part of it which has the insertion.
So I think that you should extend that from your hour to your nail in front of the postulation of the place and insert that according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it on your nail, then extract it in an inch and insert it.
Maybe if three days have passed, and it has inflated below the partition postulated, then you let that enter until the postulated caution is seen, and excavate that which is facilitated, and insert according to your preparation.
And beware of the head of the partition, because it will not be good for it.
And then cure that with water that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is inserted from the code above measure, and it obstructs the parts underneath, that will not harm it.
And maybe cure that with water that we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by poisons or by meat, and it resembles those things that we have said about the ways of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved in water which we have said is vehemently made into the cause of the patient, then it is necessary to administer an extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and very subtle, like a cane of palm and half a finger's length, so that it can be subtly inserted at the head of it.
And the manner of examining the urine is that you take the doubled thread and place it at the outer edge of the wool or cloth for good liaison; and insert the outer edges of the thread into the back of the syringe, and if there are any superfluous causes in the wool, then introduce it into the cane with vehemence. And then insert the syringe into the container and album of urine.
And make the patient sit on a chair, and cover his belly with a warm cloth, and anoint his navel with olive oil and other unguents.
And then insert the syringe to facilitate its entry into the root of the navel; and then double the navel above the umbilical area; and then empty the syringe there; and then empty it again until it reaches the bladder, and then the patient will be purged of the vile humor, and it is not done thus according to this order, but rather the meat in which it goes to tortuousness.
And then stretch out the thread into the small wool little by little, because the urine dries the wool.
Then extract it and make a cure for the urine, and use the syringe, do not cease to make water and use the syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient has thorough alleviation.
Chapter 6.
About the quality of cleansing of the veins with a clamp and similar instruments which are adapted to water.
When there is ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is constricted by pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is necessary to make an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
but on the outer edge of it there is a stopper, so it is closed. And in it there are three channels: two from one part, and sometimes they meet.
At the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is water that is impelled, and it follows according to the quantity that oppiles that, its addition, until when some cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what makes the clampcedra phicate naphtha in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, when you want to draw out humidities from the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw with that water which is impelled from above, because the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the navel according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then impel the humidity with water that impels it, because that humidity will soon penetrate the bladder, and the patient will quickly feel alleviation.
Form of the subtle crystallizer in which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its form:
And it is made of silver or copper, of which the head is so subtle that it resembles a small feather, and below it has a channel for introducing the ligament.
And then take the bladder in motion, and pause there the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the extremity of the crystallizer into the navel.
And then stretch out your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that that humidity has already penetrated the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of papyrus and make it into that circle; and perforate it with all its retentiveness; and then insert a strong thread into those channels, so that they revolve; and then add the circle so that it is added also to the sofatur, because you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and oils and waters.
And then you tie it to the instrument and make it like that, as if it had been made in the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity penetrates into the bladder.
Chapter 10.
About the extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division of the species of stone and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and its signs.
And we have said that the patient should be placed on a bench where they can operate on them, and it will be a section.
The prepared bench is the one that is fixed in the bladder properly.
And you will now give a clear and concise exposition and summary.
So it is said that the prepared bench is in the bladder of the patient; and of its signs it is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in this arena; and the patient's vein is affected, and many veins are filled with pain, and it is dressed accordingly; and I have seen that there is a hole in the colon of those.
And it is rare to heal the children of that age who have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in the veins. More often in the young it is mitigated because it is between those.
And about that of which the bench is bigger and the cure is less frequent; And if it is scarce, it is contrary to that.
So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that which modifies the patient with Christ's cross, which extracts all the filth that is in their sick veins; because that filth prohibits the approach of the bench, and it requires the investigation of it.
And then place the patient in their sick feet and let them be consoled and comforted until the bench descends to the region of the bladder, or jumps from place to some veins.
And then make that circle between your prepared hands, and their hands are placed under the hips of them, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the lower parts.
And then ask for that and all that is before it.
So if you feel the bench in the space, then you will soon find yourself in a section above it.
And if you don't find the entire thing in the same touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with olive oil on the aforementioned index finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if they are a young adult, and insert it into their rectum. And ask for the bench to enter until it is below the aforementioned finger. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press above it with your finger, and expel it to the lower parts before you see the place of the section.
And command the minister to press the bladder with their hand; and command another minister to extend their right hand to the lower parts above, and their other hand remains holding the code that is below the genitals, in the place where the section is made.
And then insert the spatula beneath the incident of which this is the form of it: and divide it into the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, but near the left hip; and let the section be above that bench and the finger is in the anus, and let it be a transverse section, so that the section beforehand is wide and direct according to the quantity that you will make of the bench as possible, and no more, because the strong compression of the finger that is in the anus on the bench prevents the section, and it is forgotten due to its difficulty.
And you know that of the bench there is some corner and margins, because the evacuation of it is made difficult for that.
And of that water it is like a lion similar to a ball, and it is round, and it is made of the easier evacuation.
So if it is that which has corners and margins, adjust it in the crack.
And if it is not forgotten, then it is necessary that you generate over that, or that you strengthen over that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is thus like a file on the one that strengthens over the bench, and do not evacuate from it; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
More often if you cannot reach that, then you amplify the traction a little, and if you see a flow of blood, separate it into strengthening that with glass tripped vitriol.
More often if the bench is more of one, then at the beginning you thrust your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it above it; and then thrust a little above that water; and similarly make many motions more than two.
And if it is a big bench, then ignorance is that you insert it into the big section, because it affects the patient with one of two causes: either death or it leads to the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated.
More often administer expulsion of it from the inside until it is forgotten, or generate in the fracture of it with the forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with poultices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And stop above that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil rosated and water refreshed, so that the postema can be cauterized.
Then raise the patient up onto their back, and do not dislodge the limb within three days.
And when those limbs are dislocated, soak the area in water and much oil, and then take care that it is treated with daily finicons and daily diaphoretic remedies until it is healthy.
Perhaps in the plague, it is necessary to cauterize the postema, adjusted and corroded, and of this same sort as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this the urine is prohibited (and this is known through the egress of the blood in the urine), so then insert the hot iron into the plague and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will provoke the corrosion of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the plague with wine, water and salt, and apply opposition to the entire affected area, so that it converges on the part of the cure until it is healthy.
And take care in the hours of the entire cure that you prepare both thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the midst of the bladder, and it is fixed there, and the emission of urine is prohibited, then cure that part which you recommend beforehand so that you may purge through section, for many vain attempts have been made for this cure and have been accused of section; and now you have experimented with it, and it is that you take a perforator of iron in the form of a spear.
of triangular extraction, pointed, fixed on a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie it to that part of the bladder beneath the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating with facility until the perforator reaches that stone. And turn the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you will perform the perforation of it until you make the other part penetrate; for the urine is then absorbed.
And then place your hand on that which remains of the stone from the partition before the bladder, because it is triangulated, and it is forced out with the urine, and the patient is healthy.
Perhaps if this cure does not appear to you to be properly prepared for some cause that prohibits it, then tie a thread beneath the stone, and another thread above the stone. And then enclose the stone in that bladder between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then dislodge the limb and modify the congealed blood, which is done in the plague.
And it is not necessary to ligate with a thread beneath the stone, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when you dislodge the thread, then the stone returns to its place and takes away the plague.
And therefore it is necessary for you to ligate above, so that you elevate the stone to the upper parts, or it returns to its former state, and takes away the plague thus, as we have said.
Chapter 16.
On the extraction of stones from women's bladders.
A stone in women is rarely generated.
Perhaps if there is a stone in some of them, then the cure of it is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of theirs is because the woman's bladder is very weak.
And the second reason is that you do not find a woman who knows how to describe her own symptoms to the doctor when she is cast out, or it is from women who have husbands.
The third reason is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, mainly the operation with her hand.
And the fourth reason is that the place of section on stones in women is far from the place of the stone, because it induces a profound section, and in that there is fear.
Perhaps it is necessary to provoke you to this, then take care that you prepare a wise woman who knows the art, and few are skilled.
Perhaps if you are deprived of that, then seek a wise and subtle woman who is experienced in the art, or present a mature woman who is skilled in the art of women, or a woman who has a part of the art.
Therefore make that present, and command it to do all that you will order, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that you examine if the woman's bladder is weak, then take care that you place your finger in her cul-de-sac and search for the stone.
Therefore if you find that, cut it beneath your finger, and then command it to insert above that.
Perhaps if it is not weak, then command the mature woman to insert her finger into the cavity of the patient and search for the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehends it with good comprehension.
Therefore, if you have reached that point, then cover the orifice of the bladder with a warm poultice so that the urine can flow out smoothly and freely through the passage.
And place a linen cloth over that painful area of the confluence of veins near the passage of urine, whichever part is affected, and bind the stone in that location, and make sure it does not move away from the stone.
And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the rod over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity which you think the stone will be extracted from there.
And you should know that the types of stones are many: some are small and large, and rough and smooth, and long and round, and have ridges.
So you should know how many types of stones there are in it, for what you signify about what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust the glass vessel in that location and hold it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
And make sure you have prepared yourself with the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is injured, then stop pouring powder on the location and remove those powders and structure downwards, and do not iterate this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because surely the patient will die from the illness. And then cure the wound.
Then, when the acuteness of the blood has ceased, then apply cooling compresses, and the location will heal, then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On the section about hernia and ulcer.
Hernia is not but an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane which is beneath the codename of the genitals containing the fluid, and it is named membrane.
And some veiled things are in the proper panniculus which prepares nature in the partition of the fluid, until it is clear that it is another fluid; and it is the codename of the genitals between the white membrane which we have mentioned, and it is not this but a tumor.
And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which affects the genitals, because at that point it is founded on this matter, and some veins are affected by percussion or a blow on the genitals.
And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or sanguineous, or red, or it is black and fetid, or it is whitish, and that is what is worst.
And the signs by which it is known are these: because if it is in the white membrane which we have mentioned, then the abscess is red and declining a little in length, thus forming the shape of a fluid, and it appears in the genitals, because the humidity contains all that part.
And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is red in the partition of the fluid and thus one estimates that it is another fluid.
And if the humidity is between the codename of the genitals and the white membrane, then you will find the sentiment there.
And as you wish to know the color of the humidity, then you will spread the color of the humidity in the abscess into the innermost circle of which the form is preceded; and according to what is written on the vestige of the innermost, judge that it is deduced from there.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of the iron ferrum, then cover it so that you command the patient to take flea-bane if it is possible for you, and sometimes use the cost of the pleurisy.
And then resume sitting on the two seats above some cause a little higher, and stop there for a few drops.
And then sit on the left side of it, and command the minister to follow on the right side of it, which extends its rod to one of two lattes at the codename of the genitals and at the partition of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a broad spatula and separate the codename of the genitals from my place for the length until you reach the peritoneum.
And make the section according to the rectified engagement distant from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white membrane comprehending.
And excavate that, and observe, and guard yourself for thus you do not injure that; and your excavation is the one which excavates for partition just as it is suspended in the fluid most subtly and carefully examined in the excavation according to the quantity at your possibility.
And then perforate the membrane full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And you should separate the two labia of the wound with an unciform instrument, and extend the scapula to the divided parts above; do not touch the codes that comprehend the genitals, and insert the scapula in such a manner that it is possible for you. You should insert that in its entirety or in pieces, and moderately loosen the subtle siege, for if you do not precisely perceive the insertion of it, it is not a certain thing that the water will not return.
Perhaps it is better to proceed with that beforehand in the area of its code during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the scapula, return inside, and adjust the two labia of the code of the genitals with a suture, and take care of that thus like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the corrupted humor through another bad quality, then it is necessary that you remove the vessels which are suspended, and extract the humor, and take care of that in water as we have said.
Perhaps the water is added in two equal parts, then you know that the two are hernias; therefore insert that part according to what you have done in the other engagement; and if it is your wish that it be an operation, then do it.
And you should purify the blood, and enter into the sections of the submerged wound with oil or rose oil; and stop before another submerged wound which you have in vi and oil, and expand that over both genitals and the navel of the belly; and stop above double drapes and poultices, and place those above a lien which is according to this form:
And you should press two drapes and fill the submerged wound with a carmenade structure according to this similarity; and fill the extremities which are prepared from cotton or humid linen, and add structure in the breech of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes hold of the buttock within the two, and the second takes hold of the part of the perineum, and two extremities over two thighs below and two extremities over two angles, and the entire structure is adjusted in the breech of the breeches.
And some veiled hernias are artificially medicated with a cautery in place of the section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutellar cautery and insert it into the code of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white scapula containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form: And it is assembled in a Greek letter.
And you should perforate that scapula, and ignite until all humidity is expelled.
And you should extend the scapula with unciform, and scrape with unciform, and scrape with subtle ignited cautery; and insert that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the humor that the fire does not touch.
And you know that this operation is more saving and farther from blood flow, and better than an operation on the section.
Perhaps you have made a contrary apostema cautious in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then it is necessary that you cure which contrariety makes you sick for water, with a curative treatment that is convenient to him according to what has been said.
Perhaps the patient is pauperous, and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified by you, for water that we have said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Then it is necessary that you place the patient on some elevated chair, and perforate the apostema in the lower part of the body with a broad spatula, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
And it is the wide perception until all the water is drained.
And then stop on the cotton place and lift that and let it flow, so that the remainder of the water drains. And then take care of that until the wound is healed.
Perhaps the contrariety is at the edge of the water in that hour you perforate it: and this is not done except for the reason that the white pannicle in the orifice of the wound makes a contrariety and prohibits the emission of the water, then it is necessary that you put into the wound a painful instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropits, in the preceding form; or adjust on the edge of the wound a small one.
And you know that the water returns, and it is helped with approximately six months or near those; and as it is added, then it should be perforated according to that measure and manner, because the patient will thus pass the seven days.
Chapter 63.
On the section about carnous hernia and its cure.
You know that in the section about this hernia, there is a lost fear of perniciousness in the major dispositions; because I have seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better one.
And you should remember the operation in that case and the species of the apostemes.
So, it is said that the apostemes are born in the bodies of those who are composed of them and it is done for many causes: either for an acute sharp superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or for percussion.
And it is the color of the aposteme according to the color of the body, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a severe aposteme.
And indeed it is a putrid aposteme, of which the color is dark, and it does not respond to treatment.
And some remedies are done for nodulation of the arteries, and for inflammation of those veins as well, which has already been perceived, or for inflammation of the veins.
But that which is for inflammation of the arteries is known through the dispersal of the aposteme when it seizes upon those inner ties; and it does not cover what that touches.
But that which is done for inflammation of the vein is not dispersed from any cause, unless it be compressed upon the inner ties.
And it is possible that on this species a section was made and on the other carnal parts; and it is that you should cut the code of the genitals, and then stretch the skin to the upper parts, and extract that from the white cypress, and remove the suspensors of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensors so that you remove that from all the upper parts of the skin.
So if the skin is already consolidated on those carnal parts, then it covers what you extract from the skin and insert that.
And if it is an adhesion between some cause of the cypress, or between what is between the veins, then it covers that you remove all that adhesion and insert it for a round incision.
But if it is a nativity of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it covers that you insert all that which is of it, and extract the skin thus as we have said.
So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin oil and rose water; and then take care of it in another cure until it is healthy.
Chapter 64.
On the cure of hernia that comes from vitriol.
Vitriol is an aposteme enveloped by some envelopment similar to a broth with mollification of the testicles, and it is done with difficult exercise movement and walking on the affected part.
And in the cure of this illness it is by fear for that which is preceded by remembrance.
However, it covers that I should describe operation according to what the first ones did.
And it is said that you should place the affected part on an elevated chair; and then apply the suspensors of the testicles to the lower parts; and then cut the code of the genitals in the inner ties with the veins that are probable to the verge; and hold those other ministers that you have, and extend them to vehement extension.
And then insert the spatula wide enough for a transverse section in the right of the veins until they discover the hidden veins.
And then scrape off all the affected part thus as you have said in extracting the arteries which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle in which there is double faith, and bind it to the first of the places where you have extracted vitriol, and bind another remedy at the back of them. And then insert them in the middle place for a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupt humors.
And then cure the wound with a cure of the other wounds in which you want to be healed, so that the veins which nourish one of the two genitals may not be harmed, because it is not bad for that.
But if you have extracted vitriol from all the veins, then it covers that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for that are cleared of all nourishment for the incision of the veins, and that they are stabilized, or that is cleared so that there is no juvenile movement in those.
Chapter 65.
On the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is by section that goes into the extended cypress over the belly on the part of the anguish of the miracle of the belly, so that by sending the intestines of that rupture to some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either from the cypress or from the excision of it, and it occurs to these two species for many causes: either from percussion, or from wound, or from shouting, or from elevation of some severe cause, or from similarity.
And the sign of that, when it is from extension of the cypress, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an aposteme that goes inside the abdomen for so that the cypress compresses the intestine.
The sign of it is when there is an excess of bile in the body, because at the beginning it makes acute pain rise vehemently; and it is apparent that various abscesses appear beneath the protruding codena, and this is due to the inflammation of the intestine, and thus the body is divided into parts before the onset of the disease.
Some swollen veins are outside the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernial whirlpool.
Some swollen veins are in the ventosity, and some swollen veins run through the intestine, and here it is retained, and this is a great perniciousness of the disease, and some swollen veins bring about bad pain and worsen when it is premature.
And in the treatment of the species of this disease iron is used, because it is believed that it drives out the bad humor from the body.
And the manner of operating on this is that one commands the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand at the inner parts of their cavity if they obey, and then it is invested over the hollow column between their thighs, and lifts their legs.
And then stop the codena which holds the codena of the testicles at the upper parts, and insert the codena of the testicles entirely for the length; and then fix the two labia of the section uncis according to how you intend to hold the section in those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that you can possibly do from it, then the hole may be outside.
And then scrape off that crust which is beneath the codena of the testicles, until the white hard crust of each part is discovered.
Then you insert the finger into that which holds the testicle, in that which is between the white crust, which is beneath the codena of the hole, and between the crust according to it, and absolve the adhesion that is in the part behind the hole.
And then move the hand to the codena of the testicles at the front parts, and also extend the white crust in its own sinew, and lift the hole to the crust at the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the hole downwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
And search in the fingers to see if there is no cause of the intestine wrapped in the white hard crust. If you find some cause, then you inject that into the belly beneath.
And then insert into the part beneath the codena of the testicles for the section from which flows pure blood and pure health, just as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the ligament which we have recommended (and some swollen veins of the white crust are cauterized, which we have said, and then the insertion of the temen of flux of blood, because many swollen veins occur) and remove the ligament until it falls by itself.
If the evacuation of it is delayed, then hot water should be poured in, and pause over that until it falls according to what we have said.
And then heal the plague with another cure for plagues until it is healthy.
Chapter 66.
Of Ventous Hernia.
In this hernia, it is not seen that anything has been hardened under the treatment of iron.
And the first doctors said that it is made thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is in vi; which is that you lift the veins to the section over that in fecility of the hand; and then you cut in the middle place around the abscess in what surrounds that, until the veins fall.
And heal the plague according to what we have said until it is healthy.
Chapter 67.
Of the disorder that is made in the veins.
Some wounds break open in the veins, as we have said, and empty the area.
And they do not seem to be the cause of the intestine in the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns to them in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged in this way, an adjusted fissure is made in the cystic part so that the intestine is dislodged from the cystic part; and it happens for the extension of the cystic part which is in the veins, as we have said, which causes the cystic part to be stretched out, and then it becomes mollified and the area becomes apostematous and empty.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery, as it has been described beforehand.
And some wounds are cured in this way: the patient lies on their back between the two mattresses, and then the area of the rupture of the apostemes is dried with a gentle touch according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cystic part that is under the codena until it is discovered.
And then take the radish and place it on the prominent area of the cystic part, and apply it to the navel of the belly.
And then kiss the two prominent places on the extremity of the radish of the cystic part, and adjust to the suture one with the other.
And then extract the extremity of the radish, and do not insert anything into the cystic part at all, nor extend the humor, nor any other cause, as you will have understood in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then heal that one in the treatment of wounds, and as you insert the fibers, purify that one and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the cystic part is constricted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more conducive to health.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the codena of the testicles.
Some wounds on the codena of the testicles in some men are softened in this way, because the flesh that is between them is softened, and it is necessary to observe their condition.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is responsible for the treatment of it to make the patient lie on their back, and insert the entire softened codena over the natural codena; and then adjust the two lips to the suture.
And if you want, then in the beginning, remove the excess of the softened codena with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
And then insert between the stitches; and then heal by healing of the other wounds until it is healthy and the fibers are restored.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
I know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for a reason I am led to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that it should be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in that, who knows its treatment and what happens; and the other way is that we sometimes have need of castration of other animals for our young ones, such as mules, and goats, and pigs, and similar to those animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by making a fissure with a gentle touch.
But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the animal drink hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang down. And then take those with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear to be touching anymore.
But in castration done by making a fissure and gentle touch, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the codena of its testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspensors, and insert above each humor in a gentle touch until two humors are processed.
And then insert those pus that you will have extracted. And do not leave any cause on the cystic part, but rather the subtle cystic part which is above the veins.
And this way of castration is better than that which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly leaves some cause in the testicles so that the animal desires to mate.
And then heal the wound until it is healthy.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of Hermaphrodite disease.
Hermaphrodite disease in men is according to two ways: one is because it appears in that which occupies the space in the codena of testicles, in which there are two testicles forming a figure like a woman's pelvis.
And some wounds of that kind corrupt the urine which is in the codena of the testicles.
In women, it is a special case: the conjunction of the woman on the pentenilh is like two testicles of a man with a little less in total and slightly different in shape, similar to the perineum of a man and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: of two for men and one type for women. And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted carnals inside so that they expel the impression of that, and then that you cure those wounds with treatment for other similar plagues.
And in the second kind of men, in which urine is produced in the codename of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter 21.
On fatigue and prominent flesh due to causes in women.
Fatigue is adjusted according to natural causes within, so that it is restrained and made light in regard; and some veins are magnified in some women so much that they spread similarly as in men and pervade unto the coitus.
Then it is necessary that you hold the superfluity of fatigue with your hand or with a uncle and insert.
And do not ultimate in insertion, mainly on the region of the root, so that there is no undue flow of blood.
And then heal it with treatment for internal plagues so that it may be healthy.
A born flesh is a flesh that grows in the horrific of the matrix within to fill it, and for it is placed in the parts of the mother according to the semblance of a snake (and for this reason the first appellators called it "caudal malady"); therefore it is necessary that we insert similarly as we insert fatigue, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of gout.
Gout is when the conjunction of the woman is not perforated, or it is a small passage. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to bad mixture which has preceded, and that is made or by flesh not adjusted or by subtle or specific ciphac.
And it is made or in the region of the matrix, or in its costs, or in the upper pus of it, or in the lower pus of it, and prohibits coition and pregnancy, and for it prohibits menses.
And the knowledge of that is made by regard for the uterus, if the oppression is apparent, propdan; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the ties of the finger or with the ray.
But if the oppression is due to subtle ciphac, and it is propelled to the two labia, then you touch and disrupt that.
And it is that which stops over the two labial pulvils, and then stops the fingers indicating from both hands in the same way.
And the woman is on her two knees, her two extended thighs, and then extends the two labia inward so that the subtle ciphac is broken and the oppression is lifted.
And then take an ointment and anoint the affected area with oil and stop that on the spot, and let a man do it daily so that the spot does not consolidate.
But if the ciphac is thick and specific, then it is necessary that you insert that with spatula or with a leaf of myrtle.
But if the oppression is due to fleshiness, then suspend that with an uncle, and insert it.
And these are the medicines that make cease blood flow with moderate biting, similarly as achaetia, and dragon's blood, and essences, adjusted to the white album of wolf'sbane.
And then administer a wide lead cupping so that the plague is not consolidated lightly.
And hold that for several days and administer cooling water of the third degree.
And then it is healed with another treatment of consolidation so that it may be healthy.
And some veins are born in the native matrix of other flesh, and then it is necessary that you insert according to this manner. But if it is for cancerous aposteme, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the matrix not made contrary with iron in any manner.
Chapter 23.
On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that occur in the conjunction of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins within which they flow blood continuously; and as they are antique hemorrhoids, they are made tails.
And I have said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say thus about those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tails when they are in the region of the matrix and do not appear to the sentiment, then in those there is no made cure with iron.
Those women who are in the horrible condition of being afflicted on those parts which have a sensitive feeling, thus those who are treated.
And you should place the woman in a warm bath and then extend her arms along the forks, or grasp her firmly, and you will find those in the roots.
And then powder over those wounds the flow of blood from one of the inwardly piercing powders its biting quality, thus it seems to resemble that.
And then soak the swollen feet for an hour, and then stop that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that one seize in decoction of herbs and of scorched grains and of walnuts and of similar things.
And then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and wine, and make a plaster to apply over the back of the patient.
And if the blood has been absorbed, it is good; and if not, make adhere two warm cloths, and to the affected parts their scarification.
And then take wool and soak it in juice of colic or juice of arnagloss or juice of guarrievier with wine, and make adhere to the area; and then cure the area with an ointment until it is healthy.
And cure him until he is healthy.
Chapter 74.
On the accidental perforation of the uterus in the womb.
Various special types of abscesses that occur in the womb, such as cancer and apostema lapidum and ulcerations and adherent and erpetromenous and fistulous hemorrhoids and ragwarts and thigh and other abscesses. And I have already said about these evils and the species of those and their signs and their cures in the division.
And you should know that I wrote in this treatise on abscesses about the one that occurs in the womb when it is of those abscesses that collect there, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of the iron is made.
Now you should consider if the pain of the abscess in the womb's commencement is acute with percussion and fluctuation and fever, and sometimes it inflates and presses on the sentiment, then it does not have perforation of it, and cure that one with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then you should make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back with her legs adjusted at the part below the belly, and her thighs are expanded, and place her arms below her knees, and tie something to hold it conveniently.
And then the midwife follows the direct path and administers the instrument with which one opens the horrible wound of the womb, in the form of which you will find in those causes that will be made.
And you should know when you want to administer this instrument that you place it in the right place of the womb of the woman, and what is inserted into the womb should not be more than the right place of the womb and the affected part. But if the instrument is larger than the right place of the womb, then you should know that you pause poultices on the texture of the right place of the womb so that the entrance of all instruments into the right place of the womb is prohibited.
And you should know that you pause the vertebrate that runs on the instrument of the path above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebrate until it is opened into the horrible wound of the womb.
And when the extraction appears, and it is touched by the hand and it is smooth and soft, then you should know that you separate that which comes out of the head of the womb with a spatula.
And when the sania is evacuated, then you should know that you pause in the plague a submerged mechanism in oil rosat or oil vert in which there is some stipulation; and place the calcium in the section in the right place of the womb.
And then purge the womb and above the navel a wool pad submerged in water in which there are swollen mumps.
And then it is cured in two days with an ointment that is convenient until it is healthy.
And some women are washed with the womb and the plague in such a way that it is christened in water and honey, and then in water in which there is boiled root of iris or long aristology, and then returns to the ointment.
And if the plague is deeply rooted in the wounded womb, then you should know that you are prohibited from the cure of it with iron, because you have no cure for that which we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach the midwives in what manner they should help the deformed embryos that are born against nature, according to an unnatural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife takes into account the beginning of the natural formation of the fetus, and it is so when you see the woman expressing desire for the lower parts and wanting to smell the air, and above this is inflamed because above it is part of it, and it strengthens the judgment of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the judgment above the womb's cap, and the second is in suspense or pending from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the woman's belly be compressed so that the embryo descends more lightly, because when they are above the womb's cap, they descend to it in the second stage, and it is freed from those superfluous fluids with good moderation.
Maybe that which is another part is unnatural and unlaughable, because when the embryo is situated above its feet and the body of it is situated in front of its head and its feet, and its hand is one, or at its foot. or it is situated the head of it and its hand, or at its belly, and it is strongly converted above the womb's neck, and resembling the unnatural figures of it.
It is a necessary cause that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And you show the entire figure of those, and what engine is in those so that it may be signified by them and established above them.
When the fetus is situated above the womb's cap by natural inclination, and that is vehement against the woman and makes a difficult part, and sometimes her virtue has already been debilitated, then do that cauterization, or what women have, and evaporate the confined humor of it with fenugrec oil and olive humectant.
And then insert the measuring rod between the womb's sides of the spatium petit and find another in the second stage, or dry that with its own nail into what corrodes that which is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly inward so that the fetus descends.
Maybe if it doesn't descend, then it is necessary that the woman be crystallized with a poultice of ptili and a poultice of fenugrec with cizami.
And then command it to her, and then the crystallizer, that it be compressed and do that stirring with condisi; and shut its mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will be forced out soon.
And if the two parts of the fetus are not yet fully expelled at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with facilitation little by little. Maybe if it doesn't obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet above, and then conceal the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the parts are not yet turned and the fetus dies, then insert those and extract the remnants of the fetus or tie the body to its hand with a drag and extract that with equality, because it will be forced out soon.
When the fetus is above the womb's feet, then it is necessary that you impellicize those in them, and then convert the fetus little by little, and then that you should engulf that, and then that you take one of its feet and extend those little by little.
Maybe when they are situated between the thighs, then you command it to emerge, and do that extraction with condisi, because it will be forced out soon if God wills it.
And if it is not yet forced out in that which we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little into its pause according to natural figure, because it will then be more easily judged.
And if it is prohibited to do all that which we have recommended, then take a poultice of altea and dissolved goma, and percussion all in the mortar for good percussion, and then line up that with the confined humor of the woman, at the bottom of her belly. And then make that cauterization in boiling water, until you obtain the hypochondrias.
And when the lower parts of it are lenified, then do the sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause that on it. And when you do the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make it settle on a chair, and then do that stirring and extract its mouth, and lift it from that, and press the lower part beneath its belly with gentle compression, because the fetus will soon be forced out.
Examine the foot longitudinally while holding one of its hands. Be ingenious in reducing the swelling of their hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then place the mattress on the bed, and shake her thighs with vigorous concussion, and administer gentle treatments which you have experienced and recommend for muscle relaxants.
And if the inflammation has come, then place the seizing on the celery, and study the reduction of the hand, and lift the foot according to its natural figure, and make the woman stumble and command her to compress herself until it is forgotten.
Examine the foot on the expanded joints, its hands and the surface of its mother's back. So that the midwife holds the foot's hand and then revolves it little by little, and thus facilitates that.
And when it is and how much it has been lifted, then pause on the joint of their hip which we have recommended for oil and muscle relaxants.
And then command her to massage little by little, and when you have done that, then place the seizing on one celery and command it to be inclined over the right side, and then command her to be compressed; and make her stumble in condition. The prepared fetus exits onto the side.
When the mother's horrific state is seen according to this method, consider, and then you will insert your finger into the second vagina until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of theirs, then you will insert that of the embryo, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then you will apply the foot to the inner parts deeply until it pauses according to what is desired, and command the woman to compress herself with some veiled words, and it will be forgotten in the examination of the doctor, if God wills it.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. You know that many veiled words are born naturally, and some words are not born three or four, but it is strange and bitter to understand; but I know the causes are not natural, and I do not live.
And count those, already it is that they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by cipher, distinguishing those that enter the ligament in the navel of each of those; some veiled words are forgotten thus as a fetus for natural examination, and so some veiled words are examined for unnatural examination thus as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to cure due to the devil's influence and come to what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you will care for them thus as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what facilitates and subtlety, and takes time, and be ingenious according to the entire figure as it is prepared for the ingenuous coming to health.
Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some wounds are formed on the hand one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more, and I have often verified that a woman aborts in seven, and another has all forms, which causes it to be done for measurement of the glorious savors.
And everything is covered because it is in the science of the midwife that they have strength to give birth to that small thing, and therefore stop at what I know.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you care for the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not contrary to the examined, and you are forced to use opposite operation on the hand, then it is covered that you consider if the woman is of healthy virtue and not among the accidents for which there is fear of loss.
Then it is covered that the woman lies on the bed on her back, and her head is inclined downwards and her thighs are elevated.
And the minister holds that of two parts or is tied to the bed so that the body of theirs does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
And then you will anoint the mouth of their mother with olive oil and mucus from altaea and fenugreek and semen of them.
And put the matrix on her hand with those oils and emollients, and put it in the middle to facilitate the movement in the mayor, and approach close to the area where the veins are located in the feet.
In convenient places there: then you consider if the feet are prepared to be placed above the head of the bed, and then you place the veins in the heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or in the beard, or in the armpit, or in the proper places of the ribs, or in the hypochondria.
Maybe if the deposition is above his feet, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the vein in the right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and put the hand in a facilitated position and place the vein in some of those places which have fingers, until we reach the underlying cause.
And then pause and place in the application of another vein, or the third if it is necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its rectitude only.
And thus the entire part is affected, so that the deposition of it is alleviated also as it is done in teeth, to achieve the eradication of it.
And it is necessary in that water which is between them so that the extension is mollified; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary to put the matrix under some fingers with oil and to anoint those expertly and revolve around that water which is retained.
So if the part of the foot is forgotten, then the veins are permuted into a place where it was not put before; and do so until all the foot is forgotten.
Maybe if the hand is ossified from the other, and it is not possible to reduce that by the contraction of it, then it is necessary that a bandage be enveloped over that; and then extract that until all is forgotten, and insert that or in the joint of the hand or in the hollow.
And thus it is necessary to make points on the other hand and on both feet.
Maybe if the head of the foot is large, or it happens to contract in the ossification, or it is in the head of the adjusted water, then it is necessary to put between the fingers spatula-like spines and break the head and extract the water, or that discovers with an instrument which is named "alundat", the form of which will be seen among the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is about to come.
And similarly it happens if the foot is of large head by nature: and then it is necessary to insert that with an algometer, or to take that with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is ossified and contracted from the armpit, then it must be opened until the humidity which is in the feet is eliminated.
Maybe if it is not complicated, nor ossified, then you insert the head as soon as possible according to your situation.
And if the deposits of the stomach are apostemated or are in the hydropic, then it is necessary that you perforate that until the corrosion of the humidity which is in it.
Maybe if the feet are above the shoes, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mayor is lighter.
Maybe if it is contracted from the stomach and feet, then it is necessary that you extract that with a bandage which you have enveloped over your hand, and that you open the stomach and feet until the corruption of what is in those.
Maybe if the other members are stopped and turned the head, then the matrix is put in the left hand; maybe if the mouth of the mayor is opened, then you put your hand in the prongs of the chair, and approach that to the head, and attract it with the fingers until the mouth of the mayor, and then put it in one vein or two veins, and attract it to those.
And if the mouth of the mayor is contracted by apostema, because it happens to the urine, then it is necessary that it not be troubled over it; before then it is necessary to administer an infusion of humid, greasy causes. And administer emplasters; and follow the patient in waters that mollify and humidify.
And if the feet are above the side of the rib, then if it is possible, it should be agitated: and administer what we have said in the living foot.
And if that is not possible, then it should be inserted in pores, and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave any underlying cause of the disease.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of the apostemas caused by the mayor.
And if there is an abundance of blood, then apply compresses in strategic places and administer another cure.
You have already seen a woman with a dead fetus in her womb, and then apply a warm poultice over that area, and then apply heat to the dead fetus itself. It happens that you have applied a long time of postrema in the swollen belly; and swell up inside so that the womb opens, and begin to make a grasping gesture.
You were called to cure him, and you treated him for a long time, but the plague is not consolidated.
Then you should pause over him because of certain causes of strong attraction, and take out one of his bones, and apply a poultice for several days, and take out another bone; and you were too marvelous, as if there were no bones in the belly.
And then you thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Then you understood the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in the many disposed milky breasts, and already visited in such a manner for a long time, correcting one of his little arms.
And you did not find it strange, but rather that it is science and help to what the artificial hand of the doctor has for administering cure.
About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of vertebrae in which the matrix is opened:
This is the form of a stretcher on which the books are placed, to which stretching two vertebrae in both extremities of two feet. I will empower this vertebral cavity that it be made more subtle by the stretcher, and be made of ivory or wood of boxwood.
And it is the width of each wood that has two inches and a margin of each hand that has one inch, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle place of the two woods there are two adjustments of that same wood which were already fixed, of which the length is a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two inches, or a little more.
And these two additions are introduced into the mouth of the matrix so that it is opened among those when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Another form similar to that one, made more subtle and lighter:
It is made of wood of ivory or boxwood according to the similarity of forceps. I will empower it at the extremity of his body with two additions like this, and the length of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two inches.
And when you want to open the matrix, then you make the woman sit on a sheet with her feet hanging, opening what is between his thighs. And you will place your hand on the instrument like this, making a grasping movement according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the matrix, until the measurement is made so that you want.
The form of vertebrae which the ancients described:
Form of a propeller in which the fetus is propelled:
Form of an amulet in which the great head is contained:
And it is assembled like forceps which bite into the extremity, thus many times, and some poultices are made long thus like forceps according to this form, thus many times, which bite thus like the teeth of a saw in which it is incised and contained. Form of a small amulet:
Form of a hook having a spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities in which the head is separated:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All those instruments are exercised, and when I multiplied the species of that one and prepared them by the artisans, as it is lighter in its operation and more suitable for the men according to their quantity.
And do not reject those instruments already, because they are necessary for you to prepare, since the necessity of those is inexcusable.
About the extraction of the secondine.
When the secondine is retained by the enfantement, then it is necessary that you command the malady to retain its siege, and apply to make that stirring in condition, and strengthen your hand over his mouth and over his nostrils, and if for that reason it is deformed, well it is.
And then, you take a sponge and pierce through the covering with a tube and pause in that herb which opens the mouth of the matrix, thus like calm and rough and anet and chamomile and Arabic scammony and cassia lignea and santal. All these herbs or some of their kind are submerged in water in the sponge, and pause that over the flame.
And then pause to insert a tube of cane into the mouth of the mother, and hold it there until the vapors go into the cavity of the mother.
And then make that stormy thing calm down as we have said, and the second serum will be quickly administered.
Perhaps the Roman method is not effective, then you order the matron to submerge her left hand in oil of sesame or in a mixture of other herbs, and then insert it into the container and heat it in the second container, and when the aura is found, then take it out and extend it little by little. Perhaps it is annexed to the womb of the mother, then insert your hand afterwards as we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little following the rectified method so that the mother does not feel the vehement attraction. Before covering, make sure that the right and left sides are facilitated.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have not recommended the treatment with stuttering and medication of the wound with herbs.
Perhaps it is not forgotten among all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue over that in iteration of abstraction, perhaps however it is clear that what has been emitted from it into the mouth of the mother lies in the cavity of the woman, and then crystallize it with gum and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it dissolve in a few days and will be forgotten.
Perhaps when it is purified, it is of the elevated bad odor at the head, and in the stomach, and that leads to the illness; and then it is clear that they have been administered sub-fumigations and conveniences accordingly.
Perhaps some of the Ancients already used sub-fumigation of nitrate and dry figs.
Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, avoiding retention of menses and of the second one.
It is made of glass or of copper.
And the subtle extremity is paused in the container and the broad extremity is above the focus, and the sub-fumigation is paused over the arms of the focus.
And hold it there until that sub-fumigation is consumed and then another one will be made.
Of the treatment of the unperforated anus of the infant.
Many infants are born with and their anuses are not perforated, which have a subtle and obstructed siphon. Then it is clear that the matron should perforate the sieve said siphon; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and beware that you do not touch the ligament.
And then pause over that woolen thread infused with wine and oil; and then cure it with gum until it is sensed.
Perhaps you fear that it is obstructed, then pause in the trajectory a caneula for many days, and wait until the infant wants to evacuate.
And then obstruct the anus for consolidation of plague or of abscess; then it is clear that this consolidation should be incised, and then cured with what we have said about the treatment and of the poultice.
Of the treatment of the fistulas that develop below.
The fistulas that develop below the perineum push downwards with a node and grossness, those which develop near the anus beforehand or in the space of one part.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that node is ancient and corrupted by the agitated white humidity or subtle pyridura, and some veins are derived from these fistulas, some penetrating.
And those penetrating ones are known for what has been emitted from them through the egress and ventilation; and some veins use the bad egress, and they have been emitted from those worms.
And some of those fistulas have derived veins in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some of those penetrating ones into the junction of the thigh and into the node of the coccyx.
And that in which the penetrating fistula is known into the anus and non-penetrating, it is that you put the tie said endic in the anus, and then insert a subtle tent of copper or iron in the fistula when it is not tortuous.
Perhaps if it is tortuous, then insert a subtle tent of lead or horsehair into that, until you feel the tent or hair in the said tie.
And if you do not feel that at all nor does it proceed from the trajectory any cause of egestion or worm or ventilation, thus as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then abandon the treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the significance of it is emission of urine from that and prohibition of it to such that the place in medicine is consolidated.
Most penetrating pain enters the joint of the hip or into the bone and causes pain in the circle, then it is understood that the tendon is pierced through here if not broken into the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the part; and that the patient's eyes are cloudy at times; and that this medicine does not work, nor is it consolidated with a poultice.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is troublesome and vain effort by doctors regarding which they are firm.
Maybe in that which is not penetrating and not chronic, health is iron firmness spread according to what you have to recommend, and that which you have and proceed.
And it is that the patient goes between their own hands over the back of them, and raises their legs towards them, their thighs are inclined towards their belly, and then insert a lead or iron tube, or if it is in the broken fistula, until you know the place where the tendon pierces.
And if the patient feels it around the ankle, then cover that you insert your finger pointed in the ankle.
And if you feel in the pointed finger the tendon already pierced and discovered to penetrate, another thing that you feel between the pointed finger and the skin or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not trouble yourself with that, because there is no health in that, just as we have said.
Maybe the Emperor's doctors said that some remedies are healthy for some people who are bitter.
And the medicine for which you hope for youthfulness in him is that you ignite subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, just as it is preceded, and insert that ignited thing into the fistula until it reaches around the ankle; and then repeat it two or three times until you know that all those adjusted, fistulated meats are like a feather of a bird.
And then heal those calf muscles wrapped in bandages until you can adjust all those meats that are adjusted, and then heal with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
And if the tendon goes in, and does not penetrate into the pointed finger which is in the ankle, and between that and the tendon that is only a small piece of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula is in what is the surface of the codena, then dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see the tendon, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the tendon pierces, and by the tendon is freed and healed.
And then cleanse those fistulated meats which are like a channel of bird's feather and do not break away from any cause.
Maybe it flows many times that comes between you and your operation when you dissect those meats, then the thousandth time that is and of the pus lesser instrument is to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because cautery with fire adjusts good habits: so it is adjustment of those adjusted meats, and removal of the blood's excess humidity.
And then heal those calf muscles wrapped in bandages or in tight bindings until the place gets strong, and then heal the wound with hard flesh that engenders and consolidates.
And these medicines are those which are stipulated and excess is removed; when then it is restored, already it is healed and does not fear relapse.
Maybe the fistula has already pierced into the ankle's surface and is elongated from the skin's surface of the body, then insert the pointed finger into the ankle and examine it thoroughly.
And then if you feel the tendon and it is only skin or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation on him except by way of trust and hope.
The cause is to administer in him one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you reach the cavity of the ankle so that it is possible for you to insert the fistula and the proposed cure; and do not process more than the drying, so that you do not irritate the contained fluid in the ankle, and that you ascend upon the patient's consent of their own free will; and then heal it as we have said because it is strong health; or to elongate the skin and remove the pus that dries it until near the ankle, as we have said, either with a tendon or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then cleanse those fistulated meats which are in the drying until one can make a crust; and then strive to do the restoration of all the wounds in the drying, and if the pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the ankle, and it will be lesser for the patient. And the fistula is finished according to this method: it is when you insert the tendon into the fistula, and it is in the ankle's surface around the body's skin with the codena and on the edge of the ankle, then take the tendon of perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the veins according to this form.
And if you insert a finger into that closed space of the intestine or hernia, and if you insert it deeply into the fistula so that you can feel the cavity of the patient.
Maybe if you penetrate the margin of the anus with your finger, then you extract the intestine from that narrow passage and you insert your finger into the anus; and you extract the extremity of the intestine and adjust both extremities together, and stretch each one, and leave it like that for a day or two, and when you feel the intestine in the flesh, stretch well so that those parts are inserted which are between the two extremities of the intestine and fall.
And then cure the wound so that it is consolidated and healed.
Maybe if the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way, so that you are prepared, but do not move in the pressing, because it is not for you to do that lest you injure the liver; and then make it so that it is healed.
The shape of the splint for the spine is such that it is bent towards the fistula: its curved part is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that you do not injure what is not necessary, thus sometimes.
About the stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows into the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are treated in two ways, either they are between the buttocks, seemingly like charcoal, or those that are with a layer of rough skin. And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them at all times and it is one, and they are moved, and they are outside the anus, and in their extremities.
Maybe those that are outside the anus are treated according to the measure of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood constantly, and it is according to the color of the thing.
And the treatment of that which is deeply in the anus is that you order the patient to sit down and to exert themselves inside so that the anus opens up and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take hold of them and suspend them in an unción or you keep them on your fingernail, and then you cut them off at their roots.
Maybe if the nails do not hold onto them due to their humidity and softening, then take them with a rough cloth or a knife or a woolen thread, and extract them from their roots, and then you cut them off and powder over them some hot powders, so that they adhere to the place of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterizing. And then heal them with another treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not obey the exit, then you cristalize the patient in cristals where it is slightly numb, and wash them with that water which is in the anus and which helps the exit more easily when the patient exerts themselves.
Maybe if the hemorrhoids are in front of the anus, then the cause of them is easy, and it is that you take hold of them with your fingernail, or that you take hold of them with an unción, and cut them off, and then heal them with water as we have said until they are healed.
And that which has an incision, it is necessary to administer stitching of them according to this method: take a wrapped intestine and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the above-mentioned parts, and make it penetrate with the needle in the root of the other part, and wrap both extremities of the intestine around the part below the needle; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then sew up the intestine and extract the needle.
And make it whole, and leave one of them open and do not close it, so that the superfluity of blood flows from it.
And then pause on the anus with a cloth infused in rose oil or in wax; and pause it on the anus and order the patient to rest. And then leave it until it scars; and when it falls, heal them with an ointment or another treatment until it is healed.
And since they are antiquated and do not have value in that medicine, then it is necessary to root them out with the point of a splint or with your fingernail until they are made humid and held back by the escar, which prohibits their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Then you remove them with a root extractor, vigorously, at first until much blood flows and they are excavated; and then heal them until they are healed.
You know that piles, this is clear, and it is not if you do not notice the redness according to the color of the body, resembling a head of garlic, and it is made in all the body and mainly in the parts below the feet and the fingers, and it is caused by those painful humors.
And then it happens that the nail has grown into the circuit of the claw, and has held onto the forked [fork-like?] or hooked [uncial?] part, and has been eradicated from its root; and then take care of that.
And if you want, cauterize the following segment that is located in the seventh chapter.
More of a true eminence appears as a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and many veins come out in the hands of children.
And the cure of it is to extend and insert that, or to stretch that with a file or with a pelt entering into the cage. And if you want, cauterize that, according to what we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
More of a ant-like eminence appears as a small, rough, gross fistula on the surface of the body, especially in the groin, and when it touches that, it is centred in the semblance of morbid formation of anthrax, and it is situated around the body.
And the cure of it is to take a caneula of pea of owl or of pena of voltor, and make it strong, and place that over the anthrax until it contains the circle of the caneula with its parts; and then revolve your hand in the caneula until you insert what is in the circuit of the anthrax, and place that in the groin of the flesh, and eradicate the anthrax from its root.
And if you want, make that with a caneula of iron or of ironwork according to this form:
The lower part of the caneula should be subtle, solid (not perforated), enveloped in such a way that on top of it the absorption of it is abolished and the revolution of that.
And if you want, cauterize the anthrax according to what has been said before in the chapter on cautery of atheya.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give crystallization.
Some veins are made crystalline with silver or gold or iron founded or molten; and some veins are made from those small and large instruments according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and of those whose veins are fragile or delicate, the crystallizations of those are small.
The form of large and small crystallization:
The head of the caneula at the bottom where the bag is tied should be wide according to this method; and it should be distinguished there where the bag is tied, thus sometimes.
And the extremity of it afterwards, which is inserted into the anus, should be solid (not opened) like a lion, and subtle; and on one side of the latz there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel is according to the greatness of the roots and thus bigger one small.
And the bag in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin, and its root should be a palm.
And it should be perforated for many channels thus as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the channels is too large.
And then insert into those channels a strong thread of crude iron which is of ten threads, or around those; and adjust it to the bag; and when it is placed in it the bag, it should be stretched at the head of the crystallization between two distinct and strong constrictions, and then crystallize in each channel: More, the quality of crystallizing in that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and elevate their legs up high and place one cord above them on which already are the homes or a lancet; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or similar; and then insert that into the anus to facilitate, and then the minister takes the bag and extracts it twice or thrice with vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine all that is in the crystallization; and then extract the crystallization and the patient lifts their legs up high to the wall.
And if the medicine forces out that excess, it holds as much as it can; and if it sleeps for an entire night, it is more beneficial in juvenation.
More, if you crystallize that in the maladies of solution of belly and evacuation of it, then you iterate the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are emorrhoids or apostemes of painful wounds, then it should be crystallized with subtle and gentle cautery, among those crystallizations which children are accustomed to.
Of the cure of plagues.
I have already said in the division of the cure of plagues what is convenient to the book, and I have said thus the cure of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, it is said that wounds are diversified according to whether they are caused by cold humors and according to the location on which the wounds occur.
And the causes why many wounds are caused by cold humors are so gathered together from pebbles, or incision of space, or cutting of a strip, or percussion with a lancet, or with a fistula, or with a sagitta, resembling those of many causes.
Many wounds that are in the places of the body are also like a wound that bites on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the thigh, and resemble those of the limbs.
And I strongly recommend the cure of some wounds because it stops that rational thinking and rule over the other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, because the recollection of compound remedies will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, it is said that when simple head wounds occur and are not fractures, then consider: if they are due to pebbles or resemblance, and you have already wounded the code so much alone and it is a great wound and you fear about that aposteme caught by the patient, then you should quickly cure the cephalic wound, and do not delay; and extract from the blood according to the quantity of its virtue if there is no prohibiting cause for phlebotomy, especially if the blood that exits from the wound is little.
And it is phlebotomy of the contrary part of the wounded limb; and beware of the patient's relapse and of vicious and gross vices.
Many times, because of the minor prohibition, then it is diminished by the vice and does not approach flesh nor vice.
And stop on the wound, if it has caught an aposteme, as it becomes inflamed with olive oil or wine in which it is steeped.
Many times, if it is certain of an aposteme caught, then stop on the wound, if it is recently with pure blood and the air has not moved that powder which I recommend to apply little by little.
And if the air has already changed that, then stop on the ulcers and poultices until it is healed.
Many times, if the wound is great or is due to incision of space and resemblance, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pustules, then adjust them with suture according to what I recommend about the suture of those.
Many times, if the wound has been discovered on the bone and skin, and it is not retained by it except for a small suspensor, then incise that and apply careful cure to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh almost in place of the code, and command the patient to be cautious of vices in which there is grossness: caps and forms are joined together resembling those, until it is composed.
And if you find putrefaction in the code and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that rottenness and remove it, and apply careful cure to it.
Many times, if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which flows blood that may come out, and it is not absorbed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find it not incised, then you incise it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if necessary, provoke what we have said does not conflict, then you cauterize until the blood is absorbed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; in this way that you powder over them with this powder, because consolidated there before the air moves them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of oil of juniper, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of unextinguished causes; grind everything thoroughly and sieve it, and from that let the wound be filled, and let it be constricted by good constriction until it be on that adheresca, and let it be coagulated with the blood.
And you strengthen that beneath with pules and lift it, and do not dislodge it while it is thus, so it does not become apostemed, because it is not eradicated from the medicine until it is healed.
And some wounds make that alone with a sole cauterization, when it is not at your presence in juniper and dragon's blood.
And I do this same operation in great wounds when it is convenient to stop on them and they are stretched, and the recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not intended for the position of this powder, but rather cure those with what we have said, thus that you stop on those ulcers and poultices digested, or stop on those pores of the flour of the ordinary bread with water and honey until they get purged; and apply careful cure to them with another careful cure until they are healed.
Many times, if it happens on a fracture wound in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with gestures.
And you must direct the treatment of fractures of the head in that which is incoming.
Of the sores of the neck.
But if the sore settles in the neck, then it is not different in medication, and between the sore of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerves of the neck are cut or constricted, then it is nerve damage, not in the engine but rather it must be avoided and cure of the limb that makes vehement stiffness, thus as wine and vinegar that seem to help and appear similar to those nozes and contractions. And do not stop upon the sore for any total cause of all fever, because the substance of the nerves is fever and its continuation is in the brain, which is the source of all the members.
And if it is that which is cured by gentle medicines, thus as it is caused by washing with warm water, some infused oil in rosated or non-rosated, and this when washed with warm water and the other minor pains are diminished according to this manner, and humidity is induced.
But if the sore is great, then administer a suture, or bind the lips of it, and then take care to apply powder inside so that it may be healed.
But if the sore is deep or reaches to the lowest part of the putrid flesh, then pierce it in the place most depressed.
But if in the sore an artery is cut and a flow of blood is consequent, then separate or dry it, or bind it, or cauterize it if necessary to provoke a stop to it.
But if you have cut the vertebrae of the throat or all, and so saved the veins of the neck, then adjust the lips of the codena with a suture over the cane of the throat and do not touch it; meanwhile equalize it and return it to its natural figure, and then strengthen it in decent structure, and leave it for some days; and then take care to induce humidity in which there is stiffness and excitement until it may be healed.
But if the sore has formed an abscess in the bone, then pierce it, and then if there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can from there; and what you do not apprehend, leave it until the sore may ripen, and be separated and the edge of the bone may be alleviated.
And if the sore is recent then powder over it with the powder that I have recommended to you. But if in the sore there is formed a fistula, then take care of it with the water of which I will remind you in the seventh chapter.
If it is a percussion of a lance or of a knife, and sometimes of its depth, then consider that if the sore has been infected when the patient was weak; then you will know that the sore is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the sore is recent with seven bloods, then you stop in it at the first hour of powdering, and do not strengthen it because the blood may be retained in the depth of it and return to the heart and afflict the patient, but rather pause in it an attractive humidity, and dissolve those two veins on the same day.
And if the humidity is not present to you, then pause in the orifice of the sore as much as possible so that it may suck out what there is of humors; and make that the patient sleeps on the sore so that it may run what is in it adjusted.
But if you see that the sore has passed three days or more and does not affect the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart nor constriction of wings, and sometimes other good dispositions of it, then you will know that the sore is saved; and then take care of it with warm compresses and another cure until it may be healed.
But if the healing of it is exhausted, and already all time has been occupied, then you will know that a fistula has formed; take care of it therefore according to the seventh chapter.
And if the sore is by incision of a spatula or of a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then take care of it with water that precedes suture, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has formed an abscess in the bone, and then you have cut out pieces of it, then twist the sore and collect to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them until the sore may ripen, so that the extraction of them is alleviated.
And of the other accidental sores in the other members, the treatment is the same as what we have said.
Of the sores of the belly.
The indisposition that affects the belly is either great, or small, or moderate.
And the disruption of the small intestine is a difficult fault for another manner, and it seems that the reduction of theirs is more difficult, if you do not quickly counteract the introduction of theirs to their proper place, because it swells and becomes grossly enlarged, since the instrument of theirs is faulty and difficult.
And therefore the lesser disruption is better, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
And we know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common which are convenient for sutures of the other wounds of the body.
And two other proper sutures communicate with the other wounds, but especially they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to each one an exposition and declaration.
Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is some cause of the intestine for that, it is very difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by shrinking of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has been inflamed by the coldness of the air.
And therefore when it is so, then you should scald that in this way, that you submerge a humid sponge in lukewarm water alone, or that you cook in water with cypress, and spice, and embrocations, until the inflammation of the intestine is resolved.
And some wandering veins make it clear that there has been stipulation, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And therefore when the inflammation is resolved, then you should humidify the intestine with water in which there are cooked altaea and malvas, because by that the instrument of theirs is alleviated with little cause.
But if it is excused from the instrument of theirs next to this cure, then you should divide the disruption into a small instrument in which there are inserted emollient roots.
And the primary cure is better, when it is proper that there is no section, and there should be no occupation to section or fall into defect.
Of the instrument, thus you see the form of it:
One part of the sharp-edged cutting instrument, and the other part not acute, and the subtle extremity, and it should not be in the subtlety of a spatula, unless it is obtuse by a little.
And therefore when the wound is amplified and goes outside the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the form of its natural, in its proper place, if it is possible above all, because better is.
But when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs more upwards than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you pause the head of theirs and the feet more downwards than the parts below.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should pause your attention and consideration at all times on this, so that the part in which there is the wound may be more upwards than the other.
And thus it is necessary that you administer this in great wounds and in lesser wounds.
And in small wounds, pause what is prepared for you, and prepare to make the minister among your most skilled attendants, who holds the entire disruption with his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and prepares to discover from that to him who knows the suture of some cause or another.
And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or counts the number of stitches according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and prepare to release the extremity of the disruption with the ring finger, and strengthen the needle once, or you do not put faith in the two extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the ciphac which is below the cord of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added the two extremities of the cord and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so make four orders.
And prepare to strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some wandering veins of two parts together, and prepare to add the two lips and the wound for decent addition; and prepare to release the grossness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and prepare to tie it with faith as you did with the first needle; and do not cease from doing this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the entire contraction of the wound.
And thus the lesser needles are between groseziness and subtlety, because the subtle needles move more easily in the flesh; and the large ones are of difficult instrumentation in the cord, and therefore it is necessary that they be lesser in subtlety and largeness.
It is not good that the needle is stuck in both extremities of the spine, so that the flesh does not become inflamed quickly and the wound heals before its consolidation.
They are not prolonged with stitches so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
And then insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not loosen the patient's sleep; and place powders expanded from all parts, which hold the extremities of the needles; and thus you will know that the wound is already consolidated.
And in these species of stitches with needles, it is more convenient to use them in small wounds, because they have been fixed with a single needle or two around those.
Moreover, the second stitch is communal: and it is that you administer stitches to the four extremities, of the spine and two extremities of the hip, at once, with a needle in which thread is wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle to that same part from which it began, so that the thread retreats in a subtle way from the wound, so that the stitch is according to the stitching of fabric with which the fabrics are strengthened.
And stop between each stitch the amount of thickness of the small finger's mending.
And this stitching is known to men.
And in this stitching I sewed up the wound which was inflicted on a man in his left belly, which had been wounded by a knife, and it was a disruption of the major wound of about a palm, and it was about two palms from the intestine near the navel, and it was a disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I sewed up that part where the intestine had been outside the wound for 23 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or around that, and I cured him and he was healed; and then he lived for many years, and it was converted into his natural dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that he could not be healed; and by a miracle it was done, because I did not cure him with ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was not effective nor any medicine, but I placed a compress on the wound for many days and nights, and I applied assiduous ablution with honey water until he was healed.
Moreover, I described two special species of stitches according to the narrative of Pareula.
And it is that you begin with stitching on the spine, and you insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And then as the needle penetrates into the spine and in that same place it is rectified and lengthened throughout the whole body, and thus the extremity of the hip is where you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the thigh.
And then when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another way in the same extremity of the thigh from the front part to the back part; and thus the extremity of the hip is in this layer, and make the needle penetrate from the back part to the front part in the other extremity.
And make it penetrate there your penetration, in which you make it penetrate into the hip in the extremity of the mirror, which is in the part of it within, until all that penetrates.
And then it begins from this same side and sews that extremity which is of the hip on the other layer, and extracts the needle from the spine which penetrated, and then returns it to the spine and body, and the extremity of the hip which is on the other side in this extremity of the mirror; and extracts it from the spine which is part of it.
And make it one way and another, and make it one way then another way until you collect all that is before according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of stitching is that you collect stitches of pellicles in which you collect the skins, thus that you collect the hip one way from the part of the extremity of the spine, and that you leave another way until it is completely joined.
Moreover, the second species of proper stitching which Gualia recommends, and this is from serum of it and for its recommendation, it is that you collect it according to similarity with which doctors collect it, thus that they add all parts to their compared part conveniently by nature; and they apply the extremity of another to the mirror's extremity to another extremity of it, and this is done according to what I have recommended to you.
It is good that you place the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your propension from the front part, and make it penetrate to the back part on that sole, and leave two extremities of the hip; and then return the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in two extremities of the hip.
And then you return the blood flow, and make some penetrating points on the affected area inside to outside on two extreme parts of the mirror image, other than those in the opposite lateral areas.
And this manner of suture is better than the common ligature, and it is a suture about which I previously mentioned remembering.
This is the serum of Gualia
And the dissected ulcer, the abdominal suture is rectified with two needles, so it is that you introduce into these a few threads, and begin with an introduction of needle from what you have, and make them penetrate inside the other lateral area according to the suture of those which sew up the hollow places.
And you know that when disruption is in a middle place of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than those of other places of the abdomen.
The judgment of medical treatment for plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
The cause is that when you recently contracted the plague with bad blood, before the air altered it, and reduced the intestine and sewed it decently, then paused over that carnal powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that ulcerated wound which is present within so that it makes hard and dry flesh, and consolidates the ciphac and mirror; and then heal it thus as is the healing of other plagues until it is sanitized.
But if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that for the time being, because it begins to take a break, much effort, and exchanges those two vegetables daily, thus as you and teach, until it is sanitized, because you do not need other medication in many disposal positions when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague communicates to the principal members, then cover that you submerge the woolen cloth in oil of triple quality, or in oil roasted, and pause it in the circuit of the places that are between the veins and joints.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the small intestine, because many vegetables are needed, then crystallize that with six stippled black tar, and it will be better if the powder is pervaded into the intestine and makes a penetrating exit into its cavity.
And you know that what is of the large intestine is of more ligature sanity than what is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult sanity because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive sanitation from plague that falls into it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and due to its magnitude, and due to the subtlety of its body, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is the web, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your correct treatment with which you reduce the ulcerated intestines.
But if it has passed to the space and already is green or black, then you stretch it with a thread over the place that is denied of it, so that healthy fluxes come, because in the web there are veins and arteries.
And then you insert what is another ligament, and pause two extreme parts of the thread pending from the affected area below the plague ulcer, so that on your part there is alleviated the attraction of it from the web's emission and breakage of the plague's branch.
Remembering the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, for thus because you saw that which was plagued in the upper abdomen with percussion of the lance and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its gestation and ventilation.
Therefore you understand the healing of it that was not confused in its sanity, but rather you continued to subtley introduce it until it is sanitized and the place is consolidated.
And you then saw that the place was consolidated, and you thought about the patient who encountered an evil accident in the upper abdomen; and you did not encounter any evil accident and remained in their many dispositional manglings, and you entered into a bath and it is exercised in its own ditches.
And you have experimented with ulcerated experiments that when an ulcer occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then cover that it is tied according to this manner: and it is that you take threads of large heads; and then adjust the two labial lips of the ulcer and pause a thread from those that has its mouth open over the two labial lips of the ulcer; therefore when you take hold of these and stretch its mouth, you remove the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then pause another thread for the primary way, and do not cease from making threads one by one according to the quantity of the entire ulcer.
And return that plague; and remove those adjacent parts from the intestine so that the intestine may be healthy; and do not aggravate the patient's discomfort with unnecessary movements.
It is possible that the intestine may be lightly tied with subtle threads, which are made from the intestines of beasts, since it is more in harmony; and you should take the extremity of those subtle threads of the intestine, and make them not too thin, and tie the extremity to it with a thread, wrapped around, and insert that thread into the hollows and thus into the intestine, and return it to its proper place.
And this manner of suturing with formiculas is not based on confidence and hope alone.
But if the plague is great and widespread, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, then it is not just a slight injury, but a complete disruption of the entire intestine.
About the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
You know that every plague and aposteme, when they become inflamed and old, it is called an ulcer, and if it is not consolidated and healed for a long time, then, in whatever member it may be, it is universally named fistula, and we call it that abyss.
And fistula, according to truth, is a nodulous, hard, white and painless formation, which is conquered in the same way as it is conquered by the pain of the abscess; and for this reason it is named "rizatus", that is to say, pain.
And it is in a moist ulcer, which gets worse; and for a long time the moisture is absorbed in certain hours. And some of these moistures are thick, and they are few, and they are large, and they are subtle.
You have already shown all those causes, and the signs of those and their treatment with medicines in the division.
And thus you have done it to make you know the treatment of fistula, which is done by way of operation with a hand.
And you know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; because among those are fistulas that penetrate to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the diaphragm, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and among those that give proximity to the principal member and similarity.
And therefore that of these fistulas which is according to this manner is one of the evils of difficult healing, and does not receive treatment, and occupation with it is trouble and ignorance.
And if it is one of the fistulas at a depth that does not penetrate to those places that I have said, and you hope and confide in its treatment, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with steel, and if the fistula goes straight, and you acquire it in the hand.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead probe, because lead in the elevation of the body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
And if the fistula has many horrible openings, it is not possible for you to signify over it with a probe.
Then crystallize the openings for their own openings, because the moisture through which you crystallize that goes away from the other openings and corrects them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves, and it is the conquest of the long-distant fistula or propinquous, or it is a fistula with many openings and this is all about your total strength, in your introspection, in which you introspect the evil, and the invention of the pain away from your compression on the hand over the location, and similarly to the signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
And since you have stood over all these causes in a stationary position, then go to the treatment with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty location, distant from a joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or of veins, or of one of the places which you have and said.
When you dissect the fistula according to what is said about the narrative of the patient, and you see that it is in that filtration and corrupt flesh, and that which is born from the orifice of the flesh, or of the vein and of similar things, and cure that interior so that it may be healed.
Perhaps the fistula is of long and profound depth, and it is according to rectitude, then you should cut into that in the surrounding area as much as possible, and thoroughly clean that from all its corrupt flesh; and administer wrapped bandages with acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which has comprehended amidst the iron.
And do so that some vegetable remedies enter into the acute medicine to corrode all that which is rough in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it may be healed.
Perhaps if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Perhaps the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to certify that, then you should inquire into that and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member thus as we have said.
Perhaps the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and blackness, then you should scrape that thoroughly so that the corruption may be held entirely; and then take care to encarnate it with what will make it healthy.
And if it is not healthy and throws out arm thus as it was doing, then you know that you have not attained the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again secondly and exquisitely the reason for it and the purification of it with the last strong fortification, and then restore it.
And so if it is healthy, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the profound depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you should not generate anything but leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract that, then you should extract it with subtle forceps which are convenient for that.
And if there are many bones, then you should exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and of those do not leave any cause in your fortitude.
Perhaps if you have made opposition to some cause of the humidity, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then you should dissect those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and remove the bones.
Perhaps if you have not prepared to remove the bones of your hour, then pause over the plague that may worsen the plague, and leave it until it is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the plague that may not be consolidated, and the section which you have made in your operation may be constrained.
Meanwhile, if you fear, pause over the submerged bone above the tristful oil, or submerged bone in Egyptian angular vertebrate, or in some of the green vertebral angles, because when they will pierce those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and from that attraction is alleviated.
Perhaps it is a large bone thus as the bone of a chamber or thigh or similar to those, and that which is corrupted is the face of it so solitary, then scrape that with resolution so solitary finally until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the plague.
Perhaps that which is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and entirely dissect into the place where the corruption has arrived, and then take care to consolidate it.
And I recommend to you that which arrives at home in its thigh so that you pause that and exemplify and assist over your operation.
A young man of about xxx years, to whom pain occurred in his thigh, and from the parts of his injured hip it is above the matter that affects the body until the matter reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of apostema with great apostema, and I do not find an extrinsic cause.
And then I extended the time with that for the error of the doctors until the apostema was opened, and I corrected the matter of the moved materials, and its cure was paused until the thigh was fistulized, and they were in the motif of the orrific tissues which all got purified and the humidity of the body.
And then I, a multitude of doctors around for two years, and I did not find in those wise men anything in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of it and the materials that flowed from it, those orrific tissues for a great body; and already the body of that man was entirely stabilized and the color of it was citrine.
And then I inserted the tent into one of those orrific tissues and reached the tent to the bone.
And you have examined and scrutinized all the orifices and thoroughly cleansed those that come out of all parts of the leg.
Then you have touched and felt around on one of the orifices that enters to uncover a part of the bone, and you have probed that corrupted place, and it was already decayed and corrupted and blackened; and it was already corrupted in a part of the leg where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then you have cleared away what was discovered and prepared from the uncovered bone.
And you have judged that it was not in the bone but that corruption which you had cut away and cleared, and you had already destroyed.
And then you have paused the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
And then you have iterated and uncovered the bone again according to the primary discovery, and you have found continuous corruption in the bone.
And cleared away what appeared to be that corruption, and then you have tried to perfect the cure of it and the restoration, but it has not been restored.
And then you have discovered it again and did not cease to investigate the small bone little by little particularly and perfect the restoration of it, but it has not been restored until you investigated around an inch of it, and that extracted marrow from it, and then you have restored it with medicines, and it is consolidated and healed completely.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and sectioning of it except for the disposition of its fragility and scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it accelerates at all hours due to an excessive evacuation syncopation malfunction.
And so it is healed entirely, and nothing remains in the place of hard carnal flesh; and it is well-disposed in its own body and returns its virtue; and it is converted into its own dispositions and does not make any contradiction in walking nor nuisance in any cause.
Maybe it is the bone that emerges in the place of the body already torn apart, then it is necessary to sew up that second wound in this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that emerging bone, and command someone to extend it in its own; and pause that ligament of wool which is thicker than the primary ligament; and then bind it over the flesh that is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts beneath, and you discover the flesh over the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not harm the flesh.
And pause or place a table beneath the bone decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to saw so that it does not cut into the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary to saw over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, and forces a second sawing.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not emerge, therefore it is one continuous part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you discover the entire flesh; and then pause the table beneath, and then saw that from the primary part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
And the sawing is according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, you investigate that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in its nature.
And if the corruption is in the cavity of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, it is necessary that you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and that you grasp it, and mend it according to any disposition which is possible for you, and in case something is not rectified for you, when it does not make contradiction or nervousness.
And you know what instruments are necessary to saw into these bones, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; because it is necessary that you prepare a whole species of operation and convenient instrument for that operation.
And you know that this operation signifies to you the species of instrument which you need; when you have great study and long experience in the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of maladies, because then you have them for yourself to measure what is convenient for all maladies.
And you have formed in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with as simple as those which proceed to your prohibition, which you have experimented on the others. Form of sawing:
Form of another sawing:
Another type of great wound:
Form of a crisis: It has the head of this crisis according to the form of the head of a star-shaped nail, and its points are according to the form of the points of a fleur-de-lis.
And it does not converge unless that crisis is broken with the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Form of a minor razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another wound decently made: it is made with an arc of its pus above and the sharpness of its iron, and the member of its boys decently made below. Form of it:
Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Form of a small razor resembling a probe:
Form of another minor incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a crisis, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Form of a crisis that converges to a ratio of that which is perforated through the bones:
And its extremity is triangular and of sharp extremity.
And it is made of iron from India, and similarly covered that all the causes that we have mentioned about razors and incisors and saws.
About the incision extremities and the sawing of the bones.
The extremities are weakened either due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not concur, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which does not perceive any cause, then it is covered that you incise that member within which the honor accuses the corruption, so that the evil escapes through death or malice which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that one to which it happens, is that the member becomes black within until it is judged that fire has already burned, or it is weakened near the blackness within which the weakness enters into that member which is its own and which takes all the body; and therefore you will find the incision of that one.
And similarly if it is a cause of corruption perceived by certain venomous causes, such as scorpion's sting or viper's bite or rue's and similar things.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters into the hand.
And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you incise that from the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm of the arm.
And if you find that, then incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause in cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly it happens to the foot when corruption reaches the toe of the foot, then you incise that up to one of the nails.
And if it takes hold in the skin of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. Moreover if it spreads into the knee, then you incise the leg up to the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then in that case it is not possible to do anything except to dismiss, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you stretch a ligament in the affected part below where you want to incise, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, even if it is hidden, until all the flesh is discovered; and then it is incised or sawed.
And it is covered that it has been placed far from all parts so that it does not touch the area there, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and the abscess is carefully opened.
Moreover if it happens to flow with blood when operating, then you cauterize the area carefully, or pause with some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
And then bind the member plagued with a ligament at a convenient time, and cure it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his own foot, this kind of accident which you and I have recommended, which is four times likely to happen to the blackness in the foot at the adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
And that corruption affects primarily in the sieve-like tissue between the toes.
Then that man prepares himself to put the remedy on the affected member with the vehemence of it, so that he attracts away the pain and discomfort of it, and inserts that foot into the joint, and it begins to heal.
For a long time, that corrupting disease had been affecting his hand.
And then I came to myself, and I began to thoroughly purge that superfluous matter which had accumulated on my hand through the medicines, according to the purification of his body; and it did not retain the superfluity and began to pass into the other joint until it began in the hand.
And I applied myself to insert my hand into his, and I did not want to do anything that would hinder the purging of that superfluous matter, and perhaps I should have waited for the insertion of his dead hand, because the virtue of the remedy was on the point of being lost.
And since he departed from me, he returned to his own land and it became clear to me that the man had prepared and inserted his whole hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narrative except to be of assistance regarding what is written about this illness, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is operated.
About the treatment of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When abscesses occur in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is evacuated from it, and one finds the place where it was, as if it were void, and the cord that is above it like a subtle drain, and it does not reach the inner corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
Perhaps instead the space is prolonged until the corruption penetrates into a certain member, then it is called fistula and not sinus.
And the treatment of it is that one inserts the entire cord thus as it revolves, and especially when it is subtily drained and made like a subtle drain, and one makes sure that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
Perhaps you think that the cord will adhere and that corruption will not have been achieved by further consequence, and in the cord has spread from head to toe, then you treat that with a syringe.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm which you have is of fetid odor, then you syringe that with Egyptian medicine oil, which is of olive oil and vinegar and zinc, receiving divided parts equally, and they are adjusted in a vessel, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes red and penetrates to the affected part.
And then you take of it what is necessary and dissolves the arm in water and honey; and syringes the arm into that sinus, and strengthens its orifice, and leaves the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
And then you extract that arm with precision; and do it for so many days until the sinus is purified and the putridity is removed.
And some vegetables are syringed with water of ash, when you do not have this medicine present; and it is that you take the ash of vitriol, and mix it with the water; and then you collect that and syringe it into the arm until you confirm that the sinus is then closed.
And if the patient does not have tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of ash, then you syringe it with water and honey and zinc mixed together, and you syringe it with vinegar and honey mixed together, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleans, and the vinegar makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the vinegar there is superfluity of stypticity and dryness.
And when you do this with some vegetables and you confirm that the sinus is already removed, then you syringe it with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of the dyaphenic unguent and dissolves it in oil of rose and vinegar stiptic; or that you syringe it with some medicines and other unguents that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on unguents.
And if the orifice of the sinus is straitened in which the cannula of the syringe is not received, then you amplify it with iron little by little, and pause in the calque enveloped in Egyptian unguent or in basilicon unguent until it is amplified.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it to suture and leave a quantity in which the syringe is introduced.
And if the orifice of it from which the arm is elevated to the upper parts, then you dry it in the pus below the place that is in it, so that the arm may flow into it, because when the arm is constricted at the entrance of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered in it.
And if it is not possible for you to drain the sinus within the environment of the lower back according to what you wish, then perforate so that you prepare the member in preparation for which the corridor flows more lightly according to what is apparent and that no cause of the arm remains retained.
Those that are on the orifice of the sinus, which remain there for a whole hour so that you extract what is adjusted in the arm. And to know if what flows from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or not digested.
And also you consider the place of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the matter that is deposited on the orifice of the sinus has already adhered, or it has proper adhesion, then you may dissolve it on the third day, and when you dissolve the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the joints.
But if the sinus has a subtle virus in it, then do not despair of its adhesion, because health is being prepared, because some homes are in those which delay the generation of flesh in the aforementioned plagues, and of those that are in those where the opposite of it is done.
And if the sinus has many days of indigested arm, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried also with the joints of the divine confection, when it is in the adjusted superficies of additional zeal.
And the last thing in which it is cured, is that you take of the divine confection and dissolve it in rose oil, and put it on the wounded area with its own substance, and then comfort yourself with that, and use it.
And it will seem similar in that action, when there is no arm, divine confection, but rather it is caught within so that it is absorbed, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them, and sprinkle all over the mel which is under the focus, and then smooth it out over the cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; and then smooth out that over the mel which has been caught within so that it is absorbed, and sprinkle over the cloth and strengthen it.
And some weeks you administer it in the long aristology and roots of heavenly lilies (and they are heavenly lilies) and ferns of errors and centaury, and use those simples or adjust them, sprinkle them and grind them over the mel which has been recommended; and take advantage of it.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the marrow of it, and it makes inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with a fistular cure, as has been said before.
Of the cure of paralysed hands and worn-out nails and incision of toes added to the section.
Paralysis is an abscess that sometimes occurs on the finger or toe of the hand or foot, and it strongly affects the other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less prepared, either it is abscessed by a cautious abscess, or it is corrupted, and it throws out arm inside so that it corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all of it, and it perverts its corruption to the bone inside so that it has a foul odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and the color of it becomes darkish.
And therefore when you will have that which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you insert iron all over the superficies that remain of the nail and cauterize the plague properly, because cauterizing is not helping in this way.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail grow back together with the flesh at the partitioned places, and they begin to form a pungency and lead to that, then it is necessary that you pause subtly under the angle of the nail that forms the flesh, and impel it onto the bone and insert it into the flesh to facilitate, and place it over what remains of the flesh of the medicines that burn corrosively so that it is all removed; and then cure that with divine confection until it is healed.
When corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary to extract the bone and remove the decayed part, because at no time is it healthy for the corrupted bone to remain within.
And if sometimes the corrosion and decay spread to the finger, then you cut off that from one of the nails according to the measure of its memory, and afterwards take care to heal what is inside.
But if the nail ends in percussion or attrition, and ends in that vehement pain, then it is necessary to begin to fleubotomize the patient, and afterwards to cut the nail with a spatula-like instrument transversely from below upwards, and be careful that the cutting does not penetrate into the flesh that is beneath the nail, lest you aggravate the patient's vehement pain, and will be the cause of the superfluous production of abnormal flesh in the location; and afterwards take care to heal that place with water that relieves pain.
But said adjusted, which is born in the marrow of some men, for it is entirely carnal, and entirely so in the bones, or entirely so in the nails.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in some nodes of the fingers. But that which is born in some nodes of the finger does not get worse, and this that is born in the joints is entirely bad.
And of those that are born fleshy, the cutting is easier, and it is necessary to cut off that which has its root with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its amputation.
But in that which is born in the fingers with nodes, it is necessary to cut off at the beginning the flesh of them with a round incision into the bone, and afterwards to close with one of those convenient sutures, and afterwards take care to heal what is inside.
But consolidation occurs when it happens to the fingers among the worn-out joints or by birth of the man who is thus, or by consolidation of a wound or by combustion of fire, or by resemblance; therefore it is necessary to cut off that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And afterwards pause between the drapes of the inflamed joints with rose oil so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them, or place between them a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in the nodes of the fingers at the palm, then you cut off that consolidation according to how it is prepared and conforming to the shape of the limb.
Of cutting of veins, they are varicose.
Veins are varicose, and they are gross, swollen, full of melancholic superfluities which come from the members of the body, and the greatest misadventure of them is in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Therefore it is necessary to administer purification of the body from black bile accumulated in worn-out joints with strong expulsion, and afterwards to bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
But the cure of their iron ferments is in two ways: one is that it be cut off and the black blood be attracted, and the other way is that the vein be elevated and all be extracted.
The cutting of it is in this way: at the beginning, inject warm water into the leg until the gross blood is resolved, which is filthy in the leg, and afterwards strengthen the patient's leg to the superior part of the thigh up to the knee, and afterwards cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three with a wide incision, and afterwards elevate the black blood in its own tie above the knee, and from below upwards, until the quantity that you want is extracted, and which tolerates the virtue of the patient.
And afterwards bind it, and command it to abstain from the black choleric winds that generate.
And continue the cure by fleubotomy when the veins are full and water does not reach the patient.
But the elevation of them is in this way: you raise the patient's leg, if it has many joints, and afterwards put it in a bath and inject warm water into the leg until it becomes red and the veins are exuberant; or exercise strongly, if the bath is not at your present, until the limb is scaled.
And afterwards cut the cord in the right of the vein for cutting in the loin or in the back of it below the knee, or in the lower part of it at the ankle.
And afterwards uncover the cord with an incision and thoroughly clear the vein of all parts until it appears to the sense, and it is necessary for that which sometimes declines into blackness.
And therefore when you evacuate and clear the cord, you will see that white thread which was a cord.
And then you place your hand under that area where it is elevated and turned away from the spine, and suspend that in an inclined position with one finger.
And then you section another section there for three digits, and then you scrape the spine from the top of the vein down to where it appears.
And then you elevate it and insert it into the rear section of the ankle, and then you extract it and elevate it until it is freed through the second section, and then you extract it from the section that is above it.
And make it so that you extract it from the section that is above or below all the sections, until everything is freed; and then you insert it.
And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then introduce a strong double-threaded needle and tie it and extract it, or introduce underneath the radius and rotate your hand on all parts until it is grasped. And be careful that it is not inserted; because if it is torn, it will be difficult for you to elevate the affected limb and it will come back over the patient for that injury.
And when the entire affected area is freed, then pause over the place of the wound with lanolin submerged in wine and rose oil and non-rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the life is constricted having twisted to the one that is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what we have said, then it behoves that you confine upon that entire part of twisting of it and the places of its envelopment, and then suspend it with an inch until it elevates the entire thing.
And beware that your section does not insert the vein and does not injure it, because it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your prudence in this.
Method of incidentally piercing the life-giving vessel:
It is not to the accustomed finger thus with the fingers nor of sharp extremity so that it does not injure the vein; and it is of coarse flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein due to its subtlety; but instead it has a superfluous coarseness thus as we have said.
On the extraction of the veins of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in dry and cold lands, just as in the land of the Arabs and in the lands of India, dry and arid with little fertility, and in which there are neither herbs nor trees.
And it is often generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from beneath the spine, just as venomous dents are made in the body of serpents and worms and scarabs and worms generating between the spine and the flesh.
And the sign of the suspicion of the advent of it is from this vein that causes inflammation violently in the leg; and then the place is blistered; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that blistering, which seems to sprout like a plant.
And then it appears that the extremity is covered, so that you envelop it with a piece of lead of which the weight of one drachm is inside two drachms, and afterwards suspend the lead from the leg.
And as many times as the flow of it from some cause to the affected parts beforehand, you enfold it in lead and leave it. And if the motion is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and enfold the remainder; and do not insert it by roots until it is fully freed, because if you insert it, it is constricted and enters into the flesh and causes apostema and pus in the place and bad ulceration.
Because it behoves that it be treated gently and be extracted little by little, until it is freed from the root of it and none of its cause remains in the body.
And of this vein it is said that some men are in their longitude of 5 palms and of 10, and already I have found one that has reached 20 palms.
And if it is inserted at the time of its medication, then introduce the radius into the trajectory of it and perforate it with a long trajectory in the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medications; and then cure it by curing apostemas.
And this vein sometimes has many ramifications, and increases especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to its many horrific ramifications, and is said to be from some horrific root.
And then cure it thus as we have said in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
On the sections generated under the skin and it is called cow's disease, or bovine disease.
This disease is named in some land as our bovine disease, because many ramifications come from the veins and it is a worm that is born between the spine and the flesh, and goes throughout all the body, weakening and debilitating, and shows the sentiment of the sick animal, member by member, until it disarticulates the spine and comes out.
And the generation of it is due to putrefaction of certain humors, thus accumulating worms and serpents and roundworms in the belly.
It is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and is poured into the vein, then it strengthens the umbilical region in it and destroys the veins, and that ends with worn-out movements.
And so when you want to cure it and extract it, then it cannot be done unless you have the certain ambulation and application of it to the sentiment, and therefore it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with ligament and strong constriction, and then you will extract it from above it and pull it out.
And if it has penetrated into the flesh and does not come out, then you apply a cautery iron to the area until it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the limb, which corrupts the area as we have said.
Perhaps it has penetrated to the head near the vein, then strengthen above the eyebrow with a strong structure, and then extract it; and it is necessary that the patient use medications that evacuate putrid humors, and beware of foods that generate putrefaction.
On the treatment of sudden feverishness.
This disease is named "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that appears in certain members, and then it spreads from member to member.
And I have already seen that according to what I recommend to you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the superficial vein of the arm, and after it had been warm for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away like a worm disappearing, more quickly than it would be possible for it to be, as if it were silver, I saw how it went from place to place.
And then the pain remained in that place and settled into the muscle, and then I stayed there for an hour.
And then I ran to the other side of the body until I reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to myself that I should turn it around the whole body according to what I had seen; and it was too marvelous about the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member. And I had already seen that in my own veins according to that manner, however I have seen many things which cause pain to be transmitted from member to member. But I did not see it in the veins as it was in the woman.
And I did not think it was that unless it was because the woman was of vile nature, with dry body and uncovered veins, and in this way it appears to the sentiment that altered viciousness is transmitted.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retrograde action in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with veins that are weak.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear at the vein as we have said, then you strengthen above it and let it slide gently and settle over it until that altered viciousness is driven out, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not find it in your own veins, then you cure it by excision of the body and with what expels viciousness, and burn those foul pills and pills of serpent's skin and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they fall, because their diversity is that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and rough ones, so they are solid; and of those with three angles, and of those with tongues; and of those with astelas (probably a type of arrowhead).
And of the signs of the arrow's effect is when it strikes into the brain, and crosses the bone, and is situated in the cypheac which is above the brain, because it accumulates with vehement soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the veins, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and the voice is absorbed and the speech is destroyed, and it is situated in the place of the humid white wound similar to a boil, and it seems to be affected by the flesh.
And so if you appear to be without sensation in your legs, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the blood, if it is not outside.
Perhaps the veins of the blood when they are in the heart, so that it is near the mamilla on the left side, and it seems that there is a fixed cause due to hardness, and it is not a vain cause; and for them the movement of the blood seems like the movement of the pulse, and corrects the plague of black bile, and dries out that coldness of the extremities, and frees the flow, and synchronizes; and so you know that death descends to its entire depth.
And the veins when the blood has infected the lung and makes spumous sputum of the plague, and the vessels that are near the collarbone apostematize, and the color of the patient's skin is changed, and they exhale great spirit, and demand attraction of fresh air frequently.
And if the blood is in the wrapping which is in the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes great anger and vehement pain and breathlessness, and it does not move all the members of the muscles.
And if the blood is in the stomach, then it makes the eyes of the plague victims look towards some kind of indigestion.
And if the blood is in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, eyes show some sign of the plague, or the fabric, or hernia which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the treatment of its extraction.
And if the blood is in the bladder, and it is obstructing the urine, and it processes some cause to the previous parts, and it makes pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Perhaps the other members are also affected like the face, the neck, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the hips, and the vertebrae of the back, and the ribs, and the leg, and their similarity to the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the blood does not attract a vein or artery and is not venomous blood.
And I recommend to you that you have seen the essence of these bloods, so that they signify something about the treatment you are undertaking.
The cause is, because in one case the blood flows from the lacrimal duct of his eye to the radix of his nose, and I extracted it from him to another part, leaving the gray matter of his brain, and it is healthy, and does not happen in the eye of his document.
And I extracted another blood from a Jew whose blood flowed into his gray matter of the eye, behind the eyelid and also behind, and the blood was hidden and not found in that except for a small extremity which adhered to the wooden stick, and it was a great blood of the acute bloods of the Turks, like iron leon in which there were no golden threads.
And the Jew is healthy, and it does not happen in his eye a bad accident.
And I extracted another blood from a Christian whose blood was fallen into the gullet, and it was Arabic blood, and it is that which had golden threads; and then I inserted it between two guiding channels, and it was submerged in his gullet; and then I subtly drew it out, and I extracted it properly, and the Christian is healthy.
And I extracted another blood from a man whose blood was fallen into his abdominal cavity, and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore, since he had passed thirty days and did not change regarding any of his dispositions, I inserted it into the blood and engaged with it, and he is healthy, and it does not happen to him a bad accident.
And I saw a man in whom a blood flowed into his back, and the plague was consolidated over him, and because he had lived about seven years, I extracted the blood from the radix of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom blood flowed into her abdominal cavity, and the plague is consolidated within him, and it did not change in his dispositions indeed, and the woman does not attract document in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man in whom blood flowed into his face and the plague was consolidated, and they removed the blood, not attracting here much pain, and many similarities to these.
And I extracted the blood of the man of the princes of the king which was fallen into the middle of his nose and had declined to the right side a little, and all the blood was hidden.
And I was called to treat him immediately after the falling of the blood within three days.
And then I attracted the plague of the blood very strongly; and then I inquired about it with a subtle touch, and did not feel it; but I felt it a little behind the right golden thread, and then I suspected that this point was for the extremity of the blood.
And I applied the remedy to the place where it was attractive and digestive, trusting that the place would be appeased by me, so that it appears to me as the place of the blood, so that it succeeds over it.
And the pain does not occur at the significant accident site where the arrow has reached; and you will continue to apply the plaster on it for many days without an accident occurring; and the plague is consolidated in the meantime, and the patient's extremity is freed from the extension of it for many days until one day feels the arrow in their nasal passages and reacquires that to me.
And then you will apply the acute corrosive medicinal plaster on the plague for many days until it is opened, and you will attempt to remove that, and you will treat the extremity of the arrow's subtle point, which adheres to the foundation.
And then you will adjust in the opening of the plague for that acute medicine until it appears visibly to me the extremity of the arrow, and I will pass the time for that space of time until four months.
And then because the plague is amplified, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I will maintain that, and do not obscure the judgment, then you will no longer subtly ingratiate and ingeniously work on that in many ways of skill, until one day you begin to descend with forceps skillfully, according to how you will find the form of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then you will restore the plague.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you will restore it and the plague is consolidated, and it is healthy through entire sanitation, and it does not bother them in any case.
And you recommend to yourself the quality of extraction of certain arrows because it pauses that rule and significance about what has not been said, since the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend those freely.
And the artisans know how to compare few about many; and it is present about what is absent; and they seek a new operation and novel instrument to remove the descent of the external causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore you say that arrows are not forgotten in the members where they are fixed, but rather according to two manners: either by attraction of the location where they enter; or by contrast with the other party.
And that which is forgotten by the location where it entered, or it is an arrow proceeding from a carnal location, and it is attracted and forgotten.
And if you do not obscure the judgment of the hour in which it happens, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes healthy, and its attraction and egression are alleviated.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone and you do not obscure your judgment, then leave it for some days and repeat that in attraction and motion on any day, and already it is forgotten.
And if you do not obscure your judgment for some days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the entire party with subtle travel until the location is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
Moreover if the arrow is already embedded in the location of the body, and it is embedded in the sentiment, then you will inquire about that in tension, and if you feel it, then you will attract it with some convenient instruments for its attraction.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the plague and the length of the press, and here there are neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you will feel over the plague until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if you have the auricles which are held, then you will deliver the flesh in which it is fixed from the entire party with all the ingenuity that you can do; and ingeniate about that, if you cannot operate on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the auricles and in twisting of those until it is obscured.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, then you will use a twist of your hand with forceps on all parts until it makes that obscure; and subtly remove subtle subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
If you cannot stand on your own hour, then lie down for some days until the parts that are in your circulation can recover, and then attempt to move that joint which has been alleviated. Perhaps you have made the contrary flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about the cure in the seventh chapter.
And guard your virtue of insertion of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer ingeniously in every manner possible to facilitate the evasion of the arrow; and make that which is facilitated and tranquilized and delayed and firmness thus as you and your recommendation.
And thus you make the arrow counter to the disease, so that the patient is according to the figure according to which they receive the removal of the arrow in them, because it is more youthful. Perhaps that is not possible for you, then you administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Perhaps the arrows that are forgotten by the contrary of another party, or that they have proceeded to some party from outside, or have made the extremity of the arrow gibbous by sentiment of the party above the code of propension and sometimes that eminent; then you section about that; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then you attract that, because it is made lighter to the judgment.
Perhaps it is retained in the bone, then you twist the lame according to contrary flow until the arrow takes root in the bone, and amplify its measurements, and then extract that.
And so, leave that for some days, and then attempt to move that joint until you are healed.
And if the residue of the arrow is in there, then you remove it from the body.
Perhaps the residue has fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then you introduce and into that, if it is dull, strengthen concavity for the purpose of entering the cavity of the body with the point of the arrow and then remove it from the body.
Perhaps the arrow is concave, then you remove it from the body with strong instrument entering into that, because the arrow is alleviated by that.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then you should hollow out all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then cure that with what is convenient.
And if the arrow is lodged in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is near for you to touch that with your hand, and it is possible for you to section about that, then section about that and guard yourself from insertion of vein or nerve, and extract that, and then heal the plague if it is indigent, and cure that until it is healthy.
The type of forceps with which the arrows are extracted:
Thus, the extremities of theirs are like the beak of a bird that are made sharp when they take hold of the arrow so that it does not slip.
And of those, there are many special types, large, small, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of its slight weakness, and of the amplitude of the plague, and of the constriction of the body.
thus like a radius, in order that the entrance of it into the arrow may be alleviated in the concave arrow and is impulsed with that.
On the phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy, which customarily run to be phlebotomized thus... of those that are in chapter 16. There are two pulsating veins which are near the aurelia, says Galen; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guideges that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are beneath the tongue. Perhaps the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are thus. because among them is a cephalic vein, and it removes the wild lactation; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is dull, and it is a medium-sized vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic vein; and the people name that "vein of all the body", and the basilica is a vein which is placed in the wild domestic lactation, and it is named "citillar", and the commoners call it "vein of the belly"; and the funis of the arm, and it is placed above the focus, and it is that one which is phlebotomized, and it is that one which appears above the thumb for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein which is between the said auricular and the small digit, and thus in both ramps.
In the foot and leg there are three veins; one of them is beneath the curve of the outer thigh of the wild boar; and the second is subtle, and its place is beneath the thigh of the domestic boar; and the sciatic vein, and its place is beneath the thigh of the wild boar; and in the leg there are other similar veins to those.
The youthful arrangement of the veins that are close to the ears is to counteract ancient and migrating ulcers and sores on the bad heads of old people.
And the quality of bleeding from those is according to what you have recommended to you: it is that the head of the patient should be raised, and the head of the patient should be rubbed in the occiput, where the two veins are, with a gentle friction; then strengthen the patient's seat with a bandage between which appears the two eyes and their places close to the ears in two predetermined places on the head; and if you feel the pulse of those in the said place, then it is a sign.
Then take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then introduce it beneath the vein in the hollow of the knee so that the flow of blood comes out. And then lift your hand to the vein and the hollow of the knee at the upper parts and incise the vein in an incident angle. And let the length of the incision be two fingers' width adjusted or around that; and make the flow of blood as much as you wish.
And then strengthen the poultices and apply them to the wound so that it heals.
And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
More of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the youthful arrangement of phlebotomy is an ancient and badly governed and persistent eye disease and body of excessive acute overflowing fluids in the wheels.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what you have recommended to you: constrict the patient's seat with a motive towards appearing the two veins at the sentiment for apparent manifestation and demonstrate the pulse of those in the said place; and then it is a sign.
And then lift the hollow above the vein to the upper parts in the said place indicated, and introduce the phlebotomy incidentally beneath, and lift the vein upwards; and incise it thus as you have done on the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then release the constriction of the patient, and pause for an hour on the vein, and then pause on that spot with poultices and strengthen it from above with a strong constriction, and apply it so that it heals.
And now the reminiscence of them is preceded, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
And so the youthful arrangement of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient evils of the face and for migrating and rough and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended to you; thus it is that the patient strengthens their seat with a bandage between which appears the vein; and then take the instrument which is named fossor, of which this is the form of it.
Pause at the eminent point which is at the head of the fossor on that vein and pierce it with a prick or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it so that it heals.
And some veins are opened in phlebotomy later, however it is not covered that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity thus as the other phlebotomies, unless it is of a delicate extremity, and phlebotomize it according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and strongly treads on it in the phlebotomy when it is subtle.
More of the youthful arrangement of the two veins that are as lacrimal of two wheels for scabies of the wheels for roughness and fetidness in the wheels, and for the evils of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you stand still over the head of it.
And it is done phlebotomy according to the transverse at a length of a few fingers in phlebotomy a few, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strongly tread on the extremity of it is wounded.
And then let the blood flow as much as you need, and pause on that spot, and strengthen it for a night, and then release it.
More of the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conducive to acute fever and violent sweat, and to the evils of the face and migrating roughness that occurs in the face, and worsens when it is ancient.
And the quality of the bloodletting of the patient is that the patient's vein strengthens the right eye and then you take the subtle vein under the tongue and place it in the middle of the nose on the right side, according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the sensation here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Collect the blood that you have drawn from the small vein little by little and let it flow according to your need; and then leave it alone for a new night, because it is restored lightly.
The juice of the bloodletting of the two guiding veins leads to a constriction of the wings and commencement of the leprous disease, and to many evil ulcers, corrosive and also herpetic.
And the quality of the bloodletting of those is that the patient strengthens below each vein in the column with a ligament; and it is the artificial devices on top of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then bleed the vein at length with a small bloodletting little by little; and then extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what is needed, as it is seen that there is need for it; and then make similar to the other vein.
And then release the ligament and strengthen the two veins in a mild stricture so that the patient is not affected, and lay him down at night because the wound is healed.
And the juice of the bloodletting of the Algerich veins causes small apostemes and pustules on the mouth and corruption of the gums and evil ulcers and fissures, and to evil ulcers that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
And the quality of the bloodletting of those is that you make the patient cease within you, and strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then revolve his lips and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is for the blackness of each of both, and it is because in the circuit of those small black veins; and therefore you will inscribe each for an incidental inscription.
If you have doubts below you, and do not know which one is of those, then you will understand the inscription of the greater part of those, and of the most manifest part of those.
And make similar to the two veins that are on the lips above.
It is because of the two veins that are below the tongue, the juice is then the bloodletting of the cephalic to prevent those that are in the throat, and to evil diseases of the uvula, and to evil diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of bleeding those is that it follows the patient between his hands within the sun, and raises his tongue, and looks below the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to blackness.
And then bleed each one; and beware that you do not exceed your hand in bleeding those, because below those are arteries.
And the veins that are bled in the body are those in which it is customary to correct in all homes, and the bleeding of them is done according to two manners, either by putting on the subtle bleeding mirror or olive oil with declining subtlety; or by anointing with bleeding cutlery, and applying to the needle, and this is their form.
It is the side of it also as times, and converges to open the concave full veins proceeding with apparent grossness, and to those that contain gross turbid blood.
And this bleeding is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and converges to the bleeding of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
It is because the juice of the bleeding of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the evil diseases that are below the throat and neck, and from there it seizes the chest and belly.
And it converges to the bleeder, when bleeding that one, that he should guard himself from that and be above-fear in that, because below it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts at the point of the bleeding, he will inscribe that artery and cause flows of blood, so that he knows not to bleed that with a pungent bleeding, unless it is sectant with the needle.
And if the basilica does not appear for manifest appearance, then it is known that you should leave that one and that you move to another, or that you seek some other vein; or that you bleed at the end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and search that one with a needle, just as we have said.
If you want to perform the phlebotomy of the patient's thigh, then place a strap around the structure of the arm that touches the area inside so that you can constrict the area of the pulses, and apply a bandage over the arm and tighten it in a concave manner next to the phlebotomy site as we have described; and be careful not to cause a percussion on any space of the artery.
And when you do it, with the strength of the ligament, an inflammation occurs at the site where you have tightened, then that inflammation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if the blood flows in the phlebotomy like the aurora of an infant, and the blood is subtle red, then you know that it's from the blood of the artery; and then you touch and pause the string mentioned above for a long space; and apply the mentioned string, and if the blood is absorbed, because many veins are absorbed, then you tighten the arm and release it.
And beware of the patient's mood, and be above-temperament with them and do not upset them for several days until they are healthy.
But if the blood does not absorb, and it seems that you do not have a present medicine for that, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of the patient is constricted, and the blood is absorbed; or take a thread of fistic, and finish that, and take one vein and tighten it over the site of the vein with a descending structure next to the ligament and pulpils until another day.
And then if the blood is absorbed, it's good; and otherwise, then cure that with water from which it is preceded by the remembrance of the site of the powders that absorb the flux of blood.
And the absorption of the patient's blood is difficult in many dispositions for the small site of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
But the dark vein phlebotomy is a juvenation that extracts the blood from the subterranean part of the head and the lower part of the body; therefore, because it is composed of branches from the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have described.
And beware the phlebotomist that they are above-temperament in the phlebotomy of the patient, because below that is a nerve; and then if you adjust on the puncture of the phlebotomy and touch the nerve, it will cause stupor to them, and healing is difficult for them, and far from being completely healthy. And this nerve has many veins appearing at the sentiment; and if it is hidden for several hours and is subtle and does not show, then beware that you pause the phlebotomy in the way you phlebotomize in a concave manner, and avoid the nerve with your forcefulness.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you finish the vein in its length.
The juvenation of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the illnesses of the eyes.
And beware in this proper manner, if you want the phlebotomy to puncture an olive phlebotomy or a myrtle phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, because it is not below the artery nor nerves.
But Emperor strongly advises you that it is postulated in several hours, when it is not phlebotomized on the first percussion, but rather does not touch in response to that postulation.
The first of the patient is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except in conservation of health and for the hope of their recovery and caution against the occurrence of illnesses, and that it be done phlebotomy on one of the veins that are in the cord, so it is: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and that it be done phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, above fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the digestion, when apparent signs of replenishment appear.
And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or at first light after three hours have passed since the morning sun.
But phlebotomy that is administered, but when it provokes convenience and necessity at any time, or of night or of day, in every hour and in every time.
And beware that if the infant is not phlebotomized until they are 14 years old, and a woman who has not been phlebotomized except for four months within seven, and the old ones who have passed 60 years.
And since you want to be a fluid botanist for some manual therapy, it is necessary that you mundify the swollen veins within the botany of the intestine, so that if there is stagnant retention, the veins do not attract superfluous fluids in the botany of the intestines, which are purged, and do not disturb the principal members.
And you do not find the passive nauseous sacration and cramps, nor evacuation of bad digestion or introversion until it is remade into its own, nor bad digestion of hydropsy, and more because botany is tempered by colic passion and vomiting, and belly pain, and multiplication of coitus and trebal exercise of vigils or total cause that dissolves the virtue, either in a corpse or an animal.
And you should consider the subtlety of humors within if the blood is gross, in food and drink, and in medicines if it is possible to adjust them to the patient.
And you should enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or be excited by some exercise so that the blood is subtly purified.
And stop the botany of it in the foot of the day, so it is around the third hour, thus as we have said.
And be careful that the foot of that one is guarded on that day from all bad accidents, animals, thus as it is anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, thus as it is labor and excessive pain and coitus and similar to them.
And at its session, the surface should be present with the causes in the use of that which corrects customarily in men with aromaticity and odorment and balms and similar to them according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the botanist over a cushion that is put above the cushion of the one who should be botanized.
And you should extract the liquid vein, and touch the hand to the botanist's hand with two or three fingers; and you should strengthen the ligament in the correct way and involve those two fingers.
And it is the tempered structure, because the structure when not engorged, or the structure is superfluous, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is mollified, and then it prohibits the body of the blood's essence.
And you should temper the structure, because the one who should be botanized touches their hands together between them so that the veins are inflated, and are declared to the sentiment.
And you should anoint the botanist with a little oil of anti-inflammatory properties; and you should stop the liquid indicator on the left hand over that vein, below the place where you want the botany, so that the vein receives a little, and the percussion is seated because the veins are the ones that attract fugitive cord of the botany, and of those it is full of windiness and when you stop the botany on that one it is contracted against the botany, and it is discovered by the botanist; and the botany does not overcome the vein, and if it overcomes, that one is stretched.
And therefore, because of this, the botanist should be firm and solicited in all these causes.
And you should pause the botany, more if the vein is huberated in a way, then it is good; and if not, you iterate another way below that place a little, or above them with festination, if the place is not apostematized.
And if the place is apostematized, or the bad digestion spreads, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen the ligament, because it would fortify the apostema's caution, nor enter into a bath.
And you should iterate the botany if it is loved.
And if the perception is small and corrects blood subtly, and you fear that it does not reach the quantity that you want, then you iterate the botany in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the perception a little, and do festination within so that the place is apostematized, because the place is apostematized in many homes due to little perception.
More if the one has already been apostematized, then you do not iterate over it, because it does not excuse any cause for you; and stop on that certain part of the wound with oil, because it alleviates the body of the blood. And it is better in this place with oil than with other oils.
And similarly, you administer the wound of oil in all botany where the botanies touch the veins due to the prohibition of bodily blood, and make a tyriacal alfadol and sagzenea when it is stopped from one of those over the place, because the blood is subtly purified and revolved when it is gross.
And if in the place of botany a great apostema is engendered, because many veins accumulate, and it is majorized to that one which has not been washed except for that vein, or in the perception of little vein, and then you touch, and stop over the place spongy infused with water and salt, a little scaled, and strengthen it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
It seems that you're dealing with an archaic medical text, written in a language that shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I'll attempt to translate the given sentences line by-line into English:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
And do not cover when you want to free the arm and evacuate the second vein, since it is already closed the orifice of the vein and it is very difficult to remove the blood, that you press underneath with vehemence and encircle, because it is too bad.
Having the lancet enter secondarily; or it remains there in the acuity of the fleubotomi that is coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein; or pause on that of tyriacal alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress underneath so that the blood comes out gradually.
And if the vein is inflamed, then lance it and do not touch it until the inflammation is calmed.
And if it is necessary to provoke the evacuation of the blood secondarily, and there is no excuse, then prick that spot or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funnel of the arm" is fleubotomized in the place of the fuse or of the basilica, when they are not constricted or narrowed, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the fleubotomy of it is that the patient introduces their hand in warm water so that the vein becomes more prominent and appears manifestly.
And then tighten above that limb with a strict ligature; and then fleubotomize according to the small transverse, not longitudinally nor according to the length.
And it is a broad perception and it is your fleubotomy that you fleubotomize above the joint of the hand, a small one.
And if the blood flow is prohibited, then you iterate with the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
Moreover if you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in warm water, and the month is placed, the body of the blood in warm water at winter time.
And the fleubotomy of this vein is more salvageable than all the other veins, because there it has no pulsating vein, nor nerves.
And the fleubotomy of the little vein of the right hand is convenient for the diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the fleubotomy of it is that you tighten the hand with a ligature or with your own hand, since you have put it in warm water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated at the moment; and then fleubotomize transversally; and if you insert it all the way no one will know what you are doing.
And be careful not to ultimately hurt your hand in the fleubotomy, because there the nerves of the fingers are exposed and denuded of flesh.
And then iterate the hand in warm water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not iterate it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and the flow is prohibited.
And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then pause on the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated too quickly; and similarly cover what you do in all tightly bound.
Moreover the benefit of the fleubotomy of that vein of the left hand is that it is convenient for the diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the fleubotomy of it as you have done in the other one.
And the benefit of the saphena vein in fleubotomy is for the diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as those of the mother, and for retention of menses, and for the diseases of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and legs, and for their similar diseases.
And the quality of the fleubotomy of it is that the patient introduces their foot in warm water and makes friction on that spot until the veins appear; and he places it above the joint of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein has a visible thread, and from there it ramifies into the surface of the foot through many routes.
And then fleubotomize the largest branch or below the leg where the thread of the aggregation of it is, because it is better and more healthy.
And if you fleubotomize that on the surface of the foot, then you beware of the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and pause your fleubotomy at the place where you fleubotomize transversally, lest you want to insert them.
And these are your fleubotomy rules.
Moreover if the blood flow is prohibited; then you iterate the foot of it in warm water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
And if the fleubotomizer errs in the first vein, then iterate with the fleubotomy in its own pace, because the place is salty; and do not fear the evil of it, more than you beware of the nerves as we have said.
It seems that the similar language is a mix of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French.
"And from the sciatic vein, the place has thus been said to be below the heel, near the hollow of the Silvester's division."
"And the juice of the fleobotomy of it is a remedy for when it is for bloody flux."
"And the quality of the fleobotomy of it is that the patient goes into a bath, and tightens and strengthens the thigh of their ankle below the sole, under four fingers in a long subtle bandage, because it does not appear except for that."
"And then when it appears, then you fleubotomize that according to each engineer who says it is possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or insert it for injection or section it for secretion, because the place of it is healthy."
"And it is in many homes somewhat alleviated; and if you touch it, and it does not appear to the whole sentiment, then fleubotomize some root of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot in the auricular and ring fingers."
"And beware of the nerves, and make the blood flow with the quantity that you want."
"And then release the structure and pause over the place of the fleobotomy, and strengthen the place, because it will be healthy soon."
"By ventilation and by the qualities of using those."
"They ventilate with horns, or with iron, or with glass."
"And ventilation is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is ventilation without scarification."
"And this ventilation that is without scarification is according to two methods, because either it is with fire or without fire."
"And the ventilations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 13 places of the body, among which one where pauses are made is in the underarm, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place of two parts of the neck together; and ventilations below the mandible, below the mouth; and ventilations of two spatulas; and ventilations of alohoster, and it is on the end of the thigh; and ventilations of two focils, and they are of two arms; and ventilations of two cavities; and ventilations of two hips."
"And ventilation does not extract blood except from the small, sparse veins in the flesh, and therefore it does not catch virtue through them, just as it is done for fleobotomy; nor does it cover that ventilation is done with fire or without fire in any bad condition made for replenishment until the entire body is evacuated."
"However, if it is necessary to provoke ventilation for illness or for continuity, administer it every hour at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time."
"And then when it happens for some cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventilation to be done after two or three hours have passed from the day."
"And the remedy of ventilation of the nuca is that when it confers gravity on the head and to that which is founded in the wheels; but it covers that it should be a proper evacuation of the entire body."
"And this ventilation is at the place of fleobotomy of the cephalic (head)."
"And it is not lawful to use it on that which is of complete fragility, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great nuisance."
"And therefore it does not cover that the use of those old things is in the heads of which there are frequent illnesses."
"However, to the one who continues above it is done forgetfulness; and therefore it covers that you command the ventilator to pause his hand a little at the ventosa on the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness."
"However, ventilation of alkehel is at the place of fleobotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and therefore it confers asthma, and to the constriction of the wings and to the scission of the instrument of the wings, and to all, and to replenishment."
"And it covers that the ventilation of alkehel is weakened a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debility in the body and in the stomach."
And the inflammation of the galle bladder causes accidental pains in the head and obstruction of the eyes, and migration, and foreboding, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of bloating of the basilisk vein.
And be careful that you do not press your hand on the scarification so as not to insert the artery and stop the flow of blood.
And inflammation of the galle bladder causes fermentation in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resemblance to those bad things that are in the mouth, and it stands in the place of bloating of the astringent vein that is in both lips.
Moreover, the inflammation of the galle bladder that is made on both spoon-shaped (organs) causes a deposit, which is made by replenishment of heat.
And the inflammation of both divided parts of the focus causes juvenile bloating of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca and cephalica, because it attracts the blood from all those veins plus many small ones that are in the flesh, and those small veins are connected to the other large ones until they bring attraction to the three veins.
And command the one who inflates that he should not proceed with scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries.
And it is a type of inflammation which is inflated above the hips and causes hemorrhoids in the backside and ulcers as well.
And be careful that you command the one who inflates to have a great inflammation, and that it is of wrath, because the place indicates strong dryness; and strongly those subtle inflated veins are scarified in scarification.
Moreover, the inflations of the thin membranes are manifest through minimal effort, because they attract the blood from the whole body, and cause ancient pains of the joints and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and cause bother and trouble; and it stands in the place of bloating of two siphons, and of the astringent vein, and of two cavities.
However, I will not belittle the whole body and do not concur in synchrony with many homes.
And of the inflations, the astringent vein is propelled to juvenation at the inflations of both membranes.
And the quality of the position of the inflations is that it stops the inflammation at the beginning of the void and sucks for temperate suction, and does not prolong the position of the inflations, but rather pauses those ligaments, and remains in those quietudes, and that the humors come to the place for adventitious ingression. And do not cease iterating that and continue until you see the place already inflamed and swollen, and that appears the rigor of the blood.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who has tender flesh from rare pores, be careful that you scarify him gently and not too much, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the one who inflates to amplify the scarification and press a little, and temper the suction to facilitate.
And if the blood is thickened, then be careful to scarify two gentle times, because in the first gentle time it opens the way of subtlety to the blood and to its acidity. Moreover, in the second (time) there is precise scrutiny acquired from the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very feculent, then make a third scarification for that it purges the worse.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
And if we want to extract much blood, we make a lot of scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then be careful to make deep scarifications.
And the term of scarification in which is the profundity of the codena only so much.
And if that of which the codena is thick, hard, fusca, and the six pores are so strait, be careful that the places of the inflations are not too lenient, opened resolutely; if it is in summer time, thus as it is oil of aloen or oil of violet, or oil of amellas of dossas, or oil of cemensa of coja; and if it is in winter time, then oil of narci, or oil of liri, or oil of camamilla, or of blood, and to those that resemble.
And if the superfluity is thick, cold, then the oil should be amaranthine, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloen, or oil of anet, and to those that resemble.
Moreover, if the one who inflates is of many pores of tender flesh, then be careful that it is prohibited from oil, and be careful to apply those places of inflations with their proper inflation, whether it is washed with warm water or cold water of solatrum, or water of coja, or water of bordolaguas, and resembling those.
And if that which has blood of much humidity, wash their wounds with agreeable wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar to those.
And if that which has gross surplus, wash their wounds with agreeable vinegar, or with water of sanzuc, which is marjoram, or of decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to them it seems similar.
And let the wound be kept away from bath; have care that it is administered its own dressing of bath for an hour or for two, and let it sleep with its own dressing.
What is it that needs to be governed so that the wounded one is not blood-let before wound-curing.
You should consider at the beginning: then if the wounder or he who needs to be blood-let is choleric and wounds above the agitated and inflamed blood, then you should take causes of cooling, thus with milky acetoses, and endive in agreeable and laxative, and scammony, and julip, and it seems similar.
And pause their food thus with poultices, and remove the swollen veins, and prepare their food with wild herbs, and it seems similar.
And if the complexion is fresh, you should take in drink essence of wormwood, or essence of scammony of sesame seeds, and sumac, and put much odorant miger among viel and noel; and it is commanded that he use few drinks and little eating, and pause their food of poultices and canabir and pissers and small veins and doves.
And you should ensure that on the day of wounding and blood-letting, the drink is more abundant than the food.
And you should ensure that it is given to drink at certain hours to certain men tyriaca alpharac, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or alkalized away from the wounding or away from blood-letting or at a distance, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtly; and do not ensure that they take that scalping.
The wounds that are scarified are wounds that are paused on the feet, and on the knee and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the pustule of the hip, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not sought for those except attraction of blood from member, thus with paused wound on the mamilha in malady of flux of blood of the blood of the veins; and use that for dissolving fresh and viscous wound of member, thus with paused on the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and scalps it and removes the pain as it resolves wound.
And already it is paused on the joints when they accumulate in their operation or pus, because through virtue of strong attraction the humble operation and eradicates the pus from its place.
And similarly it happens when it is paused on the feet and knee, then wound pain is enclosed in those.
And these wounds are administered with suet as solvent only; and some vegetables are administered at the focus.
And some vegetables are administered full of water steeped in teas for the maladies of the knee.
And that is why the wound should be filled and should be large, thus it is warm water alone or water in which are cooked suitable herbs for that convenience.
Form of wound administered at the focus: let the amplitude of the orifice be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the poultice should be the width of a palm; and let it be in the fat of it, in the place that is in the circuit, its width, the thread being small according to the quantity that enters into it with a needle.
Let it be made of raw rose or citron, of thick margins, lion, eagles and tertiaries so that the member does not leave its position above it.
And let it be in the middle of the vertical stick of raw iron or of ferrous, where the candle is paused at the focus.
And already this wound is much greater than that which we have recommended; and the little remedy of that according to the maladies and the state of him who uses that.
And the wounds of the elderly and weakened are different from those of the young and of thick corsages.
And the quality of pausing this wound at the focus on the member is that it extends the wax decently away from a small candle of tallow, and pauses it above the middle of the vertical stick in the middle place of the wound, so that the focus is kindled around the partition below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
And then it is paused on the member of the patient, and the finger is on the thread that we have said, until when we have the wounds and do not indicate that they open the finger and let the vapor rise over that thread, then the wound will be almost dissolved.
I apply gentle friction according to my manual skill, and I repeat this if the said limb shows signs of inflammation.
Maybe in a ventosa that is administered on the surface of the blister, with water, in which there is no transverse or oblique pressure, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed over the member as long as possible.
And this is its form: This ventosa is better when it is larger, so much the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter 147.
Blood-sucking cups are not administered on most members unless on those members where it is not possible to position ventosas, due to the smallness of those, such as the lip and gum, which resemble them; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and gums, which resemble them.
And the quality of using those that you have found blood-sucking cups which are on the dirty, muddy waters of a polluted world.
And then lay them in dirty water during the day and night so that they become foul-smelling, and that no remaining cause stays in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with fleabotomia and ventosas; and then cleanse the member of the patient until it is red-hot; and then place them on it.
And when they are full and fall.
And if it is possible to suck from the place with a ventosa, it is better to do so in youth.
And if not, then wash the place with a gentle touch and then apply a lot of water; and be cleansed and purified.
And if the body of the patient is prolonged due to the removal of blood-sucking cups, and it is residue, then you soak a piece of linen in cold water, and place that on top until the residue is absorbed.
And if the blood is multiplied, then powder over it with triturated vitriol, or gall and similar to those of the stiptic causes, until the blood is absorbed; or place on the spot the crushed heads of roasted broad beans, and leave them until the broad beans adhere to the spot, and the blood is absorbed.
And be careful, if it is necessary, iteration of blood-sucking cups, when it is possible to move them.
And if the blood-sucking cups are prohibited from suspension, then cleanse the spot with recent blood or fix a needle in the spots until blood flows; and then place them, because they sense some blood as soon as possible.
And when you want them to fall, powder over them a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or cinder, and it will happen soon.
Thus begins the third part: on restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in the bones.
Oh, son, you should know that I have taken from this chapter the foolish doctors and the common people, and those who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter of them.
And for this reason it is done that this manner of the scientists in our land is private; and I have not forgotten anything in a long time being entirely abandoned; and I have not acquired anything afterwards, except through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying with understanding of them, until I extract the science from them.
And then I will direct my experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which I have passed my experiment; because here I have abbreviated to you others and delivered it from the occupation of lengthiness; and I will abbreviate it at the end of abbreviation; and I will show it at the end of declaration; and I will form it in many forms of the instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
Chapter First.
Summary and collections from being fractures of bones, from which a necessary premise is, before we begin the recollection of fractured members and diverse ones, each one individually. I will therefore set out in the prohemium of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those which at the beginning were forecast by the artisans and stationed on the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt that they may know or learn this noble art, other than you.
And then I say that when accidents occur, such as fracture or dislocation or twisting or breaking, then it is necessary that you return to the beginning with fleabotomia or to lift up, or to whatever extent, if no cause prohibits it, just as debilitation of virtue, or it is that to which accidents occur frequently, or in decrepit state, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then I am content with a diet of fresh herbs and of lean meat from birds and crabs; and I prohibit gross meats and filling up on diets and all diet that fills the veins with blood, until you are secure from apostemic caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first primary regimen, which they were accustomed to following.
And then when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the patient be fed with nourishing foods rich in nutrients and not heavy or greasy, such as light foods made from flour, water, rice, and vegetables, and fresh fruits, and similar to those, and according to this regimen, it is done for coagulation of fracture pus, easing and softening.
And it is known that the broken bones, when they are in the old men who are in the primary weakness and in the decrepit states, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs.
But the Emperor Nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of the whole affected part any similar cause that grows into a mass that adheres and strengthens until it is fully consolidated and united, until they reach the end of fortification and firmness, just as at the beginning, until no cause prohibits their own works.
And for this reason it is necessary to avoid the foods of the patient, foods in which there are gravity and viscosity and grossness, just as we have said.
And it is known that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I have come to remember all species of fracture, explained in their distinct chapter, separate from the others.
Many varieties of fracture in the same member. And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their members; because there is a curved fracture other than that which occurs in the stars; and some veins are made into a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagittal and stellar and additional proceeding and not-proceeding, just as it is done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And to each species there is a proper torment in the restoration of it according to what will come to remember distinctly in their places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And for that reason, a fracture of the bone is recognized: it is the twisting of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the sentiment, and so of it when one comprehends it with their hand.
And then when there is no apparent twisting in the location nor does it feel deviated from its proper place when one touches the bone with agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
However, it is possible that there is a twisting or small fissure, and one does not feel it with their hand and with compression of all; however, pause over it from the medicines of which you have remembered to apply at that moment what is convenient for the location; and then it will be straightened by subtle stricture.
And it is known that the location where it is curved and not separated into two or another that does not occur in the sagittal, just as it is remembered from all parts of its comparison, then it is necessary to begin from your hour to rectify it, since it has occurred with apostema caution.
And if it has occurred with apostema caution, then leave it alone for some days until the apostema ceases; and then wrap it according to whatever manner you can of elevation and of ingenuity.
And it is known that the restoration of it and the union of it are more legitimate than those of the bone in which they occur sagittally.
And then strengthen it according to what will come to remember about it.
Many times in the bone there are sagittals, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And it is your position in which you hold the member in place according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then you perform that they return to their positions ingeniously and according to whatever manner you can put them in their places.
And beware that you do not fall upon the patient through your operation of the limbs nor lesion; and perform yourself according to your true power that you apply one bone with another as a companion according to their best forms.
And it is necessary that at that hour you profitably touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is a different cause here, rectify it and bind it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And violent extension and compression, thus with many foolish doctors who vainly try to accelerate the aposterior cautious operation, or accelerate counter-action in the member, thus as we have seen through the operation of their vain endeavors.
And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; for you should know that the members are diversified in their smallness and greatness, and in the form of those.
And among those that are small, such as the arm and finger and toe, and similar to those, then it becomes clear that the enveloping should be of very subtle wrapping.
But among those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, it becomes clear that in those there should be a strong and hard enveloping, because the strong connection connects the big member and strengthens it entirely in an equal structure, so that nothing enters inside.
And then begin, and evacuate with equilibrium, pause the convenient liaison according to that, on the place of that fracture in three or four envelopings, depending on how much the member merits; and strengthen your hand a little on the liaison.
And then see to it that you part from the superior region of the place of the fracture, and strengthen yourself so that you do not force your structure on the place where you have strengthened the fracture. And then elongate yourself in the enveloping of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the structure little by little, until you take hold of the place with a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelop that other part over the place where you have enveloped, and then see to it that the envelopings are parted below the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the enveloping and in softening of that according to what we have said in the primary enveloping above.
And then pause between the layers of stopping the wrapping or cloth in which the twisting of the fracture is equalized, if there is twisting; and if not, do not pause in it for any reason.
And then pause on the other bandage, and then equalize over these envelopings which are decently made, just so, if in the place there is no inflammation or cautious postulate, and then pause on that which settles the postulate and removes the inflammation; and thus it remains for several days; and then you strengthen over the same layers.
And thus the layers of the bandage are of a certain thickness, and are formed skillfully; or they are made of rushes of cane; or of palm fronds; and let each layer be ample according to this form and figure.
However, it becomes clear that the bandage which is paused over that fracture should be thicker and slightly larger than the other bandages, and the length of the bandage according to how it is laid on the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the bandages with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then bind below decently according to what we have said about structure, and it is that your structure should be according to the place of the fracture itself, and when it is more elongated from the fracture, it lessens the structure.
And it becomes clear that the threads are middling in thickness and subtlety, and are of a soft material; and if the threads are thick, thus as you have seen through the operation of several foolish doctors pausing the threads of twisted cords of the tort, and it is a great error, when the structure is not equalized.
And very subtle threads are not so convenient, because you do not constrict for structure in those things that you want, and it becomes clear that between bandage and bandage there is less than a digit.
And if the patient is led by the extremities of the bandages to the structure in those places, then pause below those of stopping the wrapping or laminated skin until it does not make a lesion.
Some vainly broken fractures are a plague, and cause disruption in the cord, and you will find remembrance in that chapter according to singularity.
And you should know that all broken members are not straightened with bandages on the first day; the reason is that the member, when it is large, does not settle over the bandages until about 5 or 7 days, according to your securement of the advent of cautious postulate.
And this is the manner of the plasterers among those whom the Ancients restored, who were experts in fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Method of plastering as a remedy for restoring fractures, suitable for complex and major injuries to women and children, because it is about that which neither heat nor cold reaches: and it is that they take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that penetrates the movement of the mill in the walls of the millet.
And they confide in that thus, but not that they filter it with the white of egg, and pause the completion of it not sparse nor subtle; and then use that.
Another manner of implanting is for restoring fracture and dislocation: recipe of assafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of enula, and of migrach, which is made from a thousand granules salvaged, of all one drachm; of mirra and aloen one drachm; alochil one drachm; all are triturated and ground and mixed with water or album in order to complete the complex of the patient's scalp; and then use this implant, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones quite strongly, and confers a great deal of comfort.
Another manner of implanting which confers a fracture and dislocation: recipe of migrach and metal of white alta one drachm; of mirra and of aloen one drachm five; of acacia one drachm six; of Armenian bol one drachm twenty.
All three mixtures in a mortar with a mixing spoon, and filter them, and then administer them in water or egg white and they are administered.
Method of plastering for joints and separated bones in those places, and then pain occurs accidentally in those and in fissures and fractures: take the woolen cloth and submerge it in warm oil and wax, and place it over the area.
More in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of postrema heat and expelling pains properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree sort and leaves of salvaged poppy; crush all together and make a plaster of it.
Method of plaster abbreviated administered for the restoration of fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remaining heat of postrema: recipe mixture of elder, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of flour of peas, of all in a part. all three mixtures and mixed together in wine, if the member is not wounded.
More if it is wounded, then confide in that with water of sweet colander humid or with water and use it.
Another method of plastering strongly in resolution that this first, when it happens postrema hard during the restoration of the member: recipe of mixture of elder and of sesame of lime, and of balsam, and melilot, majorana, flowers of violet, of chamomile, of all in a part; all three mixtures and mixed together in water of sage or in water of two waters or in wine, all that follows according to the quality of the member and the repose of its color.
More Hippocrates did not dissemble in the free will that it is placed over the wounded member during its restoration, but rather made a mixture of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommended that it be moderate between roughness and subtlety.
More in Galen's opinion it is seen that they are placed over the broken member during its restoration and the causes in which it is exsiccated with little heat so thus as myrrh, incense and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plastering that confides in lesion and pain: recipe of migat, of cezès, of skins of wild goose or pennyroyal of auzel, and of elder, and salt, partings equally; all three mixtures and filtered and mixed together, and then make a plaster.
More the quantity according to which it is necessary that remains in the league and then it is dislocated, is that you consider if there is no pain or swelling nor the bone is broken nor is it moved from its place, then you do not delay for many days. And if it happens at the place of vehement pain or swelling or inflammation, then you touch or delay that at the hour, and remove the plaster from it.
And take a drap of lime and marine sponge, humid and warm, and submerge it in tepid water, and with that wash the place until the swelling and pain cease; and then lay it to rest for an hour; and then place on it the woolen cloth submerged in warm oil or wax, and leave it on for a night until you are secure of postrema heat, and that the inflammation of the member is rested, and the pain of it is mitigated.
And then you apply that subtle structure and small implant underneath, which does not constrain your primary contraction, and subtly enter into that entrance so it may be healthy.
And if sometimes the abscess and the redness and the pain and the inflammation are all removed from everything, and you have diagnosed the need for implantation and structure, then you apply that way as you have done from the beginning of the treatment.
And if none of those causes affect that member which we have mentioned, then do not touch it for three days or four or five. And some treatments are all that is necessary for 20 days according to how it appears regarding the dislocation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the structure more than in your primary structure altogether, and settle in the engagement of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
More often the place of the fracture is disarticulated and extended more than it does not cover, then you know that the nutrient is prohibited from penetrating to that; and therefore embrocate with warm water treatment for 3 days; and loosen the structure a little, and through this operation correct the member by nourishing it, and it will be healthier.
More often that which makes the restorative forces of the fracture of the member another way when it is not restored from the beginning, according to how it covers, and it is restored according to tortuousness, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were a turner that which aggravates the Ancients in their free books and they would have worked on that.
And I have not seen any of them who have done that, because it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Chapter according to: On the fracture that affects the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures are made by percussion of a spine, and the percussion breaks all the bone into the ciphac, which is beneath the bone, just as it would in the fist, and therefore this species is named ascial; or the spine inserts into some part of the bone, and inserts into its flesh and does not pass into the back of it; and this species of fracture is named absolute levation.
And the complaint of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attraction; and its cause is percussion with a poise or fall onto stone, and to their similarity.
And this fracture is penetrating which approaches the peritoneum that is beneath the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the complaint of these two fractures is great or small.
And the fracture is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like petiteness, and therefore this species of fracture is named capillary.
And it is a fracture that is made either by fall or by percussion of stone and to its similarity, which makes some layer of the bone enter into the divided parts, and it is made in the concave location just as it affects the pores of the skin when it affects their percussion and it is a part of their entrance into the divided parts.
And mainly it is done in the bodies of human bones, just as it is in the heads of elephants.
And thus all these species of fractures are categorized, they are weighed just as they are separate stars. And I will find a remembrance of all that in its place.
And I will discuss all these species of fracture for detection above them and for inquiry into their tents and ostentation of corrupt flesh that is above them.
And the capillary species is known for that which is discovered above the bone, and it is scraped, and limited to its tents, because the fracture appears black.
More often in the cure of fracture consider from the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see for the accidents that signify manifest significance over fear, just as it is vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscission of votes, and syncope, and acute fever, and worsening of the veins and redness of those, and similarity to their accidents in the major dispositions, if they do not get healthy.
And if you see non-concurrent accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
The cause is because if it has come to you the complaint at the beginning as it is a complaint and that is in the days of winter, then it covers that you study in the ostentation of the bone on the 14th day according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it covers that you touch or starve the bone on the 7th day, having that which is beneath the bone be corrupted by the peritoneum, and that the accidents we have recounted occur.
And if the fracture has already penetrated the skull covering the brain, and it is broken into small pieces and fragmented, then be careful to collect the broken parts together and reassemble them according to how you will recommend it to yourself.
It is that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover above the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter above the patient.
And if you need to make an incision in the bone, with a flux of blood or aposteme careful, then you oppose yourself to that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the place of drained fluids with wine and rose oil, and make the plague rest until the aposteme is sedated, and be sure of the flux of blood; and then begin in the circle of the bone and in its ablation.
And that will be according to one of two manners of operation.
And one manner is that you cut the bone with an incision of straight style, and this is its form: And then administer another incision like this, a little farther later than that; and this is its form.
And then administer more incisions farther later according to the need.
And it is necessary to give you the number of diverse incisions, some of which are farther later than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the affected extremities, and are of iron or felt.
And use them to facilitate percussion on the incision so that it does not touch the head and lead to that.
And if the bone is strong, hard, then it is necessary to perforate in its circumference before you administer the incisions with the trowels, which are called non-deep trowels.
And they are not so named thus except that those do not touch the term of the bone of the test to what is approaching it, so that the trowel is round extremity or margin above that which is beneath the head of the agute seeming like a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passes the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these trowels, a large number of which will conveniently fit the thickness of each bone, until it is present in all tests of the brain, the extremity of which is agute, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of trowels: The quality of perforating in the circumference of the broken bone is that it pauses the trowel on the bone and revolves it with the fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then permits the trowel to another place, and pauses what is between all the tracts the quantity of the grossness of the radius or environs it.
And then you incise with incisions what is between each tract of the bone, and make it more subtle that you can operate on it in the end of levity, thus as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or at your hand, or for some other cause among those instruments which are prepared for that, thus as you have talons and forceps subtle.
And it is necessary that you keep with all caution so that the incision does not touch any cause of the ciphering.
And thus you will have circumvented the bone perforating, and it will be separated from the ciphering if it is continued in it, and you will have extracted that, it is necessary to shave and equalize it in the asperity of the bone of what is in the other instrument similar to an incision, more imperial because it is more tender and more subtle than the other incisions.
And if you find some small bone fragments and splinters, then take them in a way that is facilitated by what is necessary for your instruments; and then cure the plague with liniments and unguents which we have said.
And the other manner of operation is ligature, far from pain, which Galen and the lantern demonstrate for great illumination; and this is its sermon: necessary is it to you at the commencement that you begin to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most vehement and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and have placed beneath it the extremity of this trowel slow and gentle, of which this is the form.
And it is that the lentiform part is lazy and does not incise any cause, and the acute part is of it in two lengths beforehand in length, thus as times; that the lentiform part be adjusted to the ciphering on the face of the incident acute in the bone.
And then you percute on the incision of a part with a small hammer until you incise all the bone facilitated thus as it is revolved, and you are sure of the scalp that does not happen in the accident that you fear in no manner, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was asleep.
When there is a cause annexed to the bone of the little finger in certain places of the bone, it will incite that of the hand at the extremity of the index finger, and it will be facilitated by the removal of its noisy and painful joints.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the little finger, and that which is absorbed or removed from the bone is its surface, and you remain in its roughness and subtle stagnations, then it is necessary to remove that roughness and eradicate those stagnations with subtle roots, for which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it is possible to administer them in all places most conveniently and directly according to what you perceive in your operation on the broken bone and its figure.
And it is necessary to administer in your reason the quality that makes the bone start with the most latent of those roots, and then use the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so according to continuity until you reach administering the entire tone and the entire subtle part of all those.
Perhaps in one of the other small, hair-like fractures, it is necessary to administer a cure according to what you perceive in order to achieve rectification of it.
And it is because it is not diminished regarding all those that have studied in this art. And we have written about what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the little finger is restrained when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary to take a drap of oil according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled drap and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the primary drap, making it as lightweight as possible so that it does not cause discomfort; and then administer the liniment gently, and do not strain it except for the quantity that the wound has, solely.
And leave it like that for a day or two until you are sure of the apostema's caution; and then dissolve it and administer medicines as those which are superfluous dryness, such as resin of flax and flour of barley, and powder of gum and aristology, and similar to those.
And it is that you make of these powdered medicines a powder that is powdered over the wound, just as they are dry; and universally, administer in all medicine of property, which is that it cleanses and does not bite.
And beware according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and it should not be in the filthy mud of poison or another; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is adjusted over the little finger of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and falls upon the patient with a malicious malignity.
And it falls upon the patient's head, as if it is Mondificated (affected) by the bone and worsened when the cure of it is misdirected, and it turns black on its surface; and therefore consider then that it falls to the patient with accidents that we have mentioned, knowing that it is perilous in all aspects.
And if it does not turn black unless by the medicine that is placed beneath, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes it turn black, then it is necessary to take a melon's share and three parts of rose oil. and mix those liniments into a drap, and then place it over the patient's head; and then cure it with the species of cures that converge until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
Know that it is not fractured nose unless two parties are simultaneously broken, or one of those hollow veins, because in it there are two bones, since the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not fractured and does not fall to it except with twisting and tortuosity and sinewy connection.
Perhaps if one of the two parties of it is fractured, then it is necessary to introduce the small finger into the nasal passage, and that you grasp that fracture deep within the entire indicated finger, and with the entire finger beforehand, until the nose returns according to its natural figure. And it is done for you to facilitate, and beware that you do not fall into that pitfall of your operation on the patient's limb.
And if the fracture is in the upper party of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then it is necessary to equalize with the extremity of the radius on which the little finger is thickened.
And if the fracture is in two parties, then you make the similar thing to that.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then wait seven or ten days for the rest of the apostema's caution.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a drap of oil, if the fracture is in one party, or half of two calves, if the fracture is in two parties, and it should be in the thickened calyx of such quantity that it fills the hole of the nose.
And here is the translation:
Some veins are inserted into the nose, in place of a vein, pain from a ulcer that is enveloped by a lion's cloth; and it happens that you have a fracture of the nose very violently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it, and if you want, do veins.
And if an abscess forms on the nose, apply a candle made of wax or tallow to the nostrils, or an ointment made from violet oil or rose oil.
But if an abscess does not form, then I think that you should apply a poultice made of flour of sizami and powder of cofitz in a poultice of honey; and then pause on the lion's paw, and do not lift the nose for any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then I think that you should bind above them, and extract them with instruments that are convenient for them; and then sew up the wound, and cure it in such a way that it becomes incarnated and consolidated, and apply a poultice that is convenient for it.
And if a wound develops within the nose, then I think that you should treat it with veins and administer lead pipes until it is completely healthy.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not infected, observe then if the fracture is only superficial, and not broken in two and curved to the inner parts, then its knowledge is easier.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert the right index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the left index finger of the right hand; and thus you will facilitate the reduction of the inner fracture by pushing it back into its proper place, with your other hand on the outer side of the bone; and in this way, you will make a decent alignment.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two parts, then I think that you should administer extension of the two parts according to a straight direction until it is possible to align them.
And if the teeth are dislocated due to concussion, then strengthen those that you expect will remain in a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and then pause on the broken jaw with wax tallow, and pause on the double-layered cloth, and pause on the great star-shaped decent bandage, or a piece of solo gum at the length of the jaw; and then tie it below according to how you have prepared the ligature of it and how it is convenient for application, so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and pause from eating the nourishing food of the lion's broth.
And if you think that the figure has been altered in some manner, then count to three days; and then rectify what has been altered of it and apply a poultice made of honey, or album of honey, or flour of cizami, because you will have obtained the tallow of it, and pause on the lion's paw.
And then, as it stands annexed and adjusted the poultice on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, so that it does not become dislocated until it is healthy and strengthens the fracture; because many veins are stretched by this fracture for three weeks.
And if another vein forms an abscess, then administer what we have said about many veins in the treatment of it until it is healthy, and remove that abscess.
And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or shattered, then you should subtly remove those shatters with instruments that are convenient for them in the removal of those from the instruments.
And if the orifice of the wound is narrow, then you should amplify it with a fleobotomy according to the quantity of your need.
And then when you have removed those shatters, and of those nothing will remain, then you should sew up the orifice of the wound if it is wide; and otherwise, pause on one of the poultices that are convenient for it and incarnate it, until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the ankle when it is sprained.
Many veins are broken in the ankle joint beneath the foot, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch each other; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that they come together in the shatters, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is infected.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a serious wound, it is necessary to have two ministers present, so that one holds the injured limb and the other extends the broken neck on that side.
And then adjust the fracture in its proper position within, so that it takes the shape of the bone according to its curve, and is not in a slight prominence or concavity.
And if you need extensions, then take care to place a layer of cloth or wool underneath the patient's thigh, and let its size be according to the quantity of your necessity; and stretch and elevate the broken limb and wrap the cloth around your hand within, so that it adjusts the fracture accordingly.
And if you cannot reduce the extremity of the broken limb to its previous parts, so that it is pervaded by the preon, then take care that the patient is resupinated on their back, and place it on the larger muscle of one thigh, in greatness.
And the minister presses on the muscle of the patient at the parts below so that the bone of the broken limb is elevated as it is in its socket, and then you straighten the fracture and adjust it within its proper position.
Maybe you feel numbness of the broken limb and its joints, then take care to bend over that and extract those numbness to facilitate.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you make a precise incision on one of the incisors that have been prepared for that, since you had placed below the broken limb the instrument that serves the purpose; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the shape.
And it is similar to a scoop of which this is the concavity; and let its width be according to what you have needed of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Maybe the length of it is according to what is possible for you in the operation; that you have two extremities thus at times, and one extremity is wide and the other is narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the numbness from the bone is wide, and yet secure from aposteme caution, then you adjust the two lips of the wound in suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear aposteme caution, then you fill the wound with drainage and poultices according to the quantity of the separation of the wound.
And if you fear aposteme caution, then put a warm compress in wine and oil and rose water, and place it over that.
And thus, that the stake does not remain on top of the broken bone; and for this reason take care that you see the patient every day, so that when the ligament is mollified or the stake is already removed, then you straighten it and strengthen the ligature.
And then place the patient to sleep on their chest, and place underneath their thigh, removing from them in the night a small cushion; so that in this way the injured limb is elevated above the mattress of that, and thus the fracture of the broken limb is elevated above the muscle; or it is the arm tied to the neck.
And do not loosen the ligature unless you fear an impending crisis or aposteme, until twelve days.
And then renew the emplaster if you have seen the face of it up to that, and adjust in the structure and restore it and let it be until it is restored and the fracture of the broken limb is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the months in twenty-eight days, and some gentle exercises are done at home, which are made in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder.
The shoulder blade is broken in the broad place of it and does not break unless at its edges.
And then when the place of it is broken — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known unless by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture beforehand you prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in all manner of engineering which is possible for you.
And then place the poultice over the painful area, mixing wool with album of egg and stopping the flow; and place a pillow of double-layered cloth; and place a poultice on the flat surface of the table, according to the quantity of the whole spatula or maybe just a little.
Perhaps the surface is concave in some areas of the spatula, then you should bend that concavity with a stopper, and adjust the surface according to equality.
And then stretch downwards with a long humiliator against decent constriction and firmness of the surface, so that it does not move away from its own place.
And consider the ligament each day; and all softened that it should be mollified, another day and stretch and equalize the surface if it has moved away from its own place.
And elevate the patient over their own bed thus.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And then when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you will know for certain that those are of the bones which initially were not tempered nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed to the place of the bone's wound and remove the crust, then you will separate above it, and lift it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the forked aposteme, carefully cut so that it does not stick here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of a foot fracture.
The foot sometimes breaks in its middle place and that end is twisted; perhaps the extremities of it are moved so as to be crooked and comminuted.
And of the accidents of it when its middle is broken, it declines to the internal parties and sticks to the great pain, and difficulty in walking, and toes, and strong weakness, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be resupinated over their own back, and a cushion between the pillows of one thigh; and then press on its muscles, and adjust its ribs with the hands of two ribs, and subtly you operate on it and in the equation according to all manner that is possible and that converges to it, until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
And then place a poultice on it with emplastre and stop, and place another one above the table's subtle surface of sawdust or of chalk and of their similar levitation, since you envelop that in cloth; and then subtly operate on that over the broken bone so that it does not move away; and go with a binding according to retonditat on some days, and strengthen that with decent constriction; and then consider the binding at all hours, and when it is mollified, strengthen that.
And if necessary, provoke a deslimentation of that which corrodes or prurites, or pain, or aposteme that sticks in the place, then you touch and detach it and eradicate the emplastre and rectify what sticks per its manner of cure; and then reduce the emplastre, if sometimes it faces that; and adjust to its constriction until it is sanctified.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of ribs when they are fractured.
You know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places that follow the back; and of the extremities of their party within do not stick to those contritions unless for what is cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling, because of the inquiry into its measurements.
And the restoration is thus that it equalizes the fracture with its measurements according to the possible manner, until it is equalized as it was, and then applies an emplastre and strengthens the broken bone with a surface, if it needs that.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines to the internal parties, then it sticks to the patient with vehement pain and puncture, thus as puncture that sticks to one who has suffered a fall, and because of which the bone puts forth a veil; and it sticks to the difficulty of walking, and toes, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And now the Antixes are ingenious in that with many clever contrivances.
And of them, it is said: it is necessary that you pause the windings of the patient that engender inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the parties before.
Perhaps we have avoided that so it does not cause the lightness to generate an aposteme, if it does not stick; and if it does stick, then it helps with that.
And they said some of them that it should be paused underneath the window and then sucked with a strong fortitude; and it is similar to reasoning, perhaps because the emperor was afraid that the window would attract the superfluities to the place due to debilitation.
And some of the affected areas are covered: it is necessary that the area be protected with a woolen cloth in which they have already been submerged, and small poultices are placed between the ribs so that it may be filled, which is the ligature that envelops according to the technique; and then the patient is treated with careful attention of food and medicine.
And if the cause is a strong constraint of the patient who does not suffer, and the bones are punctured by a pointed instrument, be careful over the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision on the affected area, uncovering the broken rib, and then pause regarding that instrument which preserves the vital spirit, the memory of which precedes, and which facilitates the bones, and extract that.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a bandage, and heal that with implants so that it may be healthy.
And if an abscess forms, then you touch and inject poultices into the rosated oil and pause over the area, and the patient is treated with what is suitable for the internal abscess.
And let it rise above the quilt on which they sleep, so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Some weakened vertebrae of the neck fracture, and then they have a similar attraction, and similarly to the spine of the back. And when it happens to some and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then consider, because if the veins are more weakened and stupefied and deadened and cannot be nourished nor extended nor strengthened, and when they constrict them with the tight bands or pierce them with the needle, and do not feel pain in them, then you know that they are not healthy, and among the same dispositions it is mortal.
And if you touch them and feel constriction in the bands and piercing, then you know that the nut of the bone is saved and that the patient's wounds are healing.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to this and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then consider their feet.
Then if you see that they are already weakened, it happens to those who have been affected in the same way, and then when you sit on the back of the patient, and there is ventosity and egestion according to their will, and some weakened vertebrae rise above the back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that they are mortal, and therefore do not trouble yourself with their cure.
Maybe if none of these causes happen to them, the cause is better and less serious.
And the treatment for them is that you perform a sedation of the abscess with caution, because it pauses over the affected spine with rosated oil sol, or with mugwort of housing; pause on that day until the abscess is sedated with caution.
And then pause with one of the comforting and soothing implants, and strengthen over that with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side where they feel pain until they are healthy.
And if it happens that the attraction of the bone is separated from them, or some cause that has already been separated from them, then it is necessary to dissect over the codena and to remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with a suture if it is large; and then treat that with an encarnation of the enguiments, so that it may be healthy.
Maybe if the back of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the coccyx, then it is necessary that you insert the finger into the left hand under the buttock, and that you straighten the broken bone as much as possible for secondary alignment; and then pause on the implant and the asterion, if you are not skilled in those, and then strengthen that.
And if you feel broken vertebrae in them, then you feel over that, and remove that, and heal the wound with the treatment that precedes so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the narrowness (or constriction).
The bones of the narrownesses are easily broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is not only a communication in the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the internal parts; and it happens that the patient has pain in the area and piercing, and the leg is stupefied when it is fractured.
And the restoration of them is that you extend your hand over that until it is above the fracture, which is the shape of them.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of them so alone, then you straighten that according to your apparel for secondary alignment until it is assembled into its natural shape.
Maybe if the fracture is in the long or that which has already declined to the lower parts, then you make the patient sit on their back belly up so that it may be prepared for your restoration of that fracture. And then when you have bandaged that, place it over the plaster, and then place it over that straight stick or splint, and strengthen it with a structure so that there is no threat of fracture or movement of the stick.
You bandage the cavity so that it fills in there and takes on the structure according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or side, either way.
Perhaps you hasten the abscess with caution, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is settled, and place over it what settles according to what precedes; and then return to its restoration, and strengthen that thus covers.
And if you hasten them in the affected bones or they are communicated, then you treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of the fracture of the adjacent.
Adjutori is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is torn, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a wooden splint placed according to this form:
And tie them with two extreme ligaments, and then they are suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a stool; and then place the broken arm on the stick until it reaches the small spot of it in the middle place where the curvature of the stick is attached.
And then suspend it on that heavy cushion, or the master extends it to the divided parts below; and then the doctor says that the fracture is in the most affected places, until the fracture returns according to its cover.
And the other way is that the patient is resupinated on their cervical vertebrae and suspends the hand of the neck with a ligament; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture in its most affected places; and the other holds it below; and almost both of them extend to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture with a ligament and over that with another ligament, and almost both of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
And then if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then it covers that half of the ligament over the knot and the other below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it covers that the ligament is placed over that place and over that elbow.
You bandage it with facilitated and easy handling, and then when it is bandaged according to what covers and is applied for good application, then strengthen it if you do not hasten the abscess with caution.
Perhaps you hasten the abscess with caution, then leave the structure until the seventh day, and place over it a soft, folded cloth anointed with good oil and rose oil until the abscess is settled, and then you strengthen it.
And the way of strengthening it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place an enveloping of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that adjacent part, and place its hand bent over the shoulder muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the adjacent part the arm so that the arm is in its natural position, if it does not prohibit anything from the broken bone.
And then use the natural positions.
And it is that you place over the fracture that position which is more stable and stronger than the other positions; and place between each position the width of the finger, and let the length of the positions be according to the break with an addition of three fingers from the entire part.
And then strengthen over the positions with the structure which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your structure over the place of the fracture be more straight. And when the fracture is well-aligned, the structure is less.
And so if you follow the situation of the positions and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its natural situation, then you do it.
And if you fear an abscess with caution, then leave the structure and positions until the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not accelerate in the place of pruritus or inflammation; or it is prohibited to bring food to the member by disposition of superfluous structure; and thus rectify all according to what we have said.
Perhaps you are confident that it does not accelerate any cause of this, then do not remove the ligature until three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and the most affected places be above the stomach.
And place over the adjacent part a full covering of soft cloth bandage, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not dislocated or dissolved, or that the ligament is mollified, thus rectify all according to your virtue.
Stop the hand of the patient according to the order in which we have given it, so that the hand is subtle in the beginning of the treatment until it becomes stronger; and then cover the hand of the patient.
Because the custom of the assistant and the leg of the patient is to be strengthened in 40 days; and then cover that they are dislocated and administered a bath and medicated with those who correct it.
And if the fracture is badly treated, then do not dislocate from that limb and the stitches until a day or until two months.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm bones; of which one is small, and it is the one that supports the little finger, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small finger, from the part below.
And often the major forearm bone is broken alone, or the small one, and often they are broken together.
And when the small forearm bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is even easier.
And when the forearm bone is broken below, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore if the bone that is broken is the small forearm bone above, then it is convenient for the doctor to make a little extension to facilitate the restoration of it, so that it can be easily straightened.
But if the large forearm bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to make a more forceful extension.
And if both forearm bones are broken together, then it is necessary that you make the extraction even stronger.
And it is necessary that you make the shape of the hand, with the restoration of it and the extension stretched out on a cushion, and the palm of the hand is above, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger is lower than the other fingers, and the patient is seated on a curved chair.
And there should be a cushion beneath it in its altitude or inclination, so that the patient does not incur trouble.
And then extend the minister's arm from below upwards to the sixth hand or limb, and another minister extends similarly from above.
And then the doctor straightens the bone so that it returns to its better shape as much as possible.
And if in the fracture of the bone there are splinters, then you should thoroughly remove all the pieces from their place with your skill.
And if it appears that the splinter is separated and holds the codeine and does not belong to your hope in the restoration of it, then you finish over it and leave that according to the manner which we have mentioned above.
But if the fracture is a plague, you have already made a special chapter for that, and so take the care of it.
And if you suspect an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then line up a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and be more subtle between speculation and subtlety, and stretch the cloth over it in a subtle structure until the abscess is calmed; and then remove the cerate and place an emplaster prepared from powder of moly clay, and afterwards place stitches; and let the stitch that is placed over that fracture be more laded and stronger.
And you know that the number of stitches on the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one forearm bone or in both bones together.
And then place your structure over the site of the fracture more strongly and more vehemently, and when it is more certain that the extraction is above the fracture or below it, place the structure a little more soft according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be moist humectants, and not dry or harsh, and the thread with which it is strengthened should be of a medium thickness, more subtle between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament to be adjusted for several days. And if you suspect any cause for which correction is necessary, as we previously mentioned the one that affects the limb, and then it is necessary that you immerse the limb in warm water until the correction ceases.
And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then return the structure.
And if the extraction is already softened and the bone is already restored and similar to those, then correct all that with your skill.
And consider that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess of structure, because then it is necessary that you soften it a little and let it for several days until it runs towards the nourishment, and then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not suspect any cause of those that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to be dislocated for about 20 days or around that.
And then you should suspend the patient's hand for their vertebral movement agitation, and make them sleep on their back.
You know that this fracture is restored in 10 days or in 32 days, or perhaps it is restored in 28 days, and all this depends on the disposition of the complications and the disposition of the vertebrae.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of fractures of the finger and of the toes.
You know that the fingers of the hand and the toes are prone to fracture, and they do not unite quickly unless treated with well-moisturized bandages.
And when the hand fracture or dislocation unites, then it is necessary that the patient follows a straight and equal path, and then you should place their hand on that extended surface.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor extracts those that are not well-conjoined, so they may be in good conjunction.
And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and a bandage, if an abscess does not unite quickly; and then you should place a star-shaped dressing underneath according to the quantity of the wound, and you have already enveloped that in a linen cloth.
Moreover, if the splint is on the divided parts of the palm of the hand, and then it seems like a spear of cloth, and you command the patient to stretch that with their split palm; then you should strengthen it with a long cloth.
And the star-shaped dressing on the body with cloth in which it is elevated, so that the body may be applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to what is necessary.
Moreover, if the fracture is on the divided parts of the forearm, then it is necessary to place a star-shaped dressing underneath and another dressing on the divided part below in the palm, so that the hand may be straightened and directed; and then you should place the structure, thus as the hand is revolved to the right angle between the fingers in the ligaments.
And if the fracture occurs at the knuckles of the fingers, then it is a small finger, it should be joined according to what is necessary and then strengthened in the palm and if you wish, place a small straight splint per so that the fracture may be elevated and not bent.
Moreover, if the fracture is in the other fingers, thus as in that of the middle place, or in the index finger, or in the ring finger, or in the little finger, then it should be joined and tied with the finger itself; or all the joints according to continuity, and it is better; or place on that small star-shaped dressing, thus as we have said about the fingers.
And consider, in your restoration, and then place that, the disposition of abscesses and opposing — in the tie-like operation — in what is necessary when any cause of those occurs, according to which the narrative of it is reiterated.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of fractures of the hip bone.
The hip bone, which is well-moisturized, is broken and declared to the patient according to what is converted to the part above and below.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their back and on their face.
And then the minister extends all the ligaments to their part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Moreover, if it is near the root of the hip, then the ligament is propelled to the dentate part of the pentagonal place, so that the extension fits into them, and the other ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is near the dentate part, then it should be made to propel the ligament to the dentate part, and the extension should be to the parts below.
And then the doctor joins the bone with both hands in a natural way so that it reduces to its natural semblance and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and structure, if an abscess does not unite quickly on the affected limb. Moreover, if an abscess occurs in it, then you should leave that for several days until the abscess is calmed down, and then return to your cure.
The structure of it should be done thus: it is necessary to envelop around the fracture a hard bandage, and double that two or three times, and remove the superfluous part; and then envelop the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the hip.
And insert a long fillet between the hip and the leg near the dentate part below, and you will have the extremities of the fillet from the divided part above the two parts, and then revolve around the leg and the hip that which superfluously flows from the bandage.
And then place on the hip in the place of that fracture thus, and place one star-shaped dressing over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the empty spaces between the leg and the hip with many towels, so that the extraction can be facilitated.
And then begin to apply a strong structure over the site of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you have already alleviated the swelling at the site of the fracture, your structure should be less tight and easier and more gentle.
And then extend the two extremities of the thigh to the parts below until they reach the ankle of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the steel strips on the other part so that the swelling does not return to its original location.
And then place the structure over that, so that it does not touch the corroding member or aposteme of caution nor inflammation and similar to those; and if it touches any of those causes, then cut away from it, and rectify what has touched everything, according to what we have said many times before.
But if there is a bone in the bone that puts pressure, then be careful that you do not displace it according to what is possible for you; and if not, place it back over it and cure what was previously mentioned until it is healed.
And some times it is strengthened by adjusting this fracture of the hip to the steel strips, just as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But especially in the restoration of it, in such a way that it does not touch the lame and crippled part; and if it is restored alone, another thing that must be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that it limp for some time.
And you know that the hip is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the wheel-shaped bone of the forearm.
You know that a fracture of the wheel-shaped bone of the forearm is very difficult to treat, but it touches many times on the aforementioned attrition.
But if it touches the fracture, then it is not just a crack or a break in its parts, and that is a plague or several plagues, and about that everything has been said with feeling.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that it is grafted with what has been broken off from its parts, and reunited with the digits until it is aggregated and conjoined as much as possible for equilibrium and facilitation and fabrication.
And then pause to apply a plaster and place it over that round steel, if you need it; and strengthen below with a structure suitable for that.
And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, just as it is caution and similar to those in which one opposes every accident in what is convenient for it to be healed.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is large, and it is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and is named fibula.
And it touches some species of fracture that touch the two bones of the arm, and for that reason it is made restoration of it just as restoration of the arm by grafting, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken, the leg is converted into the anterior parts.
And if the large bone is broken, it puts that below, and it is one of those causes that are not well joined.
And then administer extension and equilibrium and ligature of the bones according to that grafting.
But especially be careful, if the fracture of the leg is already having many satanic things, that the extension should be more gentle and easier, and alleviate your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you graft the steel strips and complete all the entire operation, then you will take measures of wood or pine which are placed below the causes that were placed in solutes, and so make a gentle movement of palm branches; alleviate those with small grocers, and do not be rough with the handles, and let it be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the forearm down to the lowest part.
And then envelop over each cloth in two wraps according to the length of it, and place one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and so from the forearm down to the lowest part of the foot.
And then place the two steel strips in three places of two extremities and at the middle location, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left parts, and it stands for good stability.
And then administer a wooden splint according to the length of the leg; and it should be placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
It is most important that you do this in a fracture, and when it is done thusly it is properly treated.
And then consider each day the condition and study it in the last study, and you guard against aposteme and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of these causes occur, then pause and turn to the one that needs to be healed within.
Chapter 17.
About the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
The ankle does not always suffer a complete fracture; rather the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fragmented fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fractures, and do not occur unless there is great violence in the means of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot receive a fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above their place, then the patient stops putting their foot on the ground prepared thus like an ant.
And then stop putting one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then press, and bend, and insert it back into its place.
And then apply a plaster and stop above, and put below the belly of the foot a small table to which are attached two flat plates.
And then strengthen that around the foot in a descending structure, since you have enveloped that with drapes and other causes of which you are aware.
And when it passes three or four days, then you remove the bandage, because you will find the bones in place, either well-set or well-dislocated, and the operation on them is thus conformed.
But if some toes are out of place, then restore them, and insert them thus as you were and recommend to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand. And then stop the out-of-place toe according to the length of the toe, and let it be slightly bent; and then put below the foot this table which I have recommended to you, and strengthen that around in a descending structure.
But if what is out of place is two or three or more bones, then you stop above each toe according to its quantity enveloped in a lion's drap, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the plates of the table opposite the belly of the foot so that it holds with good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes which I have told you about in other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and pause at every accident in what needs to be healed.
Chapter 18.
About the fracture of the neck of the thigh and the bone of the perineum and the bruise of the hip.
When the neck of the thigh is dislocated, then make it settle in its natural position, and then incline it to the back of the two little ones, and let it be held from behind.
And then the midwife places the neck of the hip, and makes it as in the neck of the other thus like a sphere; and then the thigh is concuted, and raises the back of the little one little by little, because all that is forgotten returns until it is denuded to the natural position of the neck thus like a sphere and the dislocated bone returns.
And then apply poultices on the back of it, and when you want to urinate, remove the hip thus facilitating and then urinate, and reduce and return according to the manner according to which you began, and then return to the first poultice.
And do it thus for seven days or around that, because it is restored.
And if you want, take an egg of olive oil and strengthen it over the trajectory of the hip with a tube of cane; and insert the whole vesicle into the neck of the hip, and then sufflate through the tube with vertue until the vesicle is inflated within the neck, because the fracture returns.
And then it is fulfilled by the hip and stays for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the perineum of the hip or of the thigh is dislocated, then administer in the restoration and adjustment of it what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
And what is direct is not hidden in these proximate fractures, and little is omitted, mainly to that which is some study and use and intend my free book; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions via directness in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore it is.
But in the bruise of the hip when it is dislocated, take a poultice of water, and put the bruise in that; and then stop above it with an enveloping drap, and let it be enveloped, and then let it be laid for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Chapter 19.
About the restoration of fractures of bones when they are plagued.
It is convenient for that which suffers fracture plagued, and mainly if the bone is large thus like the bone of the thigh or of the adjuster, or similar to that, that you take care and apply remedies as soon as possible if the conditions of fleubotomy are suitable for you or testify thus like we have said before.
If the disease flows with blood, then it is necessary that you be careful in retaining it with a bandage, so that you do not scatter it on the wounded place, unless some other cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it, unless an abscess forms.
But if an abscess forms quickly, then you delay the restoration of it until the sixth day, until the abscess is mature, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth, lest you cause worse accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered cartilage, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce it and enclose it with your fingers, which are more facilitating and have little extension.
But if the extension is not at your disposal and the equipment of the fingers are more suitable, then reduce it with your fingers; and it is a instrument made of iron, its length is seven or eight inches and its width is according to the quantity of the disease; and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to take four of these, three or four according to the quantity that he needs for the cure in all types of fracture.
And it is rounded, and it is in a small groove so that it does not double back against the compression on it during the hour of operation.
And it is of acute extremity where the margin is in the six extremities; and it is below it with a large tenderness, and of its magnitude within the divided parts.
And this is its shape:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which is a small spatula.
Because it is necessary that the extremity of the acute elevation be paused above the extremity of the prominent bone.
And press it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and it is enclosed with some equipment.
And then it is necessary to enclose the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the broken extremity is subtle, and you do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone in all ways that we have recommended, then insert it in one of the ways that the doctors have said; or saw it with one of the saws in which way it is possible for you.
And then scrape off what remains on the bone of roughness and small scores.
And when the bone is reduced, and then the reduction alleviates the vehement pain of the patient, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do this because you confer great joy to the patient.
When you have completed the restoration which you do to the bone, and then submerge it in six stipations of black drap, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the cerous plague or another cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer stelas at the time of completing the restoration of the bone, and leave the uncovered plague in that place until you insert the forked instrument and use envelopments according to the quantity of the plague.
And be careful with all caution that you do not strengthen the plague in the fracture, because many times it happens that foolish doctors, and they cause death or corroding disease, or putrefaction, so it is sanity. And if the structure of the fracture is loose, soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
And if the plague is great or is a bad plague, and you fear those accidents which we have recommended, and it causes pain in that place, then it does not matter that you pause over those stelas, but rather do that envelopment of hard draps in place of stelas and strengthen it with those.
And when you have begun the plague for one or two days, which in it has generated pus, then you remove from below the drap which you had placed over it six times, and then administer calves, anointing with those of our customary practice, that is to medicate the plagues, thus anointing with tetrafarmacon and similarly to that.
And it is convenient for you to dissolve the liament and consider the plague on any day morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the putrefaction does not occur from it to the divided parts below, which are more facilitating.
If the plague passes many days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed from the pus, then you know that here there are signs of the small wounds because it is necessary to inquire into the plague in the tents. And of those signs, those that are separated remain and extract, those that from them are not separated and touch the member and cause pain, therefore it is necessary to insert them according to what is possible for you.
And if you hasten to the plague of ulceration or abscess, which are symptoms, or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then it is clear that you pause at one of those things that converge on the cure of that which is preceded by narration in the seventh chapter.
And of that in which it is clear that you make the worst sermon and you present your passion: when the gros (large or serious) is trampled, emines over the member just like the bones of the thigh and of the helper and similarly to those of the large members, and that you do not presume attraction from it, nor the extraction of it, for which motives are hastened per that death; having laid aside that entry that you may be able to fortify your vein for if you are about to xx days or .xxx.; and then the cure of the plague is seen by you, and if it does not set aside that.
Chapter xx.
On the cure of numbness that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Many hastened steps occur in this numbness in the vicinity of health from fracture, and it is more probable that it is near the joints, and it is obstructed by the figure of the member; and therefore it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the numbness is recent and administer in those medicines that have stipulated thus co alsolen, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similarly to those; inasmuch as you take some or all of those, and combine them, so they are stipulated with vi stiptic, or album of huou, or vi agree, and pause that over the numbness in estopa, and constrict them over it for good constriction.
And leave the extraction that does not dissolve it for many days; and then dissolve it and iterate another, until the numbness is removed; or stretch over that layer of lead decently, because lead has the property of removing all that which is inflamed in the members.
Moreover if the numbness is already converted into stone and it is necessary to provoke an ostensible contradiction, and then divide it by the superior part of it, and remove the superfluous and eminent, or cut that with some alcus rezoris until it is removed; and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter xxI.
On the restoration of fracture when it is restored and then Roman breaks the subtle member and frees it according to its natural usage.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and then Roman breaks the subtle member and frees it, then it is not done except for many causes: among which one is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligature that does not converge according to what is clear; or due to superfluity of structure of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from coursing to the member; or due to multitude of superfluous embrocation; or due to superfluous movement not in its hour; or due to paucity of blood in the body of the patient and for debilitation of it.
And the cure of that is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths; and apply gypsum and lettuce over them.
And then pause poultice over the member, so that the poultice attracts to it much nourishment, or continues embrocation of it with warm water and tepid, until the nourishment courses and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter xxII.
On the cure of broken bones when they are restored tortuously and prohibit the operation of their own that is clear.
When it happens to the member already restored then health of it from tortuousness and eminence to the broken bone and numbness, and it is for that fededa of form of the member, but meanwhile the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then it does not happen that you receive the word of him who existed that member was newly broken.
Moreover, I have stood many foolish doctors and restorers who have done that in our land; and this operation is very detestable, producing great fear to the old man of which it is mortal.
Moreover, if the lameness and numbness are recent, then it is clear that they are embrocated with warm water and tepid in which they take mollifying herbs, thus as they are fuel of altea and razit of them, and mellilot, and similarly to those; and let it be done to them in emplastre with mollificating emplastre thus as dyallaquilon has well done; or that it takes mucilage of razit of altea and is continued with gray of gualina or with oil of cirami, and is emplastered in that; or that they take figuas of grasses and are trissadas in females of colom, and similarly to those of the medicines that are named inermann's consolidation.
And some roots are dissolved with steady friction of the ligature that it is in the most humid places, and let it be administered with movement of the member to all parts at all hours.
Since the pain has turned into a chronic condition and is strongly rooted and converted into a stone-like hardness, provoking the need for a cure of the limb with iron, then it is necessary to remove the pus that has accumulated above the affected area and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and cut away the superfluous nodules of that member in the bone, and facilitate the administration of the treatment in that sollicitated and studied area.
Chapter 23.
On the speech about dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints in their proper place, which prohibits movement, and alters the shape of the limb, causing great pains and lesions.
Therefore, when you encounter a dislocation, then it is necessary to perform reduction as soon as possible, and do not delay, for if delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and strongly fixed, making it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And for this reason it is necessary that the patient be massaged and stretched at the time of inflammation, because many gentle movements bring about spasm and alleviate pain.
Since this happens, then it is necessary that you apply the flaubotomy to the patient's thigh, and place it in such a way that it relaxes the inflammation; and wrap the limb with hot water and oil, and then reduce it with facility.
And the whole limb will be cured in such a way that the memory of the pain will return to its place.
And now I have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been written about fracture; from the higher part of the body down to the lower part.
Chapter 24.
On the cure of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
Thus the two jawbones are dislocated if they do not close; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they are removed from their places with little movement, and then softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and complacent, until they are softened at the joint so that the saliva of the patient flows and cannot hold it nor clear its mouth, and the tongue is enveloped in its speech.
Since the dislocation of it is slight, then in major preparations it returns to itself for a slight cause.
Since the dislocation is complete and complacent, then it is necessary to administer reduction of the jaw immediately, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister should hold the head of the patient, and meanwhile insert his fingers in the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both fingers at the same time, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of the hands of the patient are beforehand in those which are engaged; and he commands the patient to relax their jawbones and release them from any part; and the minister engages the jawbone and pushes it back into place until it returns to its proper position.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jawbones are simultaneously dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both can be facilitated and not delayed at all, thus we have said.
And thus when they return and are engaged, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then pause on those pillows of cloth with cerate, and make it firm with wax and oil rosated; and place it in a facilitated position with gentle movements.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two aurelhes, so that they do not incline to the right or left side; and do not force them to chew anything, lest they aggravate some cause; having forbidden them to eat any heavy food, until when the pains are removed and the jawbones are numb, then they can eat what they want.
And that is administered with facility, and do not trouble themselves over the perception of the mouth, except for eating and drinking and citation, until the jawbone is numb and healed.
And if the reduction of both jawbones is difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and not converted to their proper places, then many gentle movements are necessary, and fever and assiduous sweat arise, and strongly it affects the stomach of the patient, and strongly it induces pure cholera.
And when you see this, then you will know that it is a loss; and many gentle movements are necessary to die from that which happens to him in ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The ankle is not dislocated from its joint behind the foot; and some gentle movements are dislocated beforehand, and that is declared by the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient jumps on their back and extends their arms. And then grasp the place with your palm in strong grasping, so that it will return.
And then place a pause on that plaster and powders and strengthen it.
May the extremity of the one who has fallen be continuous with that, it is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and set in place according to what we have said and according to your preparation.
And then place a pause on that plaster, and powders, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest inside until they are healed.
And in this medical treatment, the reduction of the muscle's extremity is achieved when it is separated from its proper place.
Chapter 26.
On the Reduction of Dislocation of the Muscle.
It is known that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the top to the bottom.
And the second is when it is dislocated from above the muscle, and that is done sharply; and it is not dislocated at the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts through the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and beforehand exits at the bottom parts of the muscle, and mostly in those where the flesh is weak, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there are many muscles, it is exited with difficulty.
And often accidents happen to some men through percussion or fall, and the muscle of it is affected by a hot aposteme, and it is swollen due to what has already been dislocated.
Then it is necessary that you spread it out so that it is above the affected part of it, and then proceed with its treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation of it occurs at the bottom parts below the muscle; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the whole muscle, because you find among them diverse manifest differences; and you find in the head of the concave muscle and below the muscle's ligament, just like a void, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to their proper position, nor does it follow for all movements.
If it is dislocated from the foot or above, then you find a clear manifestation, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises their hand to the top parts; and then pause with the fingers placed below the muscle's ligament, and raise the joint with strength in its proper place, and the minister raises their hand, and extends it there, and then pause because it returns easily.
But if it does not return for what we have said, and so from the beginning of the treatment that caused the dislocation, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and receive a soft embrocation that mollifies and liniments, just as if it were a coytz razitz of altaea, and fenugrec, and melillot in water, and be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and paused below the muscle's ligament, waiting for a day or two that it is set between levitation and stricture, and then the doctor pauses on the same spot above the spine, and raises the head of the muscle to its proper place, and attracts the hand of the patient so that it is not hidden at the bottom parts, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not hidden at the bottom parts, because it will then return to its proper place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make yourself present as one who has been put longer than the patient, and stand on the side of that bed, and insert the muscle below the ligament of the patient and raise the ligament to the top parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the bottom parts of the back. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended, so that they can hold that, because the dislocation returns soon.
And it is reduced in this way: and it is that it be fixed to the ground on a long stick whose head is rounded in shape, like a pile of mortar, which is not large nor subtle, and then paused below the patient; because when paused above the head of the stick, the patient's limbs are stretched according to the length of the stick, and then extended their hand to the bottom parts of the other side; and it is extended with strength from the other side, because the joint returns to its proper place with velocity.
And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of the quantity whose length is two arms, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted at the tip of the ligament according to this form.
And then place on the rounded head soft linen drapes so that the stick does not hurt the patient.
And you have placed the patient's little finger, and extended your hand or arm over the bust between the divisions of the fingers, and joined the bust to the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
You have placed your arm on a scale of stairs according to the latitude, and the hand is extended to the divisions below, and the other thing is suspended from the other side, so that the internal joint is straightened.
And when the instrument is fully prepared according to any possible manner, then cover it with a cloth of wool soaked in a certain quantity; and you have paused to prepare an emplaster made of powder of moly and album of egg white over all the muscle, thus revolving from above, and you have strengthened the little finger in a straight structure; and the ligament is revolved over the emplaster, and the hand of it is attached to its neck, and it is relaxed, and do not move the hand for seven days.
And you have paused to administer the food of the patient little by little, until the member is comforted, because it is easier to bring health to him.
And the food has been given in greater quantity for seven or eight days, and then an exercise of movement; and thus if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated by many swollen humidities that accumulate on it or for another cause, then cover it with a cautery in three tracts, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and seven days have passed, the ligament and joint are not strengthened, and the emplaster and structure are reduced over some swollen areas, and it is not strengthened and you cannot lift that arm to the divisions above, then you know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either injured or extended or softened, and you know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is done from the foot and thigh or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns.
And another structure is administered to it, and care for it until it is healed.
And if it happens that the healing is slow in the member and tardy in its movement, then the patient uses many swollen areas until that slowness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, especially from the front to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because it falls under the adjustment or under the touch according to some figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, it is manifestly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the underlying muscle.
And you see that the hips, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to a chronic apostema, because if it comes to a chronic apostema, difficult is the reduction of it, and far from being entirely healed; and especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many swollen areas that come with death in that.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it is extended in two directions, and the arm of it is expanded, and the hands of the doctor are on the hip and below it, and the fingers of its own hands envelop the joint, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus, that you bend the hand with its own hand, until it percusses the hip at the root of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and very strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same thing with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
And then you have revolved the arm from all parts, because it is enveloped in a double cloth wrapped long over the hand of it, or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, until that oil is poured for so that it facilitates the causes that help in lubricating the joint to facilitate; and then he envelops the joint with a strong impulse until it returns.
And then the reduction of it is covered with a plaster on which is stippled and exception made in egg white album, and is strengthened in a straight structure, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and is relaxed for some days.
And then it is loosened; and thus if the joint is formed in its original place, then you loosen the ligament of it and relax it.
If you see the joint is not strengthening, then apply the plaster and bandage, and leave it like that for several days until it is fully extended; and then remove it.
Perhaps it falls to the gravity, then reduce the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidification in bath and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or place on the joint alleviated, so it is a motor of great grease; and then bind, and leave that on the bone day and night. And then remove that, and put it in bath; and when it sweats, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then place it on the alleviated one, so it is rounded by motion, once a day, and the second, and the third. I'm in bath water, until it is relaxed.
And if you wish, place on that tender and humid wound of the cow's scalp and bind strongly over it; and do that for several days, because it is humid and reduces its disposition.
Chapter 28.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
A shoulder dislocation occurs when some veins are displaced, and the reduction of the dislocation is slower, and the opposite is for other joints, but especially it is necessary to have velocity in the reduction of it at the time it is dislocated, so that the place does not become apostematous or falls into an apostema.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's arm on a table and the doctor extends the arm of that one, and places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, and presses it until it returns to its own place.
But especially it is necessary to consider if the palm has been placed on the belly of the arm, then the patient places the back of their arm on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to the back of the arm, then the position of that arm is inwardly bent over the table, so that the doctor's arm fits over the prominence of the joint.
And then it returns soon, good; and if not, then strengthen that with an emplaster, binding tightly the apostema and leave it like that; and do not touch it, because if not, you will not suffer nor be able to put weight on the reduction of it, until the days pass.
But especially the Roman joint according to its tortuosity; and do not note to the patient any cause, but that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you will know that the nerves are pinched or compressed, and then it is not engendered in it unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the correction of it and fortifies its confidence.
Then when the shoulder is returned, then place on it the emplaster which we have recommended, and leave it like that for five days; and then remove it and leave it and the arm of it should be exercised.
But if the movement of it is hindered and falls into some gravity, then bathe it with warm water and rub it with tempered friction for several days, until it is alleviated.
Chapter 29.
On the cure of dislocation of the toes.
Several days are needed to dislocate the toes completely.
And when a toe is dislocated to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then stretch the toe and press the dislocation of it with the tied toes, until it returns.
And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in its own day.
And when it is night, lay it according to that narration, and do not cease to dislodge it in the day and exercise it with movement, and lay it at night; and do that for several days until it is straight.
And do similarly to that, if it is dislocated to the belly of the hand, and lay it on that part and do that for the first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do that when it is dislocated to other parts.
Chapter 30.
On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it falls to one of the vertebrae of the back or neck a complete dislocation, and so many vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death is likely to seize the patient.
And it is sign of that, the effort of the patient is exhausted and beyond their will, and cannot retain it; and many days are mollified some members of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many days are removed and many days are made for the removal of that in four parts.
Therefore, it has been demonstrated in the back parts and is called gout of the elbow.
Maybe the treatment of it is that then you should consider if the gout of the elbow occurs due to weakness, because then there is no cure nor complete healing.
Maybe in this case you see by chance or by percussion or by similar things, the Ancients described the methods of treatment as verbose and lengthy; maybe it returns to profit; maybe you have already experienced relief from that which you had little excuse for, due to the proximity of my own exposition, in which I have expounded and formed diverse instruments from that which I will show and explain.
And of those, none are cured except for that which occurs properly in the back itself, and that is what you recommend.
And it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face on a low bench near a wall, and should be stretched out with many pillows under them so that their feet are not lifted.
And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bench around the patient's head, and another stick in the air above their feet on the other side of the bench.
And one minister holds the stick, and it should not be fixed in a trench; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then envelop the patient's head and tie it firmly with a linen bandage; and extend the end of the bandage to the stick which is above the patient's head, and tie it there; and then strengthen the other bandage around their hips, and bind their legs; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick which is above their feet.
And then the minister should carefully extend the bandage to the part of the stick, and do not remove the two sticks and the bandages from their places where they are fixed, maybe even more firmly tied as we have said.
And the doctor should place their palms on the spine with great strength until it returns to its place, or should place them on a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until they return to their proper position.
Maybe if it does not return to its place through this method, then take a table whose width or length is in the air about three handbreadths, and excavate in the wall where we have said that it is proper for the patient to enter with their limb into the table. And then place the flat surface of the table on the spine, and the doctor should place their feet on the other limb, and stretch strongly until the spine is straightened and returns to its proper position.
And if you wish, take hold of the one that is revolving around the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground behind the patient's head at the end of the two sticks, the length of which should be an arm's length, and behind the patient's head again at the end of the two sticks; and let the length between each stick be a palm, and already it is made in each stick a hole in which the cord turns, and each one should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be a round stick in which the cord turns, and let it revolve around the two holes of the two sticks.
And at the end of it there is a hole in which the stick is formed, the length of which is a palm where it revolves; and on the two other sticks it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the bandages that you have stretched on the patient's feet at the hole which is above their head, and the bandages that you have stretched on their thighs at the cord which is above their feet.
And then there should be a cord and a minister who twists the cord with their hand, and the doctor should adjust the spine according to what we have said.
And then since the spine has returned to its place, and the location is adjusted, then cover it with a plaster made of albumen of egg, and then stop; and then place on the plaster a table whose width is three fingers or around that, and its length is as much as takes up the space of the gout, and above the part of the spine.
And then let it be tied with the bandage which we have said, and use subtle nourishment to help the patient until they are healthy.
And if there remains any weakness in the location at the end of the healing, then cover it so that medicines are administered which mollify and liniment with administration on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it has been administered in that location a lamina of lead.
And some weakened joints occur in the back of the spine of the two, and it is judged for that dislocation; and it is that bone which already has been weakened so that you do not cover it with a prognosis to him at this medicine, because it will make his condition worse and lead to death.
Chapter 21.
On the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not only have a dislocation, but also a slight movement, and it does not happen to those who have a small movement and cavity.
And the ankle joint is dislocated in four ways, either it is dislocated to the inner side, or to the outer side, or to the front side, or to the back side.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inner side, and rarely to the front side or to the back side.
And the sign of dislocation to the inner side is this, when you adjust the leg of the healthy person with the sick one, it is then longer and the knee is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee, and it is the place where the knee becomes swollen from an apostema, so that the head of the thigh bone has been dislocated here.
And the sign of that which suffers from dislocation to the outer side is that the symptoms of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that which suffers from dislocation to the front side is that it expands the knee joint according to its natural alignment, but nevertheless does not bend because of the pain in the knee, and if it is forced to walk and cannot stand on that leg; and their urine is retained and their knee is swollen, and they have difficulty walking on that foot.
And the sign of that which suffers from dislocation to the back side is that it does not expand the knee, nor can it bend forward because the knee joint bends, and their leg is shorter than the other, and the knee is weakened, and the head of the thigh bone has fallen to that place.
Moreover, the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already become chronic with time, you approach its reduction according to its disposition, then it is not in complete cure; and therefore it is not possible that there will be a full recovery.
Moreover, in the case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocations, then you must take care to return the joint to its place and extend it to the inner and outer sides, and move it to the right and left, so that it returns strongly and does not require another treatment.
Moreover, if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg from the lower part, or with its own muscles, or with a bandage which is tied above the knee; and another minister extends the hand below the knee, so that they grasp the lower parts of the thigh; and you strengthen the bandage over the joint of the thigh bone, and hold another minister who stretches out the extremity of the joint.
And its extension is from the ankle to the knee, or from the inner side to the outer side of the hip, or from the back side to the heel.
And its extension is all of these in one way, so that the patient is elevated above the ground and remains suspended.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary to apply all species of treatment that we have spoken of for its own cure.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the inner side, it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on their back; and then pause the joints at the joint of the thigh bone in the place where the head of the thigh bone meets the knee; and then extend the joint from the part of the knee to the outer side of the hip.
And then another strong minister takes hold of its arms, and grasps the large joint of the thigh bone of the patient and extends it to the outer side with violent extension, so that it returns to its original place.
And this species is of less gentle treatment, in which this member is reduced more than the other species.
Moreover, if it is excused above you and does not obey the entrance to this species of treatment at all, then it is necessary that they be tied with strong bonds, gently, above both feet and both knees.
And its length is of each part by the quantity of four fingers, and the patient's leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient is suspended over the top of the beam, and it is in a pulley; and its length from the ground is a quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong youth to pull the head of the thigh bone, and it is suspended with another youth, and the other youth pulls the thigh bone with strong and empowering force, so that the joint returns to its original place with velocity.
More in the reduction proper, when there is dislocation at the forefront of the patient, it is as if the patient lies on a pug according to what we have recommended in having gelbozitated the vent; and strengthen the ligament over the patient's leg properly and over their chest.
And then place two cushions under him, one at his feet and the other at his head; and then place two adjusted cushions under the middle of the puerile ficatum, which wraps around the patient to prevent them from being damaged by the cushion being between their thighs, so that the extension does not reach the affected parts.
And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor places his hand on the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then it is fitting that the leg be extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative method on puerile; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the loin of the patient, and then he takes the other hand, and with this contraction he stops the extension to the affected parts below the dentil of the forehead.
And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then it is not fitting that the patient be extended to the affected parts below, and he is elevated above the ground; having said that he should be placed on a hard cause, just as it is said that the anchoring of his feet is dislocated at the forefront, according to what we have said about the positioning of him on two anchors; and it is on his face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no trouble.
And it is fitting that compression be administered with a table on the area where the joint is affected.
Then, since the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient stretches out his leg and expands those six excuses, then you know that the member is returned as it should be — and then you adjust both thighs and place them in a bandage and stretch thus that the anchor is not bent in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then release the ligament and the bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see those joints in their proper place, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore the patient can walk again.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and replaster it, and stretch it according to your primary structure, and let it be for three days.
And then release it, and make him walk about on crutches for some days, until he is comforted.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of dislocation of the forehead.
The forehead is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated at the forefront, and at the back parts, and more at the lower parts than at the upper parts; and at the front parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you order the patient to apply his leg to the thigh; then you know that the forehead is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient sit upright, so that he stretches out his leg, if possible; tie both his feet to his chest, and place his foot between them; and then make him hold his forehead with both his palms, and return those between the teeth on the forehead in strength, and another minister extends his foot until the forehead returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction of it is that his leg adheres to the thigh without effort.
And then replaster it and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and then tie those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release them.
And do not allow the patient to walk about for some days, until he is healed and comforted.
It is fitting that if the reduction of it to you is explained, then administer strong extension to the ligaments which are in the treatment of the preceding narration about the ankle.
Chapter 33.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Some ankles are reduced by small movement, and some ankles are dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is made either at the back parts or at the front parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that you see the ankle inflating proceeding to the part where it is dislocated.
The treatment of the patient's leg is a lengthy process, and it is necessary to extend it with facilities and ease the hands so that it returns inward.
When treating a patient whose limb is displaced according to its natural alignment, make sure to straighten the affected limb, and hold one minister firmly and steadily behind the back of that patient in the middle location.
And then you place your right hand on the upper part of the foot above the ankle, and your left hand below the foot at the heel.
And then you pull the foot with your right hand, and place your left hand for two fingers, and stretch out your left hand; and you will feel the pulse of the foot on the inside of the leg.
And make two finger marks according to what we have counted.
And then you feel the pulse of the foot at the third finger mark, and that is at the heel.
So if it returns to one finger mark or two according to this method, and if the foot is bent inward, it's good; and if not, then you iterate the operation, because that returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then place the affected limb on a soft surface on the ground, and stretch out a cloth tightly fixed to the earth, and enclose it between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped it in a drap so that it does not displace.
And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or wraps it with a bandage that lies on the ankle; and then extend each minister against the extension of the affected part, and the cloth remains extended between the patient's thighs, retaining it, so that the body does not pull away from the lower parts beyond its extension.
And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, so that the dislocation returns to its natural alignment.
And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause the plaster and stretch out that bandage strongly, and bind the foot with a bandage at the leg.
And be careful that you protect or guard the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the bandage on it is not violent and holds it firmly.
And then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes soft, stretch it out.
And then remove it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the affected limb from movement for forty days. But if it is forgotten to attend to that space, it is not done securely so that the dislocation does not become dissolved and corrupted, and then it does not receive a cure.
And if you encounter a severe abscess, then be careful that you administer in the sedation of it what we have described beforehand, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is relieved.
Chapter 34.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
It is necessary that what is dislocated be bent with little extension of its own effort; and that which is not difficult, because it is easier.
But if the dislocation is in one of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to straighten the affected foot on a flat surface on the ground or on a table, and it should be steady like that.
And then you stand on your feet, and pause the affected foot on what you imagine to be the joints, and then calcify that in the affected foot until it returns, and you will see that it is already bent and does not appear in its eminent location.
And then pause below the belly of the foot on a table that takes the whole foot, which has two cups, and then strengthen it in a decent structure and firmness for three days; and then remove it and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its return is assured.
Chapter 35.
On the species of dislocation that are made with a wound or a fracture or some other signs.
When you encounter any of those causes, and you fail in the treatment of it and in its restoration, many finger marks will follow, leading to death.
And for that reason it is not fitting to presume on the treatment of it, but only he who is wise in the art, with long usage, merciful and piteous, tardy, not arrogant nor presumptuous; and who uses in the commencement of medicines that calm down so much, and leaves the affected one to divine judgment, but hopes for salvation from destruction, with alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope. And therefore it is necessary to strive so much to reduce it in the commencement of the cause, lest an abscess develops cautiously.
And therefore if the limb returns according to what we will, then administer a regimen that calms down abscesses and cures the wound with what is convenient for it among the diseased and dried out.
And if the dislocation is a fracture and it occurs in separated bones, then you perform the statement of theirs, and do so that we have said in simple maladies beforehand about the preceding places of those.
And beware and avoid according to your virtue that which is internal in the ways of fear, as it has preceded my prediction; because it is better for you to give thanks to your Creator, and may you be more permanent in your glory, and may there be more salutations to your body very truly in your time. Thus the phrases of Albucasim perfectly manifest those which God may bless. Amen.
