Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, for the completion of its consequences, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you have completed that for you at this treatise, which is a part of my operation with you, so it is surgery.
Because the operation with you has been postponed in our region and in our time of total privacy, until it strongly affected the science of it, and its investigation is exhausted; and there remained no rough draft of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the hands and induce error and confusion until their intentions are closed and its force is elongated and the art.
And it seems to me that you have vivified this ordering of this treatise in the second way according to the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that you may come into possession of the forms of the ferramentz of cautery and of other instruments of the work, as it is for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
The reason why no artificial art has been found in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it covers the entire actor who needs to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen knew thoroughly, including the joints of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and the knowledge of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and their position; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their movement.
And for that Hippocrates said that a name is a motion, more in the small work, and mainly in the art of the hand.
We have already said that about him in the introduction of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, it is evacuated that he will not fall into error, for which many men die, thus you have seen many of them, since they are formatted in this science and get away from that science and its experiments.
Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has attempted to incise an scrophilous apostema on the neck of a woman, and has cut some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed out until the woman almost died in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who promised that he would remove a stone from a man's bladder which had progressed to his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone in a trough of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And you have already called him a destroyer, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and because of the disposition of the patient's body, I knew that he would die under his hands.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he made a bad incision on the patient's thigh, which was already fractured; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he worsened the fracture, above the wound, with poultices and bandages in a strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then the dislocation followed according to the desires of the sick ones, and then the relapse, and then the loosening for some days and I commanded that we should not dislocate the limb; and it was thus until the thigh and the foot became apostematous, and they went into perdition.
And you have already called him a destroyer, and he was unable to dislocate the limb, and consequently there was tranquility and thus an end to his pains.
But the corruption was confirmed in the limb, so that it could not be restrained, and it did not cease to spread the corruption in the limb until the patient's peril.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous apostema, and it became ulcerated afterwards for several days, until the evil of it was magnified in his lord's sight.
The reason is that the cancerous tumor was pure melancholic humor, then it did not cover that it would come to him in entirety, but rather it was a member that suffered from all of it, as if it had been grafted.
And for that, sons, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with you has been divided into two devotions: one is an operation where health is associated, and another work where danger is in the major dispositions.
And you have already existed in every place of this book where I have opposed operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the fools do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And then take up your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your evils are abolished and stopped.
And use the best way for the grace of God to obtain health and laudable success, and leave the terrible evils of difficult healing, and stop using your arms for that which makes you afraid, so that you may have faith in your heart and in your name you are not evasive: because more remains in your glory, and also in the world and afterwards in your sanctities.
Because they are dispersed in certain small muscles: "There is no bad doctor who does not know the name of bad diseases."
"And I have divided this book into three chapters."
"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part." "The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the furnishings of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation."
"The division of the second part." "The second chapter, on scarification and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of poultices, and of extraction of arrows and of similarities to those, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and of treatment of twisting and of similarities to those; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments."
"I will discuss the quality of the youthfulness of that cautery and of its instruments, and in which complexity it is prohibited to use cauteries."
"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the youthfulness of cauteries and of their instruments is long and prolix, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they are discordant among themselves, and to me it suffices to take a small part of their sermons, fearing prolongation."
"Therefore I say that cauteries confer universally to all complexity, which is either matter or its matters, except for two complexities, which are cold complexities without matter."
"In the cold and dry complexity matter is disordered; because some said that cauteries are youthful for that, and others said the contrary of that, that cauteries are not convenient in illnesses which are by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that cold and dry illnesses are healed by cauteries which are hot and moist."
"And they say that those who say the contrary of that, that by cauteries youthfulness is made in all cold and dry illnesses that occur in men's bodies, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the complexity of fire, you find the body of man to be cold."
"And I say through the sermon of that, that I have already experimented and discovered many times."
"Moreover, I do not know what will come over that which has already been experienced and experimented in the chapter of cauteries for the last exercise, and to recognize the diversity of the complexity of men's bodies and the disposition of illnesses in their members, and the causes of those, and the accidents of those, and the space of time of those."
"Moreover, in the other complexities, it is not about your fear, and especially in the cold and humid illnesses, because all doctors have agreed on those, and do not disagree on the youthfulness with cauteries in those."
"And know, sons, that the secret of cure by cauteries is fire and its goodness, so on cauteries I will speak of comburent medicine, because fire is simple, the action of which does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not reach another member unless it is adjusted with a small benefit."
"Moreover, the action of comburent medicine penetrates to that in the members where it is needed, and strongly helps to come into the diseased member with difficult healing and strongly assists."
"Moreover, fire, by its sublime quality and good substance, does not do anything except to superfluous; and it is already known to us through experiment and lengthy service of studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that I have excused the length of the sermon; and if it were not that it is not read in my book in this passage to you secret hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion per which it expels illnesses, a philosophical sermon demonstrative, which would be acute in your own pages."
"And know, sons, that they disagree on the time in which it is convenient to do cauteries and pause at the best time of spring."
"And I say that cauteries are convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the youthfulness of that which I do with cauteries, and especially if the cauteries are for pains or necessary pains, strong and swift, which do not suffer tardiness because it is feared that those which come with malice are greater than small harm entering at the wrong time."
"And thus I do not cathe in your pages, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that to that illness which is healed by cauteries, there is no return to all time, and pause at that consequence."
And the cause is not so much in the preparation of the remedy as in the location of medicine which alters the complexions and dries the humidity, which are the causes of the pains.
Perhaps emperor's cautery should be placed above the medicine to demonstrate its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of his lordship.
And it is possible that the disease returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease, and its virtue, and what has been prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluous humors, and what has been acquired by him through habits and similarities to those causes; but that the disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease in members with few superfluous humors and humidity, thus as cautery of teeth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in him there will not return that pain, but rather it is done in small pieces.
And it is a common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a barbarous saying, not to those who understand it, because they believe that it is not a cure that advances with medicine nor another cause that advances with cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not so when administering various methods of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and thus at the end of the cause administer them with cautery, and it advances towards that. And from here it is clear that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and foolish doctors understand.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the limitation of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not break, as it is not absolutely virtuous, because you already have that probed and experienced that it does not do that except in certain bodies with others, and cautery with that is good and better than with iron, as they said; but when you make cautery with a focus of gold, it is not for you to declare, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and thus prepares to receive fire; and if you adjust it over the igneous matter, the gold is melted by the focus, and in this way the artisan can make use of certain laminas to occupy themselves with that.
And therefore it is done with iron cautery, we do not push lightly and do not propose to rectify the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that they may ask for what they want from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the accidental servant of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of swelling and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the divisions of the veins and ears flowing, and multitude of drowsiness, and of toothache and gout, and universally of all disease that comes from coldness, thus as paralytic, swelling and apoplexy, and similarly in those diseases.
The form of this cautery is this, that first and foremost it commands the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine, clearing the head, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and their age and custom.
And then it commands him to shave his head with a razor, and then to seat himself between two cushions on a heated bench and to place his hands on the soles of his feet.
And then he places the razor in the palm of his hand, and then puts it on the razor's edge between the nostrils, near the soles of his feet. Perhaps emperor, as the finger of my middle place has arrived, it signs that place with tension, and then ignites the olive cautery, of which this is the form.
And then he places that on the place marked with tension, in a way that it descends, so that the finger of his hand is constricted little by little, and you rotate that.
And then he lifts his hand lightly and regards the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, thus as the quantity of grain of errors, then he lifts his hand, and if it does not return to his hand on that iron, another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by him what I have said to you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the place and let it stay there for three days.
And then he places it on the wrapped cloth in binding and lets it stay there until the scab of the focus is destroyed. And then he cures the place with four-ingredient remedy until it is healed.
And I said that when the Roman plague breaks out, it is so much better to receive the arm, because it is a greater and more youthful juice.
I instructed them to cauterize the codes within the bone, and hold the cautery within so that some part of the spine's structure is burned.
And then it should be reduced to what has been burned of the bone, and then it should be cured.
I instructed others that I should apply the cautery to the back, so that it penetrates into the bone with strong penetration, until the bone breaks, and this is the method of small abscesses. I estimate that from that place, vapors are exhaled from the head.
And it should be held in the open plague for a long time, and then it should be cured until it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two special types of cauteries at all, except in some homes according to the way of fear; and thus, you see, I, better am I healthy, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity of that, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the species of first cauteries is more saved and better than I; and from that house and I, in that work, I am healthy.
Following chapter.
About the cautery of the head.
When the entire head suffers from chronic and long pain, and it is in a prolonged patient, and uses remedies and poultices and cupping glasses and implants and gauze and cadels and wads, and especially if it has been cauterized with a cautery that recounts and does not profit from any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and troubled by much fatigue, then that cauterying is another cautery below that one. And then I will cauterize that on the horn of the seventh head with a cautery until the code is divided. Cut the code and it is discovered in the bone the quantity which we have recounted and cauterized that with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place which is called "vas" - and it is that place where the wind is paused. And lift your hand in that way, and do not discover the bone, because the patient suffers from such great diverse pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And I said that this cautery is in its place, because it is known that the cautery is the one that cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the method of it.
Chapter three.
About the cautery of non-ancient migraines.
When there is pain in the part of the head, or it is sudden pain until the vein, then it should be evacuated with medicines that mondify the head, and another cure should be administered, which I have said in the divisions of the diseases; and if not profited, then cauterying is done in two ways: either cauterying with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
The cautery with burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and scrape it and bind the extremities of it to both heads. And then I cut into the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it is in the exact place below the code, until it is hidden.
And then I strengthen it above the place where it is stopped for descent and constriction, and thus it remains for three hours; and then I remove it and extract the alum, and thus the plague is for two or three days, and then I pause on the covered area submerged in water until the place makes a break.
And then I cure that which is wounded until it is healed.
And if you want, here are some burning medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
The cautery with iron is done in this way: ignite for cautery of which this is the method.
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus like a form of key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it is a small prominence.
And then I pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand - so that the artery which is below is not burned - and turn the small iron quickly little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it that is burned by the structure of the code is thus as much as the magnitude of it, and hold your hand for so that the artery which is below is not burned, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then I immerse the area in salt water and pause it on the place, and thus it remains for three days; and then I pause the area much softened in water, and then I cure that which is wounded until it is healed.
And if you see it, burn the extremity of the ankle joint with a cautery, and be careful not to make an incision on the artery in this emigrant procedure, which is not antiquated.
Fourth chapter.
On the old emigrant cautery method.
When you treat emigrant disease as we have said about previous cures, and as we have said in the divisions of the illnesses, and do not hasten the cure, and sometimes because of the illness that does not respond to what we have said of the first cautery in medicine or of the cautery in focus, then it is necessary that you ignite the cautery flame within so that it is whitened, since it signifies above the line of length of which is the greatest part of the aforementioned, or whichever; and pause your hand for a while and strengthen it before incising the artery and piercing through to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful of the continuity of the jawbone, which is worn out by chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves are not affected in such a way, and that there is no spasmodic contraction.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood in the artery that is compressed, because in the compression of it there is fear, and furthermore to one who ignores what he does and is not studious and experienced; and thus the operation begins with him at the commencement.
And you will find the reminder of the regulation of blood flow by chance in the artery according to the usual method, in the same place of this book.
And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, then burn it in the middle of the head thus as we have recounted, and cure the plague until it is healed.
And if you see it, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the stretching of the artery with cautery having two handles, and this is a better cautery method and more convenient.
Chapter five.
On the cautery of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is treated with causal laxatives and another cure which has been said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has a pointed name, of which this is the form:
And place the point at the ignition, and it should be led around the entire ear thus as a wheel is turned, or in the circle of some things if the pain is somewhere. Go along with the cautery of the root of the ear little by little, because you will soon feel the spot where you are aiming.
And if you cautery several points throughout the entire ear, and that is it, and then cure the spots until they are healed.
Chapter six.
On the cautery of gout.
Gout which is treated and cured with cautery is not just one of the species that come through flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
It is necessary to cautery the species that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that species of gout with herbs and capillary vessels and gargles, and your cure does not take effect, then it is necessary that you cautery the illness in three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, and the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your hand with the cautery for the opposite part of the affected area, because mollification only appears in the part that seems healthy.
And the form of cautery is that you cautery it with the cautery in the right place of the extremity of the ear, then slightly above the horn of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which is according to the length of the aforementioned finger, and pause your hand at the cautery until the quantity of the greatest part of the species of the codeina is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of ankle joint, the form of which is described in this table. However, it is more subtle because that one is little as you see; and it is necessary to cut in the excess fat a little.
And then cure the spot where it is described, until it is healed.
Chapter seven.
On the cautery of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not take effect, and the illness has no fever, then cautery it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and with the cautery in the neck. And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said before.
And you have been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more delayed; and then you should be cured, so that digestion proceeds.
Chapter 8.
About the cauterization of oblivion made through weakness.
It happens that donations are given to the patient at the beginning of the illness, large and pilled servants administering remedies.
And then you will take off the whole head of the patient and place it on the gouty joint of their affected limb described in the treatise on applications.
And then you will apply some gentle touches, because that is the manner of cauterizing. And do it thus according to the method which I have already described.
And therefore if the patient is thus; and if not, then make three cauterizations on the rear part of his head, which are dependent on the upper part of the head going into the lower part of the neck. And place between each cauterization the thickness of a finger, and then cure the cauterization so that it proceeds.
But if you find the patient is more tolerant, then make the cauterization in a moderate place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cauterize above the two horns (of the veins).
Then cure it until he is healthy; and let the olive oil cauterization be according to the form previously given.
Chapter 9.
About the cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
It happens that you proceed in mundification of the head with juices and as we have said; and then take off the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a moderate cauterization on the middle of the head, and cauterize above all the horns of the head, and cauterize above the rear part of it, and make three cauterizations above the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to treat those and the patients are tolerant and the illness is strong, then cauterize it with four cauterizations above the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards cauterize until it is combusted from the cord motus of it, and raise the tieua ma. And then cure it until he is healthy, and let this olive oil cauterization be.
Chapter 10.
About the cauterization of epilepsy.
It is not cauterized, the epileptic one, but rather that epilepsy is due to weakness.
And therefore it happens that you mundify the brain of him at the beginning of his years and another cure which we have dictated in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer from medicines, then administer gentle and mastigatory servings of mundification, beforehand for many days, with good purification of the veins.
And then take off the patient's head, and then cauterize it with a moderate cauterization on the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and another cauterization on the occiput of it, and above each horn of the head it is cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with cauterizations which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body above the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the olive oil cauterization be according to what has been previously said.
But if the patient is a child, then apply subtle cauterizations according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
About the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and great weakness, then cauterize it with the cauterizations which we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him something that mundifies his brain according to what has been previously said in the division.
And then take off the patient's head, and then make a gentle tortura decently made of them above the circle, and then place it in the middle of the head.
And the patient is sitting on a chair, and is held by all parts.
And then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy of being bound with an old cloth of wool. And heat that over the fire for moderate warmth, which is measured by the patient's own temperature when it is in him. And then put that in the middle of his head in the circle, and leave it there until it is frozen.
And do it thus with the patient for a whole week, another regiment of his good health until he is healthy; or if you wish, cauterize it making small points according to the size of him, but holding the hand in one cauterization thus ordered: this is a special kind of cauterization that humects the brain in equality.
And then stop that constricted gut in the belly or in the grayish-white area of the groin.
Chapter 12.
About the descent of warm water into the wheel.
When you have declared the commencement of warm water in the wheel through the pipes which you have placed in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient so that it cleanses his head, and beware of all humidity.
And make him sweat in a bath for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the commencement of the flow of water in two wheels, or from one side if it is the commencement of the water in one wheel.
You will cauterize all the veins and arteries which are located in the hollow; and place the cauteries at that length in the latitude of the temples.
And beware of flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, apply some medicine to him, which is as much as possible.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and their removal, and caution regarding flows of blood.
And some veins are cauterized on the neck between two bones with two cauteries, producing an immediate effect.
Chapter 13.
On the cauterization of old tears.
When the tears of the wheels are old and accumulated through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head beforehand, and it is verified that this is a superfluous flux of phlegmatic humors, then cauterize with that cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the commencement of warm water flowing into the wheels, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries between two bones. And if you indicate addiction, then cauterize that on the entire side of the wheel above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the cauterization of foul discharge from the nose.
When you treat that with the water which we have spoken of in the division and it does not receive your treatment, then prepare and give to drink to the patient the juices for three nights; and then shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery, a mixture of a mild cautery and an olive oil cautery. And then cauterize that with a cautery of cloves, and two cauteries above the eyebrows beneath the hair, a small one.
And beware of the artery that you do not injure it.
And this is the form of the cautery of cloves.
Chapter 15.
On the cauterization of softening of the eyelids of the wheels.
When the eyelid of the wheel is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery, and this is the form of it:
And if you do so, cauterize that above both eyebrows, a small one with two cauteries on the entire affected part, and it will be lengthened from the temples. And it will be the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Chapter 16.
On the cauterization of the eyelid of the wheel when the skin is converted into inner parts and punctures the wheel.
When the skin of the wheel is converted into inner parts and punctures the wheel, cauterize in that which is according to two manners, because the cautery is either with iron or with a combustible medicine.
If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to hold still while he raises his skin thus as those who are in the world, until they are prolonged and engulfed; and if you puncture that which is devoured by the excessive growth, then strengthen the wheels of him with a band so that it is not augmented until the skin is born.
Since they are born and engulfed, then stop the head of the patient in the tierce, and place a sign above the eyelid of his wheels with a tent, which is according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and it is the beginning of the signal proper of the skin.
And then stop constricted gut in album of Huou or in mucilage of ptilli on the wheel.
And then ignite the cauteries, of which this is the form.
And then cauterize over the figure which has been signaled, little by little, in moved motives, until the surface of the code is burned, which is thus as a leaf of myrtle, entirely apparent properly.
The sign of good health in the body's work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already constricted and its skin elevated from the puncture of the eye.
So raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place it on the outer border of the scar so that it may be eradicated. And then heal that wound with an ointment until it is healthy.
But if the skin returns to its original state for some reason and the eyelid is softened, then make another attempt with the cautery on that entire area as you had done previously.
But if the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its natural place and is equalized and the skin does not press on the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine is what commands the patient to lift the skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a paper template in the shape of a mitre leaf.
And then take a gentle grasp with living heat and a single vein. I think there may be an error here, as ".i." doesn't seem to make sense in the context of this medieval medical text. If you meant to provide another sentence for translation, please go ahead! or that, and then mix those causes well, and make that into a fasting powder so that it is not frozen; and then spread it over the paper which was made thus in the shape of a mitre leaf, and place it on one eye or both; and place below the eye a hollowed-out albumen of egg white, and the head of the patient should be in a straight position.
And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little and not too strongly until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, because the biting is in it as from fire.
And then as you perceive that the biting is excessive, then remove the medicine and wash your finger; then when the biting ceases, then rinse the eye with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid has been lifted thus as it has been freed from the constriction of fire or incision, because then it is so; and if not, turn back to that of the medicine on the place where you did not impregnate the medicine and do not deny until your operation is equalized and the eye is constricted.
And then place on the outer border of the scar until the root of the abscess is eradicated, and then heal that wound with a definite ointment or another until it is healthy.
And it is necessary for you, from your operation to keep diligent watchfulness that no residue of the medicine falls in the eye, and if the eyelid for several days is softened and some cause of the skin presses on the eye, then repeat your medicine on the place where the eyelid is softened, and properly thus as you did at the beginning, and then finish it until it is healthy.
And this is the shape of a mitre leaf.
And you know that the eyes of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and thus according to what is done, your contraction is made.
And it will not be ambiguous the way of direct treatment for that which is studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
On the Cauterization of Fistula that is in the Tear Duct of the Eye.
When you cure a fistula with water that we have spoken of in the divisions of illnesses and it does not conform to your cure, then be careful that you cauterize it thus according to this manner: command the patient to hold their head straight in a straight position, and hold the head of some minister between the eyes but in such a way that it is neither bent nor agitated by the straight head.
And then place a hollowed-out border of egg white or a layer of poultice on the eye of theirs.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which should be conical, thus as it is in the shape of a reed or a feather's quill, from one extremity to where the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want, let it come out thus as a point.
But I think that which is burnt is better for the eye's work.
And then take the fistula if it is open, and draw out its humor and dry that. And if it is not open, then operate on it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold that in the eye for a little while away from the cautery of the eye to the bridge of the nose, so that you do not err with your hand or the patient is not quieted, and then place the cautery in the corners of the eye and corrupt it.
And then at the beginning of the eye's cautery, perceive into the bone, it is; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if need be; and leave that thus for three days, and then place on the outer border and surrounding it with a dried-up ointment until it is healthy.
If they have not passed urine for eleven days and are not healthy, then stop the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scratched according to what is convenient in the seventh chapter.
And it is another manner of cautery for the fistula which initially showed signs: then at the place of the fistula and make an opening there and stop in that subtle cavity, which is its shape; And put a quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and you hold your hand firmly with good retention, and do not let the patient move so that the melted lead does not penetrate to the bottom of it; and cover the opening on the patient's skin with egg whites or water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about the cautery and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the body of the nose as it will return to its own location.
Chapter 18.
On the cauterization of the fracture of the toes.
Wounds caused by accidentally made fissures on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
So when you treat those fissures as we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your care, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this form that is shown:
And it is the conquest of it according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Then stop that initiated cutting deeply into those fissures until the cautery penetrates to the bottom of the fissures.
And then take care of it with wax until it is healthy.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth an abscess is formed and then breaks, and it is ruptured, and it is antiquated, and correct breaking and it makes a fistula, and then you treat that and do not deepen the cure, then stop because you should ignite the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then put that ignited thing into the hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron ignites at the bottom of it, and afterwards make a wound or two; and then take care of it as we have said about the cure until it is healthy.
And so if the wound is abscessed and is healthy, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and stop the corrupt bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cauterization of teeth and softening of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are bad, and you treat them with medicines and do not consent, then stop the head of the patient in the straight tie, and ignite the cautery in the form that will come, thus you stop the gum on the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery, holding your hand firmly so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
And then lift your hand, and then apply the cautery to some wounds according to what you want.
And then the patient should hold his mouth full of salty water and keep it there for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the bad tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is reinforced and the corrupting humidity is dried up.
Chapter 21.
On the cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is due to coldness, or if there is cold or worm in it, or does not consent to the cure with medicine, then cautery is applied in two ways: either cautery with the edge of a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with the edge is that you take the edge of a cow's horn and burn it in a hot fire, and then take it out and wrap it over the extremity of the tent, and then submerge it in boiling water, and stop it on the painful tooth firmly until it is cooled.
And then apply that to some wounds until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge the nail or cot in the edge mentioned above, and stop it on the painful tooth, and stop over the iron fire until the iron penetrates to the bottom of the conquest of the tooth.
However, Emperor's caution on cauterization with fire is that you should attend to the quantity of iron or fire, and it should be in the heart of some grossness and the acuteness of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form that will come, and stop it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; and make some wounds because the pain will be relieved or on that day or on another day.
And you should cover the area with a layer of that cautery which the patient will place on their good mouth and hold it for an hour, and then scrape off the excess.
You should cauterize as much as you can tolerate, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
On the cauterization of clubfoot.
When clubfoot is caused by flux and cold humors and does not respond to digestion through medicines and you want to treat it lightly, then you should ignite the cautery in the form of which this follows, having two hubertas on both extremities so that the smoke goes from one extremity to the other, and pause for a while over that aposteme, and another time if it is indigested, until it reaches the beginning of the aposteme.
And if the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and leave it for three days and pause over the swollen area in a good way until what the fire has consumed is removed.
And then heal that wounded area with tents and drapes until it is healthy.
Chapter 23.
On the cauterization of sciatica and constriction of the wings.
When moisture comes over the channel of the lung, and especially when that is caused by cold complexity, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that from which the root of the ulcer is in the affected area.
And beware that you do not bring the cautery to the ulcer nor burn the skin of it, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery from which the joint of the spine is in the rear vertebrae of it. And let the cautery of it be tempered according to the preceding method.
And then heal that wounded area which has been treated until it is healthy.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization of lung disease and of cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold moisture and the patient has no fever nor thirst and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the affected areas of the loins and sides; and with another cautery in the middle area of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be tempered according to the preceding method.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cauteries that are called points, the form of which is mentioned in the pointing of auricular pain.
And let them be points until they reach those; and then heal that wounded area which has been treated until it is healthy.
And now the cauteries have three ramps because cauterization is done in this way: you can do three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter 25.
On the cauterization of stuttering, which is a defect of the tongue.
When the head of the tongue is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return to its place in the hour of its usual return, until it is accustomed to returning, and then through a small movement it is dislocated thus that it is hindered, as we have testified, then it is necessary first to reduce the dislocation, and then let the patient be reversed over his back or on his side; and then lift the skin which is in the partition of the tongue to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated in the lower parts.
And then ignite the cauteries having two heads; and this is their form:
And then cauterize the skin until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization with four heads of cauteries.
And some times it is adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
And then pause over the cauteries poured out in salt water, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with tempered cauteries or with many pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and moisture come into the stomach until that extract from its complexity and are multiplied in it, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confuse, then it is necessary for the patient to be on his back with raised hands, and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger's breadth in tempered cauteries, and two cauteries below the sides of the chest, until the figure of triangular cauteries is obtained; and elongate between those who are not adjusted so that they will make purging.
And if the depth of the cautery equals the quantity of the two tertiary burns on the surface of the knee.
And the figure of the cautery is added according to this form, and if you wish, make a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let it be a circular cautery according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized at the point to which the fear of this cautery has reached: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you wish to hold, and then cauterize at those points; and then heal with the cure that precedes until it is sanitized.
Chapter 27.
On the cauterization of the fevered foot.
When the foot is painful due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness until the normal complexation is disturbed by superfluous egress, and it is cured with water that we have said before, then it is necessary that the patient be resupinated on their bed, and feel held with three cauteries according to this form and this measured quantity on the foot beneath the hip joints, where one perceives the decubitus of the home.
And let the space be that which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
And do not comprehend your hand with the moving cautery.
And if the quantity of water that is absorbed equals the quantity of the matter of the specific condition of the knee, and it does not need to be adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their thighs, and elevated their own arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cuticular cautery, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed excessively in the cauterization, and let the specific condition of the entire knee be absorbed so that the entire body is penetrated and reaches into the intestines, because the knee here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the perforation of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
When there is an ulcer or abscess on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tendon, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will have grave trouble and pain will be acute.
And if it is in the tendon of the foot, then the pain is greatly acute and sometimes the doctors are weary of curing it.
Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned over onto their bed; and then anoint the area of the abscess with water; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled in a row, the form of which has been described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire knee is burned, until it reaches the hip, until there is no more sanity.
And then heal it by healing the other abscesses until it is sanitized.
And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one whom you have studied in the art of medicine has prolonged it, and in many cases where many maladies are conjoined; but some experiments have been made on this operation, but I emperors leave that to those who know better, and it is mine.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology ulcers burn according to this manner of being made, and it is this that you take from the roots of Aristology a long dry root which is found, and let it be of the thickness of a finger.
And then submerge it in oil and expose it to the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that place where the continuity of the furcula is with the neck; and make two small cauteries beneath the guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is beneath the beard, and make two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the cisterna, declining slightly towards the back parts; and make another cautery in the middle of the foot, and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the back parts; and make one cautery at that place where it is between the two spines, and make two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, beneath the cautery which is between the two spines.
And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery, unless it is in the manifest of the code in work.
And thus I have described the ancient cauteries that are similar to those of the men who use iron-like cauteries that resemble a ray and ignite them, and place them in that spot which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and sanitize it, just as we have said about the abscess on the foot.
In this perforation of the cautery, it is not in season, because for so long it has accumulated in the place of the fistula that it does not heal.
Chapter xxx.
On the cautery of the worse.
When you treat the worst case of the worse, as we have said about the cure in the division and do not confuse your cure, then cautery it in three ways, all of which are directive, one of which is to make three or four linear incisions according to the length of the worse, according to the figure of the cauteries on the foot, the figure of which has preceded.
And it is between each cautery a thumb's width or a little more, and the manner of the cautery is the manner which we have said in the cautery on the foot, equally.
And do not comprehend your hand at the cautery; and the patient should be seated on a high stool.
And there is another way of cauterying, it is that you ignite the cautery having two virtues, which cause we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and it alleviates the codeine which is at the end of the worse where the patient feels the pain without sinistrality.
And it is your elevation in which you elevate the codeine according to the length of the body, so that you make pointed cauteries according to the width of the body.
And then introduce the two virtues, ignite motion, in that introduction where those penetrate the codeine from the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and thus they are made four pointed cauteries.
And if you want, cautery with a cautery having three virtues.
And then you cure the cautery, because it has lain for three or four days, for it is more comfortable than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Chapter xxxi.
On the cautery of dropsy.
Cauteries are not made in dropsy, but rather in a certain precise location.
When you treat the dropsy, there are ways of cure which we have said in the division and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary that those cauteries are four cauteries in the circle of the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the foot, and one cautery on the worse, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery is proportionate to the specificity of the codeine.
And then leave the cautery open so that it heals for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from cure then with the cautery as it is necessary for them to be added to their two intentions, and they will be strengthened by the help of health.
The form of the cautery that is cauterying the belly is club-shaped according to the form of that which precedes, and it is that which is cauterying the back and is olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Chapter xxxii.
On the cautery of feet and thighs.
When the feet are apostemized in dropsy and are full of watery humor, it is necessary to cautery the feet on the back of the foot at night, where it is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand at the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it entirely, because the watery humor resists.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make points on both thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a pointed cautery at the extremity of the cutting cautery. And it is the cautery according to the length of the thigh: one below the knee and another at the middle place of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And then leave the open plague for a long time of cure so that some watery humor is resolved from it.
And then cure them with those causes which we have said.
Chapter xxxiii.
On the cautery of the belly and stomach.
When the belly and stomach are full of cold and humidity inside, which debilitate the strengths, so it is the digestive and retentive strength, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured with those ways of cure and do not confuse, and sometimes the patient suffers from exhibiting cauteries of strength, then cautery it with a great cautery on the entire stomach according to what has preceded in the cautery of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and four cauteries in the subtle circle of the navel, with a club-shaped subtle cautery; and with a cautery on the alcatin above the large alozis, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the humidities exhibit and the patient tolerates, then cautery it on the pentenilh and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal area, because it is a perfect cure of juvenation, from which you do not err.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When in the nature of behind ancient hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that corrupts or humidities corrupted, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confer the swift cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the pus below the small and small triangular spine, and cauterize beneath the navel for two days.
And if it happens that their stomach is inflamed and their food is not digested, and their face is sometimes spotted, then cauterize above the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and apply one cautery on the thigh, and another on their navel with a clavicular cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time open, and afterwards cure them from within so that they may be healthy.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of athelia, suitable for their abscesses.
When you abscess athelia, then ignite the cauteries that are assembled into a row. Then insert the ignited cautery into that abscessed athelia, and hold it there for a short time until you feel the cautery reaching the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make one or two trips, because if the athelia are too thick, then cauterize each of them according to what we have recounted, and afterwards cure those who confer their healing from within so that they may be healthy.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the elbow, it is more beneficial for the joints.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature behind in their bodily parts.
When the nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is despaired by it, then heal with cauteries.
Therefore when you have a fistula in the nature behind, and it is ancient, corroding their sanity and humidities corrupted, and therefore it is more worthy that you cover it with a subtle tent, and afterwards consider the quantity of the depth of it before the aforementioned tent.
Then ignite the cauteries that are assembled into a row. And then insert the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you introduce the tent.
And hold the cautery over that fistula until the corrupted bodies are completely burned, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not make this except when the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
And afterwards cure the place until it is healthy.
And if the place is sealed, and you have removed from it the bad materials, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it has been entirely cured.
And if the bad materials are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting the bone, or that is because of those causes which will bring remembrance to its place.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of the kidneys.
When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or gross ventosity, and thus the side of the patient's thigh is weakened, then cover that with a cautery above the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney with a clavicular cautery from which proceeds the remembrance.
And strengthen their cauterization according to the second small spine, so that three lined cauteries will come, and thus they will be more beneficial for the joints.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When debilitation and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and humidities, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize above the pubic area just below the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery is according to the quantity of nodes on the foot; and cauterize above the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And it is a clavicular cautery according to what has been described.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the uterus.
When cold and humidities come to the uterus, and thus it is prohibited from conception, and their menses are corrupted, and it is delayed the provocation of them, and there is pain in the region of the abdomen, then cover that place with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder; and apply one cautery above the lower part of the back, or two cauteries, and it is a clavicular cautery.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of a dislocation of the ankle.
When moisture accumulates and is distributed to the part of the ankle, and it causes effusion into the joint, and it seems that the thigh is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is discovered in the boy's knee.
Then you should cauterize the patient on the part of the ankle with a circular cautery, because you will have sensed them in the circuit of the joint thus as it is revolving, and so that the joint falls into its proper place.
And this is the cautery which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at your disposal, then cauterize that man with three olive-shaped cauterizes.
And it will be done the cautery according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and you should take care of that patient until he is healed.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain goes to the ankle joint, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and not contradicted, and that is ancient, then you should release the patient from gross humors with fetid pills or artificial similars; and then cauterize him.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either cauterizing with combustible medicines, or cauterizing with fire.
It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that it cauterizes him on the part of his ankle with three triangular-shaped cauterizes in this form; and do so with good depth. And it is the space which is between each cautery, the quantity of the thickness of the said and if the olive-shaped or large cauteries.
Sometimes it is necessary to place the cauteries on the middle spot on the head of the ankle, because there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with the circle in which the form is precised in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, there where the circle contains and combusts the inspection of the entire code.
And this is the manner of cautery in certain cases when pain is adhering to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Sometimes if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize him with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient turns which is the pain; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers below the affected part.
And if the cautery is cutting, and its depth is according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
And if the patient turns where the pain is extended into the place near the toes, then cauterize him there where it turns with three points or four or maybe even more indications of that.
And if the patient turns where the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize him there with a cutting cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not exceed with the cautery so much that it combusts nerves or great arteries, and that for this reason you are above the patient's bad nourishment or contradiction.
And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the hip and exceeded in the cauterization, and the burned flesh became inflamed until the tumor reached the foot, and the burned and corrupted the entire foot. And then a strong solution of wine, and then death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And I will describe the wise men in the cauterization of an ankle cautery, of which this is the manner: make a circle of iron wire whose circumference is the width of a palm; and it should be of seven orifices according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
And divide that circle into another third; and the space which is between them is the quantity of the thumb of the foot; and those circles are opened in two parts; and their length is one notch or two notches, and make a decently apparelled iron margin in those circles; and this is the form of it:
Then ignite it in the fire until it becomes red-hot and throws sparks, and then place it on the part of the ankle, the patient collects himself on the side of his bed. And then cauterize him with three red-hot cauteries at once.
And then leave it like that for three days; then apply a dressing with a bandage and leave the open wound for many days; and then take care of him with an ointment until he is healed.
Says Albucasis: Oh, sons, of this species of cauteries few have used for the fear of the regard of it, and for this reason few have found those which regard it above.
More of those who suffer from burns are burned in that place, and turn around to apply it to their area.
Many cauterizing medications adhere to the fact that you make two circles with a perforated armula, in which the gate of iron is inserted; this is the length of the partition in the narrowness of their shoes or those nostrils.
And if the spaces which are between almost the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and thus they open below and above, and thus they contain themselves among their following according to this form:
And then stop on the affected area of the water that the patient is sitting on, and comprehend your hand on the affected area of the water; and take hot water in a font between two circles, and the quality of that water should be warm little by little, and apply it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the biting and the adjustment of it  because that bitter biting is thus as from fire  until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and evacuate the hot water from all of the affected area into water that is lukewarm.
And then leave it like that for three days and stop on that border until the blackness of the adjusted remainder is seen, and leave it like that for some days, and correct his impoverished condition; this is the last stage in the treatment.
And then cure him by bandaging until he is healthy.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or leg, make him stand in it so that it contains water according to what is done in the affected limb.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkaline and cause not extinct of both anaesthesia in one part, and triturate them and stop in a new vessel of which the affected part is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the vein.
And stop below the bottom of another vessel inverted, and gather above that alkaline and cause living water which surrounds them for a finger, and since you comprehend them with your tie or good compression, and leave the hole that sends from the sharp water to the affected part to the vessel inverted.
And then adjust all that water, and gather it above another living cause and other alkaline renovators, because at those times it will be of great fortitude acuity, which is administered in many operative operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
And thus of the medicines some are those which are cauterized deeply, thus as they are teething and honey-like and cause wisdom in knowing that they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure in which the pain of water and of vein sciatica is cured, and magnifies much to be that of it, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healthy for a season thus as recommended, because strong is the one who introduces it into bath and thus knows how to do it.
And it is that it takes near certain green, and if it is not found green, take fresh fig; and much is triturated in a few gray ones and placed on the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and it is tied.
And it is left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
And then put him in bath and then when his body is relaxed, introduce it into the sun, because the pain ceases and he is healthy.
And you know that there is no need to use cauteries in these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
Many times Escorides says that when the vein of the goat's horn is cauterized, it is beneficial for his body; and this is the cauterization in the following manner: take wool and dip it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
And then take dry goat's horn and inflame it in fire until it is made into carbon; and then stop it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched. And then repeat this, and do not cease doing it until the sensation of the biting pain is eliminated from the water and rests the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cautery of goats.
Chapter 42.
On the Cauterization of Pain in Toes.
Some times pain is in the toes for many causes, such as by trauma or percussion or by excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, by infusion of cold and humid matter.
And cautery is not effective except in this single species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Therefore it is necessary, then evacuation of the patient with small, fit pills and similar to them, which are made on the toes where the pain is three lines according to the latitude of it, because you have ten in each line or cauteries, or more, according to the quantity that is seen from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And it is necessary to make a pointed cauterization on the surface.
If you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries on the middle clavicle according to this method:
Chapter 43.
On cauterization at the beginning of gout treatment.
Soft remedies are applied to this ailment in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it settles on their little joints and causes elevation and movement.
And it starts in the back of the spine, on the dorsal vertebrae and ribs, which have already begun to overgrow the other vertebrae.
And so when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize with a circle-shaped cautery according to this method: that takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine in a circular motion.
And if you want, cauterize around the circle of the spine with a pointed cautery of two lines or three. And place the points properly between them.
And then heal the area within, which will be healthy with what we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Chapter 44.
On cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus how gout of cold cause is cured in a manner of cure and the pains are not left behind, then they remain to be cauterized.
And it is that you should cauterize with evacuation around the circle of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And this is the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form.
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains go inside the teeth or to other joints, and this is very difficult to endure, then cauterize that on each tooth with three or four cauteries of the entire affected part with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed for this cautery to be necessary, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, it is only necessary to surround the specific area of the code.
And if the pains go inside the tooth and ribs, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called sciatica, then point around the circle of the ankles thus as they revolve, point on those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point around the circle of the ankles on each rib and on the edge of the hand.
And if the pains go near the joints to the tendons or muscles, then cauterize the affected areas of the entire joint.
And do not evacuate the ailment with good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good regimen and the flesh is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God willing.
Chapter 45.
On cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the limbs and the intestines are torn apart from the cavity to the genitals, and this begins to come out, then it is necessary that you order the patient to remain quiet for seven days and use gentle causes so that the wound of the seventh ventricle may heal.
And follow the patient between your hands above the seventh ribs, and command him to hold his seven wings inside so that it may be completely healed or the cavity or intestines may appear.
And then return that to the ties of the fingers and sew them together to hold the rupture over the bone of the fifth finger on the sign of the extremity which seems like a circle at the sublime parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the form.
until it is very red and has many sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then pause the cautery on that sign with your hand on the cautery standing upright, and you will see that the bone of the fifth finger is consolidated into the middle of the divine; and afterwards in another way if you have not succeeded in the first way into the bone.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during the hour of your cautery, lest you harm that intestine so that on the patient no mortal or other great evil may come.
You should know that when you have the cautery in hand, do not touch the bone, it does not hinder your operation.
And be careful that the cautery for children is subtle according to their age and measure of theirs.
Then take care to cover the area of the cautery for three days, applying a bandage so that the scar becomes remade by the heat.
Then take care to cure those who have other afflictions until they are healthy.
And let the patient sit on a soft cushion for 40 days until the place and the wound are sealed.
And be careful to moderate the nourishment of his according to the length of time of his cure, which relieves his stomach, and that the intestine does not come out with excessive straining to heal.
And then when you want to get up after 40 days, administer the medicine decently made, and keep that for another 40 days.
And avoid excessive labor and replenishment of food and drink, and violent vomiting, because when you use this entire regimen of sanitation, you will be entirely healthy.
And you will direct the cure of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you want that it does not relapse, then cautery the rupture with a red-hot iron according to its quantity, and it is what is expelled from the codena thus as the third part of it; and then take care of him who has what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And you will discover some primary rupture that should be cauteryized with a triangular cautery iron according to this form, since it is marked on the tents:
and it is a paused line that goes for the width in the lattice above the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a clave-shaped cautery iron, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Chapter 46.
On Cauterization of the Torso.
When someone suffers in their members from bruising or percussion pain and it persists for a long time without being helped by medical treatment, then be careful to cautery with a pointed cautery.
And it is the cautery of each member according to its size and smallness, and its straightening and developing, and location of torso and pain of it.
So if it is healthy from the first cautery, good; and if not, then iterate over it with the cautery; because it is customary for those pains to be punctured in members next to each other, so that you know how to conserve them with the cautery until the patient is healthy.
Chapter 47.
On Cauterization of Leprosy.
Some leprous sores are treated with a cautery for great judgment, and magnificently if the species of leprosy is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And so when you want to cautery that, consider if the leprosy is contagious and if it can be cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor this, and fear about the patient whose corruption comprehends the entire body and all its complexity, then cautery that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and one at the end of the hair; and two above the horns; and one behind, above the nape or service.
And finally, place your hand with the cautery iron a little inside so that you press on the bone a small impression, and from it are dislocated the scorches, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from it; and cautery on the mesentery according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then be careful to cautery that with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on the two maxillae, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one great one on the vertebrae near the coccyx, and one on the coccyx, and two on the haunches, and one on each haunch, and two on the tendons and one on each tendon, and two on the muscles, and two on the ligaments of the entire foot; and cautery that on all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each talon of the aforementioned feet, and on the metacarpals of their hands.
And beware of the nerves that are above the ankle that you do not harm them.
And some sores are treated with a cautery on the bone of the thigh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more judicious and beneficial they are; and you should know that the patient does not have pain in the cautery, thus as they have said, so that the body of him is stunned.
It seems that the treatise is describing a medical procedure. Here's my attempt to translate the sentence:
"And then heal the cautery in the form of a circle around the thighs, and on the other side, a corresponding cure within, so that it may be healthy."
"Chapter 48"
"On the cauterization of stupor"
"When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and it is not healthy, then you cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the greatness of the member or its smallness."
"And let your cautery enter into the inspection of the codeina in a little way." "And then heal that which is wounded within, so that it may be healthy."
"And some wounded areas are cauterized for some numbness which extends to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back and eyes, and it is the inflammation of the nerves that bothers that member, and the numbness is relieved."
"There is no presumption about this except what is known from the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the entire moving body."
"Chapter 49"
"On the cauterization of ulcers that are morphea."
"When ulcers are old and do not respond to the treatment of medicines, then you cauterize on that wound with a pointed cautery in a little way according to the quantity of the species of the codeina within, so that the whiteness and color of it may be restored, and its color may be changed."
"And then heal that wound with a circle of roses and of lentils, with oil of rose and leaves of arnagrosa, and blood of pigeon or blood of yronda, each one a part and all are mixed together, and then let it be anointed with a cloth and placed on the area until it is healthy."
"Chapter 50"
"On the cauterization of cancer"
"When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize that wound with a circular cautery in the circumference of it, so that it may be completely removed."
"And I warn those who are to be cauterized that it is done with the last cautery in the middle place; more than I have not seen this, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and you have already seen some wounded areas."
"And it is better to cauterize in the circumference of the wound with a circular cautery as we have said, or with many small cauteries."
"Chapter 51"
"On the cauterization of abscesses"
"When some abscesses are delayed in maturation, and it is because of the superfluous fat that makes them, or because of the state of the patient, which is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around the circumference of the wound with many small pointed cauteries; and then let it be, for it will fasten in maturation."
"If you want to make a perforation of the wound with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and pause it in the middle place of the abscess until it penetrates the codeina."
"And if you cautery in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and then heal that until it is healthy."
"Chapter 52"
"On the cauterization of corroding"
"Corroding is a corrupting ambulation in the member, which corrodes that as if a focus consumes dry wood."
"Therefore, if you want to cautery that corroding in the place where it suffers from a focus, then you ignite small pointed cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where it is corroding."
"And then cautery that entire part until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause of it remains."
"And then let it be for three days, and pause on the cautery places with a mixture of oil and herbs until all scars are totally eradicated and all corruption."
"And then heal that wound with flesh generating flesh."
"If then after three days the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, well; if not, then iterate the cautery on that which remains rotten in the corrupted places."
"And corroding is treated with some herbs in acute medicine, because that is half in place of cautery." "Perhaps it is better to cautery with a focus that is of gentle juvenation."
"And you have already said the healing of the wound with acute medicine in division, and therefore take that which is of the wounds' endogeneity."
"Chapter 53"
"On the cauterization of hernias and other similar things"
Moist wounds are treated on the affected parts of the foot afflicted with claw-like pain, and it is a gross, inward cause that takes hold of the foot; and cautery is done in those places according to two methods, so it is done with fire and water.
Maybe cautery with fire is that which ignites the cautery like a penalty of torture, which is done with iron according to the quantity that holds the claw of the entire affected part, and it is of subtle margins.
And then pause that ignition on the claw, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the claw until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the claw. And leave it like that for three days until you start to feel better. And then apply a plaster made with healing herbs and salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, because that will eradicate its roots.
And then heal the place where the flesh is generating until it is healthy.
And if it does not convert, and moist wounds appear on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer to those cauteries with water, and it is that you take a tube of iron or fire or penalty of torture, and pause that on the claw; and then put in the tube of hot water a small quantity, and retain your hand, and you revolve that with compression of your entire hand, and it is embedded in the margin of the tube in the root of the claw, and you inject the hot water via the opening of the root of the claw; and wait for the patient for a little while to feel the biting of the hot water for an hour, and then remove that, because the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus it is done in those places, I then add the other until you come to be on top of all the qualities of their own in the body.
And then heal those pustules because the roots of the claws are eradicated, and thus the flesh will generate again.
Chapter 3.
On the Cauterization of Tremors.
When you have a tremor due to cold in the nerves or due to fever from a cold cause, or for another similar cause, then it is necessary that you cautery with four cauteries or five above the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and a cautery on their chest, and on their stomach, a cautery on their olive-shaped mark.
And the tremor of it is restored and strengthened by the healthiness of the affected cold place.
Chapter 4.
On the Cauterization of Accidental Injuries to the Body.
When the body is accidentally injured, and pustules appear which are made of gross corrupt materials; therefore it is necessary at the beginning to appear, that it be cauteryized on every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery of myrtle, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with a root of long erestology; or with a slow cautery.
And the wounds are cauteryized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is disrupted, making them healthy.
Maybe it is necessary that this be done with evacuation through phlebotomy.
Chapter 6.
On the Cauterization of Fluxes of Blood Accidents due to Incision of Arteries.
Wounds are treated for fluxes of arteries that are incised by the plague which is beforehand, or by the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the limb, and it seems difficult to remove that.
Then, as it arrives at that point, you should take with your hand the orifice of the artery, and pause on that the tieth digit end, which is strengthening those wounds until the flux of blood stops, and does not come out.
And then pause at the focus of the olive-shaped cauteries little and great, by name of many, and exhale on them until they are not ignited.
And then take from them a small or large one according to the place and the plague in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly, because you will have removed the tieth digit, and you will cautery until it is closed and restrained, and that blood is restored.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the tieth digit and extract the cauteries, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries which are prepared in the focus, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is restrained.
And beware that you do not touch the nerves which are here, and that another evil comes over the affected place.
And know that when the arterial flux of blood, then it is not possible to restrain the blood in those places, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four methods: either cautery as I have said, or extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the extremities of my veins are burned and the blood is restrained, or that it be tied with a strong structure, or that they be paused on medicinal remedies which virtue is to restrain the blood; and they are strengthened in a pulvinar with decent constriction.
Those who administer restraints decently to the limb and strictures on the arm or leg, not comforters but rather tighteners, in position of combined causes and similarities.
Perhaps the patient does not need a doctor or medicine, then operate on the indicated finger over the orifice of that vein, and understand the great constriction within so that the blood is stagnant from the superior part of the plague, and above the artery it is not diminished; and above the artery it is made more constricted by a very cold liquid with great constriction until the blood is congealed and thickened; and perhaps it is necessary to cauterize or medicate.
Of incision and perforation and vein sections and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similarities.
I have spoken in the first chapter about all maladies in which cauterizing fire is convenient and combined medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for its forms; and I have ordered the chapters according to the inferior nature of the head until the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter for that method, so that it may be alleviated there, then on what will have been demanded.
And then that I begin here, Cove, sons, who learn that in this chapter it is to be terrified at what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for what Cove says, it is in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuations are made, such as evacuation of blood with the aspersion of the vein or incision on the aposteme or percussion of the exit or purification of the wound or extraction of a splinter or incision of stone and their similarities. And all those are accompanied by fear and trembling and in their hands death.
And I warn you that upon you does not fall what is in the situation, because some evacuations happen due to your manner of men being many manners of maladies. And of them it is some that flee from their malady and fear death, and thus for the vehemence of what they find in their malady, and for the length of their malady, and in the malady is the fear which means death.
And of them it is what gives to your son to have and to say, you hoping in that sanity, and the six maladies are pernicious.
And therefore do not believe that you consent to what comes to you from this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause about it unless with certain scientific knowledge which verifies it for you, and to which you perceive laudable success.
And you will be established in the cure of all your maladies by prognosis and indication of it which is converted health, because in that you will have help above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspires you with His understanding and does not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this distinct chapter according to the chapters that precede in the chapter of cauterization, from the cure of the head to the feet, so that it may be alleviated what you demand of it and of what you have need.
First Chapter.
On the cure of water that is contained in the head of infants.
You know that this malady has many evacuations until the infants are born and when the nurse strengthens the infant's head with her livelihood.
And some evacuations happen due to a hidden cause which is not known.
Perhaps you have not seen this malady except in infants; and all those whom you have seen are caught by death, and thus it is to me a visible, abandoned work in them.
And I have seen that an infant's head which was full of water swelled, and the head of it was always magnified until it ceased not to be able to support itself by the greatness of its head, and perhaps the humidity made it increase until it died.
And this humidity is added between the scalp and the bone, or it is added beneath the bone above the sphenoid.
Because the operation in that case the humidity is between the scalp and the bone and the aposteme is small, then it is necessary that you make a hole in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two inches until the humidity flows, and this is the form of the spatula.
And then if the humidity is more augmented and the aposteme is greater, then there are two fissures here according to this manner.
And if the humidity is beneath the bone, it is sign of that you open the commissures of the head with all its parts and the water is pressed when you comprehend this in the same manner at the internal parts and it is not what you hide. There is a hollow in the middle of the head where three sutures meet according to this method.
And then remove the excess humidity; and then strengthen the sutures with draps and plums; and then put a warm oil on top for six days, and then remove the dressing and cure the plague in tendons and joints, and strengthen the head equally; eat the patient food cooked with little humidity until the member is comforted and healthy.
And there is another method of incision, which considers how to expose the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some evacuated abscesses are more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and so you attend to the incision until the abscess appears and the flow of water, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid flowing blood and death of the patient through that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter following.
When you find some catarrh or rheum in the veins or at the foot, and it is an old thing, and it does not agree with the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision in those two arteries.
And then you want to incise those that the patient's head is his own capital, and then make a clean cut with a sharp drap in order to open the arteries, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some drap; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the places on top of the places which are close to the aurellas are hidden until they appear in some homes.
And then sew over the artery with a thread, and then incise some part of the divided space in order to make an incision that penetrates into the bone, and it is for the width of the head.
And if you want, enter the space below the artery and divide it into three parts to incise at the upper divisions.
And the length of the incision is two inches adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood is ejected with a pulsating flow, which jumps back frequently.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then you measure from the aurella the quantity of space of three inches, and then sew with a thread, and finish it into the bone.
And that is how to stop the flow of blood, which is a quantity of six ounces. and forcibly stopping the flow of it, or more, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and the refill of their artery.
And then consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone some cause of the cyst, then incise that so that an abscess does not form.
And then strengthen the plague with plums and with threads of drap, and then cure it in tendons until it is healthy.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When some ancient or long-standing catarrh or rheum has migrated to the temples, due to humidity and quality in the lacrimal ducts of the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing to those, and it is treated with the methods of medical cure which do not agree, then we have spoken about these evil extractions of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those eyes as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient's skin is shaved in the places which are in the temples; and it understands the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by the pulse, and it is hidden until few homes due to vehemence of the vein.
And if it is hidden, then strengthen the patient's neck with some thread; and then make a clean cut with a sharp thread or evacuate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then you take the space of which this is the form: And then you score the code with that which facilitates until you penetrate to the artery; and then take out from the vein and extract it from the upper divisions until you extract it from the code and discover it from the tunics which are below it, of the whole division.
But if the artery is subtle, then envelop it at the extremity of the oncii, and then incise that one division according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are lengthened and contracted, and do not find a flow of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not flow at all.
And then evacuate six ounces of blood. within three.
And if the arthritis is great, then it is necessary to bind that in two places with double strong cords or chains at length, and do not touch the putrid flesh during the consolidation of the plague and ending of blood flow.
Then cut away the excess flesh which is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a cautery iron between the bones with a cautery knife between them so that the extremities of it are cut off, and stay in place of that bad work.
And it is better work because the patient has fever or is of complicated composition; since cautery is one of those causes that help to end humidity, and therefore it is better in juvemation.
And it is necessary to extract the roots of the joints that fill the place of ancient wound, and they will be placed decently on the decent pulvis, and then it will be cured with dry medicines that make the flesh and cartilages whole again so that it will be healthy.
And if meanwhile you are working on another affected area to stop the blood flow from the joint, then you should touch to restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or fill the place of the wound, and stretch your hand inside so that the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the finger on the place so that the blood is congealed, and wet the place with water of vehement coldness so that the acute pain rests, and it will be strengthened according to what is necessary.
And it is better to extract the vein in the extraction of the joint because you should cauterize the vein with this cautery having two ends, since you have touched the two places with tension, and paused sometimes, not much, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the sharpness of the two ends together. Maybe it is better to mend the sharpness of two ends, because if you sharpen them as two ends properly against each other, they will not cut the flesh with velocity.
So when in those there is some roughness, it is held by the heat of fire in those and the flesh is separated more lightly.
And this work is better in all works and more lightly.
And it is the space which is between two ends, the quantity of the roughness of the finger.
Fourth chapter.
On the cure of bodies of acute and acidic humors of the veins.
When the humors are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the cap before, and do not find in that any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already enroges and feels in the six front ambulation as if it were of ants, and the veins of that one are extinguished, humidifying thus that the skin of their son is constricted, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of tears, the ancient groans mixed in the cure of those of this operation, and nobody remembers that cure with space.
And it is that you command the patient to relax the skin which is on the six front, and then cut into the front three fissures equally distant according to the length of the front. And if the length of the fissure falls into two digits: one fissure is equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third of another part.
And beware of the beginning of the joints which are in two sides, and elongate your hand from the continuation of both the jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three digits adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge-like material or dry cloths that absorb the blood which drips from them.
And then insert the spatula between two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it: which is from the partition of the temples into the second incision. Extract all that code which is between two incisions at the siphac which is above the bone, and then make that of the middle incision into the second incision. And then withdraw this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument called a cutellar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And pause the side of that sharp part towards the adjacent flesh of the code, and the side of it beneath the bone, and insert it so that it reaches the middle fissure, and separate all those veins that descend from the head to the veins.
It is necessary to continue the incision to expose the code, and then make an opening in the middle fissure into another fissure.
Then because of the flow of a large quantity of blood, express the locations of the congealed blood clots.
And stop in each warm water fissure, and put on those swollen veins that are inflamed with oil and wine, and make sure not to induce an abscess by cautery.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large warm infusion of hot water or decoction, and then cure it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other things until the wounds are fully healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending humors from the divided parts of the head.
When the catarrh comes with continued flow, and sometimes the thin humors of the patient are exhausted, and already their eyes are weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and because of that the skin is rough, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then it is clear from this accident that the matters and catarrh do not come except from many veins of the divided parts proceeding.
And the best cure for this is: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in a fissure at the middle of the forehead, a small one for the width (and start with the fissure of the left temple going into the right temple; and make an incision into the bone; and extend your hand from the lacertus of the temples which are numb from mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then replace it between the two lips of the fissure with warm water or cloths. And then strengthen below with swollen veins that are inflamed with oil and wine, so that an abscess does not induce by cautery.
And when you see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until it begins to form new flesh, and then cure it with a regimen of desiccating ointment which makes the flesh numb, thus as if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an emplaster and administer it in these wounds of the native flesh.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment of what falls into the ears.
The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, either it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus as iron and vein, or it is from a plant thus as cypress or fava, or it is a fluxible cause thus as water and wine agree and their similarity, or some beast.
And so when peyra falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust nor believe in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if sometimes the peyra, then distill it into some cause of violet oil or sizaami, and then administer the extraction of it, and make a sternutatory condition, and open the nostrils to receive the event of sternutation. And then stop in the circle of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the lower parts, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not evacuated, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtiles, of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten in the gesture, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with a subtle hook of little duplication.
And so if it is not forgotten by that, then make a canal of iron and insert the extremity of the canal into the hole of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oil mollified so that nothing comes out except the canal. And then extract it from the tieu vent with strong attraction, because many evacuated matters are gathered there that we have recounted.
But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alum bat or prepared vessel apparel with which the wings of a small quantity are pressed, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then envelop it decently over that warm paused thing. And then insert that into the hole of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of humidity.
And so if it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recounted, then you will be able to heal that wound without inducing an abscess by cautery or spasm.
And the manner of healing that wound is that you first cleanse the patient's vein of sepulchral blood and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a circle between your hands and convert the ear to the lower parts, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear where the grey matter of it is in the place previously prepared for it. If the fracture of a lunar figure enters into the skin, and the skin is wounded, or that which you can operate on with an appropriate instrument; and then make the fracture in that hour at velocity, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
And if the cause resides in the auricle and is one of the fats that grows and inflates, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your own judgment, then take a subtle spatula tuned according to this form: and administer to that the excision of that fat which has fallen into the auricle.
And do not think that it has been humidified by the vapors of the auricle, and stop it in many places, and propose to extract them with small hooks or subtle gestures, or without incision as I have said, because the extraction of it is alleviated.
But in the water that has entered into the auricle, it is necessary to use sternutation with condition at the commencement, and fill the entire auricle with a lot of very good cotoneum, and pour over that auricle where the water is, and if by this means it is forgotten; well, then take three or four tender threads and tie them according to the length of the finger, and cauterize them in the fire for a little while, and the patient will insert one of these into the channel of their auricle and press on one side of that partition and percuss with another thread on the thread that is inside the auricle. Then do not cease pouring water into the auricle until all the water has been forgotten.
Then do not cease pouring water into the auricle until all the water has been forgotten. And now the water will be forgotten, so that you take pieces of paper or of cotton. and place one end of it in the auricle and extend the other end to the fire until it is combusted, the best of it.
And then place another cotton and make it as many times as necessary until all the water is forgotten, and draw that out with a cannula in the same way as it is said about the extraordinary auricle.
But in the extraction of beast that enters into that auricle, if it is a small thing, thus pierce and to its likeness, cure it thus as I have said in the division; but if it is a great thing that causes apparition at the senses of the veins, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and hooks, and the cause of it is put lighter than all the other causes that occur in the auricle.
But in the extraction of engendered worm in the auricle, when you cure it with water as I have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confound your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the auricle to sunlight.
And so if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle hooks, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula straight and extended from which this is the form of it: And insert the subtle extremity into the auricle according to the quantity that the patient can suffer; and then suck strongly with water, making many turns, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if you do not obey your own judgment, then operate and close in the circle of the cannula with wax as I have said; then administer distillations which have already been proposed by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be that which you pour out the medicinal oils into the auricle with this instrument of which this is the form of it: And make that of silver or of copper, straight, in which there is a small channel, and with a plate on top.
And so it will be how they assemble that which is in the cavity of the cannula, to continue here where it will be necessary. And if you want, take the ray and envelop it decently in the extremity of the cannula, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ausiment, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want to put into the cannula  and that is in the auricle , and then insert the ray with cotton on top and express with your hand a tempered compression until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the ausiment and the patient feels the oil dripping.
And what has been poured into the auricle has already been scaled in a small fire. And beware that the cause which you distilled into the auricle is not too frequent, because the medicines of the auricle do not suffer from it.
Chapter 7.
On the cure of obstruction of auricles.
Some turns some infants are born with obstructions of the veins from their mothers who did not perforate, and that already happened in some homes, obstruction in the middle of the auricle because of a plague or because of carnation in it; and this obstruction some turns is made in the pregnancy of the channel of the auricle which does not consent to the veins, and some turns are in the previous parts.
And that which occurs in the patient's chest, which does not comprehend the movement, is in the major dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that which follows the movement, it is necessary that you hold the patient's shoulder to the sun and look at that. And then if an apparent opacity appears, observe carefully with a subtle spatula the shape of it.
If the extremity of it is in which the latitude is small, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatula is of two flat blades so that it does not make a lesion on the shoulder.
And then if the opacity is born from flesh in the shoulder or in its meat, then take it with subtle and precise incisions and facilitate a vehement entry so that all the flesh is opened.
And if the opacity is in the chest of the shoulder, then take a subtle and fine razor and scrape that focus into a little hole, and then place it in the meat of the shoulder.
And then if you have felt the opacity in the water that the patient's atrophy has facilitated, by gravity of evacuation, it forces the oppression of it to be facilitated; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the shoulder.
And then stop in the shoulder drap of the second according to the quantity of the ample of the treatment which you have involved in the Egyptian ointment; and do it for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some water and infuse it in a saucepan and pulverize over the third trituration and use it; and if the shoulder has already been apostemed, then it is necessary that you extract the water and permute it with another water which you will involve in wax so that it is done with oily rose, until it is the cautious aposteme treated; and then cure it until it is healthy.
Maybe it happens that blood flows, then submerge a sponge or drap in cold water and pause over the shoulder, and use another cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is stated in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
On the cure of ataxy, which falls into the eyelids.
Ataxy, which falls into the eyelids of the eyes, sometimes veiled by humidity, sometimes veiled are dry.
Then it is necessary that you hold those with tenacity or with nails, and incise those with spatula of their own roots, and then stop over the places thirdly triturated.
Maybe if pain with blood flow comes, then you cauterize those with subtle, detailed cautery.
And the best cauterization is to return the incisions and trodden veiled paths when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized in focus, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Cure of cataract which comes into the eyelids of the eyes.
Veiled motes settle into the eyelids of the eyes for some cause which is assembled into cataract in its strength and hardness, and thus cataract is called.
And it is an addition of thick humidity in the lower eyelid and underneath.
Then the operation in them is that you consider then if the cataract is proceeding into it in water that appears from the eyelid and is moved to the whole part; and the cause of it is weakness.
Then make a section above it with a fissure for the latitude, and then scrape it from the whole part to facilitate until it evacuates, and then suspend it in nails and absolve it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that which the anguish of it restores and incarnates.
And if the cataract is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the superficial deep, then you remove the eyelid and suspend the cataract with nails, unless you indicate an incision, and prepare it for the whole part, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, water does not enter for any cause.
And then make the incision, wash the eye with salty water; and cure the place with water that incarnates until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the cure of abscesses in the lower eyelid of the eye.
Abscesses are grayish things which are engendered in the tunics of the lower eyelid, and they increase especially in children, aggravate the eyes of those and cause their catarrh to flow; and they cannot gaze at the clarity of the sun because of that which gathers and adheres to them.
And for a long time you have been lying on your back with your legs bent; and on the back of your eyes you have humid eyelids, which have covered the inflamed skin, and apparent proximity to the affected area is in the vein; and when you press the spot with your fingers, you feel apparent proximity.
There is some manner of operation in which the patient pauses with his head bent on one side, and you pause to draw from him and from his vein a certain water, and from his circle according to the quantity it contains of arthritic matter, and you pause to place that above it and press with your fingers around the entire circle, and you feel in the middle of the circle an incident humidity at the spot of the fissure, and the fissure is not greater than the one made in phlebotomy.
Maybe in the preceding cavity you will find the entire code that leads to arthritis, because in the aforementioned processes arthritis proceeds through a fissure according to the form of white grease.
Then extract that water which you have enveloped between your fingers to the forepart and revolve it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful that you do not adjust at the fissure so that the incident spot does not reach the vein and descends to that.
Maybe if your arthritis does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, maybe you adjust in the fissure a small facilitated water until it processes arthritis; and then extract that water as we have said; and then submerge the draps in water and wine and place them on the spot and strengthen those with poultices.
And thus you will find that they draw salty water and pause it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains is free from that humidity.
And then cure it until it is healthy.
Maybe if there is a post-apostemic boil, then cure that with emplasters made from cedar until it is healthy.
Chapter 11.
On the methods of touching the vein.
When in the eyelids of the veins there are natural and ancient adjustments, then those who touch the vein and cause various maladies, such as frequent tears and mollification of the eyelids and skin until that becomes a cause of destruction of the vein, which is called touching the vein, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with focused fire; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery; or by making incisions and sutures; or with canes as you will be directed.
And then you pause the head of the patient on one side; then convert the eyelid of the vein with your left hand, and if it is converted, well; and if not, insert a needle in that spot where the fault lies beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate to the fault below, and that is  near the edge of the eyelid where the natural veins are  near the veins, and draw the fault to the upper parts beneath the eyelid, and convert it into a ray.
And then feel in the part beneath the eyelid beneath the adjusted veins incident spot of the larger tear duct until the smaller tear duct; and then extract the fault and pause beneath the eyelid with small poultices of cotton or cloth, and then place a thread above the eyelid in a tent-like shape, and it will be like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Maybe the Emperor said that it is a figure according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because it has been diversified in the homes, because of those who indicate that it was incised from the large eyelid in great quantity according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
And then feel in the incident spot above the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller tear duct. And if it is your fissure near the natural veins, just like the large artery of the king.
And then place the onion on one of the two angles of the code, and then excavate that entire thing, and then adjust with a subtle thread or woolen fiber the two labial lips, and purify the blood, and make adhere what superfluously falls from the fibers onto the two eyelids for some envisioning causes, if you want to do it, and if not, do not cure.
And then leave the suture of the fibers for three or four days, and then cure it.
And if you want, leave the plague with its suture, and cure it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated from the sealing of the plague and the aggregation of it; maybe the suture is better. And thus I have described the ancient methods of taxanir.
Maybe the Emperor has solicited about the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another manner in taxmir, and it is that you mark on the eyelid figure like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and conjoined inches according to this form.
If it is not possible to have the hips, and it is not swollen, then take an awl in which there are threads and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread next to the larger tear duct, and the second thread next to the smaller tear duct, and adjust between the two threads so that they are equal, and then elevate your hand with elevation of the entire code above where you have made a recommendation.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and cure that which is inside so that it may be healthy.
If you find an abscess on your incision or your fracture, but that abscess is hard and resembles a candle, and it is swollen.
And some eyelids need to be converted that the eyes may see clearly, then cover with a skin that you use on that of what we have said about incision; but rather suture in cases where it is rather artificial.
To prepare a canal according to this form: and it is that you convert the eyelid and dissect the figure which is hidden according to what has been recounted; and then, by artificial skill, make two canals or two subtle channels of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width is smaller than the width of the spatula. And you have made incisions in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Then add some subtlety under what superfluously flows from the eyelid of the wheel, and construct the canals of certain divided parts with a strong structure, and place it there for several days, so that the code for the structural morass is denied and will not be poured in until you have measured yourself falling.
If it is delayed, then cut through the outer layers, and then cure the wound so that it may be healthy.
Since it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the eyes do not hurt.
And this is the method of making two canals which you will do according to this form: and it has the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
About the elevation of painful eyes in the wheel with a needle when the eye is hard.
When the eyes are unnatural, hard and rough and painful in the wheels, then the operation is that you take a subtle needle and place it in that very subtle thread of silk and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move them subtly in many ways. And it is the length of the threads of a quantity of one palm.
And then you compose another subtle thread below it briefly, and tie the extremities of that if you want to.
And then place the patient's head in a warm place, and it is near the sun for your work to be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted eye which has need of ingenuity, and make it penetrate into the eyelid firmly until you extract it from under the natural eye.
And then remove the eye from underneath and introduce it into the socket, and the eyes will be one or two or three and no more.
And then draw your hand so that the eye is situated in its socket in the eyelid with the natural eye.
If it is not situated in its socket and the eye is not guided, you will guide it to the divided parts below with the thread which you have composed there, until it is guided into the socket above the transparent vein.
And it will be in the vision of the wheel, because then you will guide it into its socket and the thread, and you will close the eyelid and lock the wheel, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the eye adheres to its proper place and is born on that good flesh.
And if it is more brief the eye, then you adjust an eye longer than the natural eyes, and it is elevated in that, or they will leave until it is lengthened properly to some space, and then you elevate it.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of herniation which appears on the eyelid underneath.
When it appears in the wheel herniation, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is constricted in itself, either on the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of the wound or section or cautery, and it is called leporina, and this herniation is natural or accidental, and it is made for consolidation of the wound or sections or cautery, or for resemblance to their bad cure.
There the manner of the operation is that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place them in it where it is between those a kind of layer of silk, and tie them together until they are healthy.
And do not cover that you use for the cure of it from the causes which dry out, constraining; because if you do that, it will return to herniation worse than at no time had been.
One of the causes that softens thus with fenugreek, and wraps it in water in which there are many other things, or engulfs dyquilone, which is liquefied in a container of oil, and submerges it in this mixture, and cures it thus.
And the treasure of your cure is that you penetrate everything in a whole engine that is not consolidated according to the form that you focus at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is not but some rectification of the humors that do not return to their proper form in the area according to what was previously determined.
Chapter 13.
On the cure of eye humors which are made in the eyelid below.
This humors which are made in the eyelid below, which is called vertadieramente humors; and it is of them some natural, another accidental.
The accidental ones are caused by a blow or by a cut or by a cautery or by other similar things.
And the way of operating on them is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and you place it in the flesh, and you make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates through both extremities of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh to the upper parts with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into a spacious spatulum. And then if it returns to the shape of the eyelid as it should be; otherwise, take the thread and pause it in the divided figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
And the extremities of the two fissures form two angles of the incision, which are made so that they converge, and it is from their angle that when they gather together, they form the shape of theirs.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then lift the flesh there for the quantity that is the width of the lower eyelid, which is sufficient to open the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of flax; and then cure them with what we have said about the softening medications and poultices until they are healed.
And if the humors are eliminated through a fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been described. And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the cure of humors when they are above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of humors, and this is in various forms of diverse motives.
And the skilled craftsmen always prepare everything in whatever manner is possible to return the shape to its natural form, or near it, and that patient according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many men in this way that the eyelid is solidified above on the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, therefore it is necessary that you introduce the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it there, or stretch it with an onion.
And then you insert the adhesion into a subtle spatulum, which is not sharp from the incisions, having obtained an obtuse angle so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remain with the spatulum that does not harm the eye in its sharpness.
And it is your incision that easily removes this adhesion to facilitate the return of the eyelid to its natural form and that the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you put salt water in the eye, which you wash with; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of milk, and pause on the eye a flax seed infused in album of egg, and then use the third day of causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On incision of a nail and prominence of flesh of the lacrimal glands.
You know that the nail is according to two manners, because it is nervous, and resembles a subtle, hard skin; or it is non-nervous, resembling a white, congealed humidity, which when you touch it, or is forced to take hold of it, is detached and the nail does not fix in it.
And both species do not begin except from the major lacrimal gland until it goes little by little, covering the sight and prohibiting the light and movement of the eye.
The manner of operating in the incision of it is that the patient pauses the dry cap in the tie, and then operates on the eyes, and elevates the eyelid with their hand, and then collects the nail at the point of little duplication and stretches it to the upper parts. And take hold of a needle and insert it into the patient's skin, or of cattle, or of a cow, or of a similar thing, or of strong thread, or double the extremity of the small needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind it with strong thread; and extend it to the parts above, and extract from the patient's skin the bad humor which is in the pupil. And thus you will follow it into the patient's skin, entering from the back of them.
And then you will insert the rhizome into the root of the tear duct with subtle spathes or small forceps, and lift the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by inserting it you do not obstruct the continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is in the sole of the foot, already extended or strengthened, thus we have said, and then it will be excavated with a lion's paw-shaped instrument, of which this is the form.
And beware that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the instrument and that it does not enter into a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then make an incision in the vein with a little salt water or a few drops of sinear oil, and let it enter into another day; and then take care that the water that flows in is healthy.
And if the nail is not nervously sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that joint, then many times this type of nail is cured with medications, and it is healed thus as I have written and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then open the vein of the patient and take a subtle lion's paw-shaped instrument with a very sharp point, according to this form. with subtlety. And if sometimes it is rarefied and congealed and enters into the root, then distill from your work in the vein of few drops of sinear oil or of strong oil or of salt water, and open the vein into another day.
And then iterate over that operation until everything that is of it is removed, but not so that the contrary happens, and an abscess forms in the vein, because then you will leave it, and take care at the beginning to remove the abscess until it is healed.
And then iterate your operation on that root until it is healed.
The prominence of the tear flesh, if you notice in the vein a great disturbance, it will be suspended in the joint; and insert that from that one part, and do not exceed the incision so that you do not obstruct the flow of tears.
And then distill in the tear duct strong oil and few drops of sinear oil until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
On the incision of the gazardenic and of that which is born from adjusted flesh in the vein.
Some times in the veins of some people is born red flesh, and it is suspended until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly holds the eyelids to the parts before and is assembled like a lattice of a balcony.
The operation on it is that the patient stops putting their head in the bandage; and then open the veins of that one and collect all that flesh in convenient joints, and you have a forceps or a chest; and then make an incision into the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished in the encisors, and beware of the vein that does not deceive you during your operation.
And it is your incision in which you will insert those or with the instrument that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or small forceps that are collected assembled according to what will be seen in the form of this chapter.
Then when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, then fill the vein with salt water, or distill in the red powder and similarly to the corrosive medicines, and stop above the vein before putting on an album of skin until it is assured against abscess.
And if some cause of gazardenic is and it is Lord-sent pure abscess, and fears abscess, then leave the vein and take care of that abscess in what kills that abscess, and then iterate over that operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which adheres to the vein of this species.
You will always have to take care that you totally cure the vein freul by natural means or by accidental means, open with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently suffering from that operation.
Chapter 18.
On the collection of wisdom in the vein.
Wisdom which comes from red veins that are tested above the vein and prohibit its operation, and develop the vein in length of days.
Then it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the vein in which wisdom is strong and there is no other bad humor except wisdom, then you collect that wisdom.
It is that you command the patient to hold their head in the same position, and then suspend those veins in one or two inches according to your prudence; and it should be that inch of subtle duplication according to this form:
or thus two inches gradually in a hollow according to this form:
And then collect those veins in subtle forces, with subtlety, and evacuate the blood at that hour, until you see those veins being refilled with fluid and thus being revolved.
And beware that you do not lead the fluid into the extremities of the spatium; and if your operation is in the middle of the day before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that nothing slips except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you distill the fluid into a clear green or red liquid because that is what is removed from the rust of the sable.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all of it at that hour, then you apply a poultice with all that which removes the pain from him, and leave it on for several days until the pain is calmed and assuredly protected from abscesses.
And then apply it repeatedly to him according to the manner of the doctor until he is healed.
And this is the form of the treatments:
Chapter 19.
On the reduction of inflammation at the nose.
When you treat inflammation with a cautery or acute burning medicine according to what is described about him and he is not healed, then it is not engendered in him unless you make an incision over the abscess until the maturity of him, and that you extract all the humidity which is in him and the pus until the bone is discovered.
And then when the bone is discovered and sometimes it is corrupted or blackened, then you scrape him with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is called an aspere cap, and it should be made of iron, and the head should be rounded thus as to make points for puncturing with a file or aliskalfati for subtle puncturing (thus as it is in the following form).
And pause that over the corroded place of the bone, and then turn it between the fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corrosion is worn away.
And it should be done with some gentle touches, and then restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Then if the place is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the body is free from the humor of blood and remains so for 40 days, and it does not relapse and does not become abscessed and does not fall into accident, then you know that it is healed.
And otherwise, then it is not in him engendered unless to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you discover from following the bone or acute medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take a tribe according to this form:
It is the extraction of the triangular iron, and the rod of it should be first extended until to the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
And then pause that over the bone, and it should be near the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little with the fluid, and then turn your hand around the tribe until it penetrates all of the bone, and the patient feels for what he wants to draw out and thus you will know when to remove your hand.
Then restore the place with astringent medicines that dry and constrict, thus as you will be expert in it.
Then as the flesh and the place are indurated, then the matter which was poured out to the parts before returns to the nose, so that is why it is easier to treat the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the fluid.
When the fluid is prominent in its entirety and does not fall into vexing nor diminution, then it is necessary to lax the patient, and then follow, and then make incisions on the neck with scarification and suck for good suction; and then pause over the fluid with a liniment made from acatra and aloe and essences and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the poultice over the fluid with many powders.
And the manner of the powders is that you take drams of the lion's powder, and each dram should be divided into four parts; and make it from those powders.
And then pause those one upon the other according to the quantity of which the fluid has need. And then strengthen over those with a strong stricturing powder; and make incisions with suction and scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the fluid straight day and night.
But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then it is necessary that it be very straight.
And then remove the ligament day and night thus as we have said.
And if sometimes the fluid has already been reduced, well, and otherwise, then make the poultice with powders and stricturing and cups until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
About the inflammation of the coat of the uvula.
When there is disruption in the coat of the uvula, and it becomes prominent and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape is altered for this reason, and you want to incise, then the operation on it is thus recommended, that you insert the needle into the root of the uvula from below, and place the needle on the other side in the double layer of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and let it emerge as the first needle according to its disposition; and then incise the double-layered area and lift it up to that part of the uvula in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen it thus.
And then extract the needle and pause on the woolen thread infused with album of egg white, and let it enter so that the filament in the uvula becomes detached.
And then heal the woolen thread in that which comforts until the wound is healed.
And some vegetables of the whole part in a circle of cloth enter the wool adjusting great eminence, and then it is perforated with a subtle spatula that comes to the edge of the wool, and corrects the albugeal humidity, and descends the wool and enters thus.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
About the treatment of catarrh.
This illness that is called catarrh is not but a wisdom that is adjusted in the wool-like mucus descending like water and it is not that.
The manner of operating on it is that you make the patient sit on the prepared seat and straight, and then take the dry cloth in both hands, more than two parts, until you see the wisdom coming to the lower parts, and then it is dried and does not descend, and the light is obscured, and the patient sees the causes thus, as he sees.
And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared for the descent to the wisdom in water that we have said, then make the patient sit between the hands and take a subtle spatula and spin it over the panniculus circle, surrounding a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva in the corneal tunica in the crown (in the place of the vein), until the wisdom is forgotten.
Then when it is forgotten, then you distill in the wool-like water, which you have mixed with honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it is cured of the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
About the treatment of the descending water from the wool.
We have said the species of water in the division and which ones are convenient to perforate with a declaring sermon, then that according to the sanity.
Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and lift the dry wool-like thing, the most stringent word.
And then pause near the eyelid of the dry wool-like thing with your left hand, if the wool is on the left; or with your right hand, if the wool is on the right.
And then with your right hand take the alum, if the wool is on the left; or with your left hand, if the wool is on the right.
And then pause the extremity of the alum near the crown for the greatness of the vein in the album of the wool from the part of the least lacrimal, and then pour out the alum into a vessel and revolve your hand in that.
And then penetrate into the album of the wool and feel that the alum has already arrived at the cause of the vein.
And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the alum be at the measurement of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the wool; because you see in that pupil with the vision of the wool through the clarity of the corneal tunica.
And then pause the alum into the place where the water is, and then you will throw it down below another time, and thus if the water descends so much, then the patient sees above what he had seen before, and the alum in the dry wool.
And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you pause again another time before the alum is touched.
And thus when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the alum with facility, and revolve it a little by little with your hand, and then dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt of gemma and in that wash the wool dedintz; and then pause for the wool to stop or to be infused with oil of rose and album of egg white and ligature in that the wool is thus.
But we who are of our time pause over that which has been treated with album of egg white.
And if you do not obey the almagra at the instrument of the wheel for its durability  because it is the axis of the homes where the wheel is very hard , then beware that you take the spatula which is named alberid from which this is the form:
And then perforate at that conjunction, and do not ultimately place your hand in the tract, and it is not so that you make a way to the almagra location subtily.
And then insert the almagra according to what we have said.
And give completion to your work, prepare the patient's dormitory decently made in which they sleep on their back with their legs in a dark, tense position, and prohibit all movements.
And pause in the nature of that water so that its nature is aligned, and do not move your head towards the right or left side at all.
And let it be bound according to its disposition within three days.
And then remove it from that dark place and expose it to fresh air, and do so to see some causes, and then return the binding within seven days.
And beware that you do not make this during the hour of treatments or almost at the time of infusion. Be careful that you handle this water properly because the water can flow strongly and vehemently with great regard.
If it happens that an abscess occurs cautiously, then beware that you remove the wheel within seven days, and correct that water which causes the abscess.
Then you will have absolute sight of it and pause on the surface of its orifice for which the evacuation of its contents may be regulated for some days, existing in the dark place.
And then it will be extracted from that dark place gradually and converted into its causes.
And you know that in this case it is not excused to omit some visits, and then you will be anxious about the operation.
And now we have arrived at some of those which are according to the Artach, and it is said that they make a focus in the Ayraque magma, perforating where the water succeeds.
Perhaps the emperor has not seen anything like this in our land which has perfected this water, nor is it written in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magma for which it is above those, which ignores those.
And they are made of iron or their own proper material, and they are the extremities of their love in this subtle triangular shape, the acute extremity thus as that is the form.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths adjusted to which some cause is assembled like a scorpion of many weights, or a polyp of peas; and this malady is called polypus because it resembles those peas represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, rough, of dark color; and of it is that it is not lion-colored flesh of dark color.
Then in that which is in these lion-colored flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, beware that you make the malady clear between your hands and place it in the sun, and open the nostrils of it, and touch the tender part once in that flesh. And then extract it from the forepart, and then insert the spatula which has comprehended of those hands a subtle part within one party so that you know that all the flesh is opened; for if it remains there for some cause where the abscess is possible, then you will ratify this with one of the subtle instruments facilitated within so that none of the causes remain. Perhaps it will happen that you have a holy or cautious abscess, then you pause at the water which beware; or it is one of the malignant apostemes, then you touch and cauterize it within so that it is absolved holy and all the cavities are opened.
And then it will be cut out in the nose, then insert the agreement of water or wine. Perhaps the nose is opened and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Perhaps the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that it is flesh wound in the purulent ulcers of the nostrils which have not been absolved.
Then beware that you insert faith in the one who is some grossness, and anoint with many nuts the quantity of the said or month, and pause between each nut the amount of the said or month, and engender the malady and insert an extremity of the faith in the nostrils with the ray or at another cause which is possible.
And then it will be done, that the sieve odorament is inserted so that it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and it is situated above the sieve golayro, because many visits seem to resemble this action, and it is a light cause for him who wants to do it.
And then stop the two external endings of the vein, one ending that is above the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a gentle closure of flesh on the nails that are on the vein, and do so inwardly so you know that the flesh is also on the nails of the vein.
And then extract the vein, and stop in the nose with the abstraction of a blood mixture, and do so for three days or more until the corrupted blood is entirely removed from the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, stop in the nose a tube of lead for several hours until it is healthy.
Perhaps there are signs of recovery that appear, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument to make a cupping device, which is used to distill oils and medicines into the nostrils.
And make it of silver or copper, which resembles a small lamp-shaped vessel, thus with a small container, and the meat similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube thus like a cane, and the canal of the instrument to make a cupping device is flat, uncovered; which is handled in the rear of it, with which you hold that when you suck out the oil or what you wish of the juices and causes that are sucked.
Chapter 25.
About the veins that are born in the external endings of the nose.
The blocked veins are born in the external endings of the nose, and it is magnificent and mentioned for several days until when a vein is ready to be looked at.
And through that you discover what you insert at the beginning of its appearance, and you inherit all of it. And then stop over the area with a cautery or burning medicine that was in place of it.
Perhaps the injection is delayed until it is magnificent, then consider if it is lapified, hard, of dark color and of little sentiment, then do not touch that iron quart which is an apostemic cancer; because blocked veins are injected with this aposteme to bring about great malice on that which it had.
And if the aposteme is of a lion's touch and not of dark color, and sometimes the injection is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and inject it without fear, and cure the area with what appears and constrain until it is healthy.
Chapter 26.
About the stitching of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by similarity.
You know that when you succeed in dissolving the continuity in one of these cartilages, little confidence is placed in that operation except by some men.
Therefore, when you come to some cause of those, consider if it is fresh plague with old blood, and then adjust the two lips of the plague with stitching, and afterwards cure it until it is healthy.
And if the lips of dissolving continuity are already separated, and each one is made sane, then it is necessary that you extract some part of its apparent cord until it is not bloody. And then adjust the two lips with stitching and strengthen them, and on them sprinkle blood of dragon and essence of three, and place on the powder a piece of diafinicon plaster, or some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave it like that for two days or for three, and then remove it and permute the plaster and leave it until the veins are absorbed, and then cure it entirely until it is healthy.
Perhaps the manner of stitching is that you add the dissolving continuity or with needles thus like we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the dissolving continuity with vein thus like you and I know how to do it.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts.
The blocked veins come to some men in the divided parts of their lips with some apostemes hard similar to grass of errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore it is necessary that you convert the lips and find each one of those hardnesses throughout the entire part, and then remove the impurities from the place where the blood is three times strengthened, and then wash with vinegar and cure the area with what is stipulated, until it is healthy.
Chapter 28.
About the injection of flesh adjusted in the gums.
Because of excessive growths above the adjusted gum carn, which ancient doctors called albulous, then it is necessary to suspend that arm on the occasion or hold that arm in the forks and incline it from its base, and let the healthy blood flow or the sanious flux.
And then stop above the sacred place, thrice-stripped or with other powdered stimulants or excitatives.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery does not return.
Chapter 29.
From reason of bad teeth being iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts of the tooth and of the front and between the adjusted gums, there are scorched spots, ulcers, and some growths are blackened and are citrine or greenish within, so that the gum is corrupted by that decay and the loose teeth.
And then it is necessary to separate the patient between your hands and stop the head of them in the tie, and extract the teeth from those which appear scorched and cause similar symptoms within, so that none of them remain without a cause, and that makes the blackness and citrinity and other mondified things.
Therefore if it is established that this is in those of the beginning of the reasoning, well; and if not, then you iterate the reasoning over those to another day and to the second and to the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And you know that teeth have needed various forms of roots and figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And for this reason the roots are those which the tooth is rooted in the divided part of the tooth, another from the root which is ras between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots you have prepared those which you will see soon.
Chapter 30.
On the eradication of teeth.
You should cure the tooth of its pain with all effort and slowness in total eradication of it, because there is no cause that supplies the growth of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance within which it excuses itself in the eradication of it.
Moreover, you should be certain when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, because firmly you must have certified which is the painful tooth, because many growths cease the pain and convince the patient that it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Therefore, how do you certify which is the painful tooth, and what do you know about it, then it is necessary that you scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula on which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of the entire part, and then mauk those with the tight ligaments, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until it concudes.
And then apply a lot of strong force with good pronunciation or sturdy strength, and stop the head of the patient between the teeth that you hold so that they do not move, and then extract the tooth according to rectitude in many ways so that it does not tremble, nor does the major pain bother them.
And then if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, and place it there to facilitate the entire part and force the removal of it, so that it is done from the beginning.
Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then it is necessary that you complete the drawing of that traumatic part and strengthen it with a subtle extremity of ray so that it is not trapped during your construction over that entire surface.
And then it is necessary that you operate with great care in the scarification of the entire circuit of the gum and guard your strength so that it does not tremble and remain a part of it, and return to the patient for the malice that is greater than the primary pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what ignorant barbarous barbers do in their foolishness and audacity over the eradication of it, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for many growths come upon the bad homes with great difficulties which are more difficult than those trapped, and their roots are totally removed, or some of those, or that you extract those from the osses of the mandible, just as many growths have testified.
And then the eradication of it is washed with mouthwash or vinegar or salt.
And if afterwards there are fluxes of blood for that, just as many growths afterwards, then sprinkle some quantity of powder and asperties over the wound, and if it does not confer that powder, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and ligaments are subtle, which are mauled at the beginning to extract the tooth, with a long extremity, short handle, and thick, so that they do not double when operating with those that must be done.
It seems that sometimes the large veins between them are constricted when they are stretched out, but not doubled back, and are short external branches.
They make iron filings from Indian steel, making fine external branches, and in these external branches they have teeth like those that enter into others and are strengthened by constricting force strongly, and sometimes the external branches of these are shaped like a bird's beak, which is called cicoria, so it is said, and they are of strong constricting force.
Chapter 21.
On the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones from crushed jawbones.
When you need to eradicate teeth that are stuck due to some cause, then it is necessary to pause on the area with a bandage for one or two days until the area is mollified; and then insert thin forceps, which resemble the beak of a bird called cicoria or guanta, in the shape of pincers.
Their external branches are made from dented teeth, like files or awls.
And if they do not obey you and do not come out with these forceps or tongs, then it is necessary to operate on the root and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is this.
And it should be a short, thick, small extremity, and not be bent back so that it is not stuck.
Therefore, if the root is perforated, well and good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extremity in which there is some thickness.
The form of the second instrument is that it is triangular and has a subtle pointed extremity.
And thus you are helped with this instrument having two slants of which this is the form, suitable for the following: and with other instruments which precede in the scraping of teeth; because the junction is made with this instrument, which is assembled like a large hook, and this is the form.
of the triangular extremity, curved or short, which has some thickness, and is not bent back so that it is not stuck.
And another thing: the instruments for extracting teeth are moved similarly to the other instruments.
The skilled craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, attuned to their material according to what they mean by operation and diverse maladies; because they are among the maladies for which the ancients did not design or pause to prepare proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
Moreover, if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are stuck, or if they are fragile, then it is necessary to operate carefully on that area in its proper location where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have spoken about in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with the management of which this is the form.
And it should be with some small thickness, little by little, and be held or tied in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is perforated; and then restore the area with suitable medicines according to what is convenient.
Moreover, if there is small pus in the bone, then drain that pus and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 32.
On the cure of teeth protruding above the others.
When the teeth are protruding not according to their natural form, and especially when they disturb the women, and especially the venerable old ones; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not adjacent to another tooth, and it is not possible to file or smooth it, then root out that one; more, that it is not annexed to another tooth, then you extract it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a pig's bite, and is made from Indian steel of sharp external branches.
And it should be your extraction in which you extract it in three days for the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not joined to another of the teeth.
And if it is a protruding tooth exposed to filing, then file it with a file of Indian steel of which this is the form.
And it should be all of Indian steel and the margin is ornamented; and it should be of many small points like files, in which they are made into agitated hooks, in which the tooth is filed little by little over many days with facility, so that there is no other joined tooth and gap. And then bind it together in the end, and drain it with subtle razors.
And if it is a tooth of which one part is stuck and hurts the tongue, then it is necessary that you smooth it until the aspersion of that fraction is stopped and enclosed, and it should be applied so that the tongue does not hurt nor the speech corrupt.
Chapter 33.
On the restoration of teeth joined with gold or silver files.
When the teeth are positioned in front of concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the patient cannot hold onto what they eat, and you have tried that medicine with stuporific effects, and it has not helped your treatment, then it is because those who are strengthened by faith of gold and not of silver, for silver makes one wise and one can recover in several days, more gold has no effect at any time.
And it is the faith in such subtlety and grossness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the faith and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with double tortuosity of the faith between two molars, or one or more, until it reaches the fabric to the healthy tooth on the other side. And then you interrupt the sensation until the part where it begins, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom until it is not molar.
And it is your stretching that strengthens the faith by removing the roots of the teeth that do not evacuate.
And then you excise the superfluous extremities of the faith with forceps or scissors, and add those to any place in gesture, and convert those into occultations between the healthy tooth and the molar tooth, so that it does not cause harm to the tongue. And then you leave that thus, stretched out like a Roman.
Moreover, if it is dislocated or ruptured, strengthen that or those in another faith in such a manner at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two molars, thus as sometimes these are bound together.
And when it happens that a tooth or two return to their fall from any of those places, and are re-implanted thus as we have recounted, and they remain there.
And do not do that unless you are skilled craftsmen and wise.
And some evacuated are apt for a certain cause of the cow's bones, and it is made from their form as a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the incision of the ligament which you see in the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which you find beneath the tongue sometimes is or is naturally with which man is born, or accidentally and suddenly due to a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation in him is that you open the mouth of the patient, the existing tie in the tissue being; and elevate the tongue, and then incise those nervous ligaments according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its retention.
Moreover, if there is some hardness or denseness, and that has been steady by consolidation of the wound, then you inject oil and separate it according to the latitude until you have incised the ligament and the denseness is dissolved.
And beware that there is not made a fracture in the pincer of the flesh and that you separate here arcadia and come to a flow of blood.
And then the remnants of the incision are washed with warm water or wine vinegar or warm water frequently; and then pause beneath the tongue, licinium; thus it is the means by which you hold the patient beneath the tongue in any novelty for so that it is not consolidated another time.
Moreover, if there is a flow of blood, pause over the vitriol-treated place; moreover, if the blood stops, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that is suitable for this. And then that cure is for the other causes until it is healthy.
Chapter 35.
About the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Sometimes it happens that beneath the tongue an aposteme gathers, resembling a small swelling, preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
And the operation in him is that you open the patient's mouth before the sun and examine the aposteme.
And if you see that it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is cancer.
And if it has declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onguent on it, and incise that with a subtle spatula, and incise the entire part; and if blood comes out during your operation, then pause above the treated place, thus it is vitriol, until the blood is restrained.
And then return to your work until you have treated it with a complement of it, until it is washed with wine vinegar and salt; and cure that with another cure suitable for this until it is healthy.
Chapter 36.
About the extraction of an aposteme from two auricles and of that which is nothing in the gullet and of the other apostemes.
When you encounter a patient with a goiter in the throat, who has glands that are swollen and hardened, which have grown together, and are named as golden vessels, which when you treat them, it is said that they do not heal, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then you do not touch that aching part.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then you do not touch that aching part for the flow of blood; unless you let it mature inside, and then you operate on it, or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is of white color, radish-like, and its root is subtle, then that is what should be incised.
And the operation on it is what you consider, during your operation, if you have removed the abscess with a cautious hand or if it has been diminished by some diminution; and then you make the patient sit in a chair, and their head is at a high level, and open their mouth, and the servant holds between their hands before their tongue, holding an instrument of noble form, which is this shape.
It should be made of silver or copper, and it should be subtle as a knife.
Then as you press it against the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and you see above the high level, then take hold of it with your fingers and place it in the amulet, and pull it towards the divisions as far as you can. Or another way that you extract some cause from the tunics, and then incise with an instrument of which this is the form.
Or another way that you extract some cause from the tunics, and then incise with an instrument of which this is the form. and it is assembled into forceps, although the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one of those is in the interior of the other, very sharp, which should be of iron indeed, well-made.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise with a spatula of which this is the form of it: It should be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
And after you have incised one spot, incise the other according to this same method of incision, and then wash the patient's mouth with cold water.
But if there is a flow of blood, wash with water of decoction of sage or mint leaves and similarly to the stiping causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it so that it may be healthy.
And some vegetables, namely in the throat other abscesses of golden vessels, and incise them according to what you have said in the incision of two spots on the gums.
And you had medicated a woman with an abscess which was born in her throat, the abscess tended to dark color, of little sensation, which had closed her throat, and the woman breathed with difficulty, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was near death if not treated for a day or two.
And the abscess had so grown that it had formed two horns within which there were two passages.
Then you carefully cut into the fistula and fixed it in one of their horns, and pulled it out, and the abscess is of great porosity, and then you incised that which comprehends the other passage, and then you opened the patient's mouth, and comprehended their tongue, and then you fixed the horn in that abscess.
And then you excised a great part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. Then the throat of that woman was absolutely clear, and soon she began to drink water, and then she started to eat, so you did not cease to incise from that abscess for a long time, and succeeded in incising the abscess in its place, which prolonged it.
Then you ingeniously cauterized the throat of it, then added to the addition; and then you walked and did not know that God did that miracle for me.
Chapter 38.
On the incision of a vein when it is abscessed.
When the veins are catarrhed in the vein, and it is abscessed and long, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and you do not contradict your cure, and sometimes it happens that the abscess has remained subtle, then it is good to incise those that are rounded aggregates; and if it is of long duration, and it is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not at its center, then it is good to attempt the incision of it, because in this case there is fear about the patient.
And when you sometimes do it according to the method that you have described of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit and press their tongue with an instrument of which the process takes its form, and then place the horn in the new one, and pull it out and incise it with one of two instruments which are said in the incision of two spots.
It is known that you should not insert anything unless it is adjusted according to the natural term of its additions, because if you insert it in a wrong way, you will hurt the patient's speech.
And then insert it, use what we have recommended for the insertion of two fingers, and take care that it enters in a way that is healthy.
But if the patient is frightened by the insertion of it, you know that use of fire in the cauterization of its fear, and the manner of the cautery is not just sharp water, and it is that you hold the head of the patient on your thigh, and then press the tongue of the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have spoken of in the chapter on cauterization, and make it vibrant thus, and do not make it too sparse or subtle, and with this fill the concavity of the instrument, which is the form.
It is the extraction of the intestine from the cavity in which the medicine has been placed, as well as the intestine of a ray-fish, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and let the patient spit or clear their mouth of that saliva or mucus for the internal medicine, so that it does not descend to any other cause on the throat of the patient and that it is not hindered.
And then put your hand on the medicine, and express it onto the uvula for a space of half an hour until it becomes disintegrated and settled by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and envelop it around the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a canal above until the cotton adheres to that canal, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
And if you understand that you have to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then the cauterization will be abolished in the circuit of the grape with cotton wrapped around it in a bundle, and manifest what is in the circuit of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure it beforehand by embrocation, and remove the bitterness until it is healthy.
And this species of cure is more salvaged than insertion and more lengthy in fear.
Some wounded people are cured of the uvula with what is more subtle than cautery and insertion, because it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of theirs, into a bowl, and they are submerged in a good wine, and boiled; and the bowl should be well sealed, and placed in a suitable location of the bowl, on top of which an instrument made of iron or silver is placed according to this manner; it is made of silver or iron.
And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula above the canal, until the uvula is moderately suffused.
And then iterate over those many wounded people until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this cure at the commencement of the arrival of abscesses, because it would too much adjust in the abscess, and you do not know that you are making this, but rather declare the abscess of the patient's wound.
But if it is not present to you this instrument, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of the patient's thigh close to their knee, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the close position of the knee prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of thorns and of what adheres to the throat and other causes.
Many wounded people adhere to the throat or thorn of feet or some other cause.
Therefore you know that you extract what is apparent from those, on which the gaze falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument alone in the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is occult in the throat, you know that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the throat will be fore-getted by vomiting; or that you give the patient a piece of bread soaked in wine or milk of lettuce or a dry loaf; or take a piece of dried seaweed sponge, and tie it strongly with faith, and then translate the patient through this, so that when you perceive the place where the thorns are extracted, then it is fore-getted. And sometimes take an eel and bind it strongly with faith, and then remove the table and the instrument is extracted; or take a porpoise and the instrument is lifted and the metastases are lifted and the entrails are lifted.
But if we are not skilled in those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this method:
And it is better to have a small rod, and in the extremity of it there is a cavity that you insert into its throat to facilitate.
And the elevated head of the rod is held by you, and beware that the touch of the rod's bone on the throat does not divert the body or that which pierces the bone or the spine, or that the doctor places his hand.
But it is better that the patient inserts himself, for his own knowledge of the place of the adjacent cause and pierces within, and draws his hand to the instrument in itself, all according to the quantity which is prepared beforehand so that it may be skillfully guided.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood from the adjacent vein.
When bloodletting is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not comforters, consider then the vein of the patient at sunrise, since you have comprehended the language of the instrument which you have recommended.
Then if you practice bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle and decent gestures.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's vein, and place a ignited iron in the cavity of the cannula, and do so many times (until the bloodletting stops and is removed from the vein) and abstain from giving the patient water all day.
And then take a full glass of cold water, and hold it to the patient's mouth, and wash the mouth with it; and do not transgress from that cause and give the water an hour afterwards with your own hand, because the bloodletting is so much that it feels the cold water like a cat.
But if it is not skillfully guided as we have recommended, then suffocate the patient with a pinch or an asp on the instrument which we have recommended in the suffocation of the uvula.
Do so, thus in four hours.
And it is another manner of operation in the suffocation of that, which is that you take a rod on which are ignited carbons and the rod is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a tube; and then place underneath the suffocation; and pause the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close the mouth so that the suffocation is not skillfully guided until you know that the suffocation has reached the bloodletting, because the bloodletting is so much that it takes four hours.
And if it does not take effect, then you repeat the suffocation many times, and abstain from giving the patient drink, and eat salty causes and meats, and do not give water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be skillfully guided.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting from the vein is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, just as sometimes, except that it is in some curved shape. Which is placed on the vein, and its extremity is similar to a stork's beak, which holds, in which there is applied a file, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not let go.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the sermon in perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to which we have remembered them, of each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of theirs by two manners, of which one is for the species of abscesses in their metrics; and for that which you comprehend of the humidities.
And the second manner is for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that occurs on the head is different from the abscess that occurs on the buttock; and the abscess in the fleshy place occurs differently from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each one of them is judged according to operation.
And some abscesses are those which cover that they are not perforated but rather matured by the sania in those or complement of theirs.
So other abscesses cover that they are wounded when they are crossed, and do not mature according to their compliment, just as abscesses that are proposed to the joints, because an abscess when it proposes a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it makes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured in the principal member; or it is near the buttock, therefore perforate what has not matured, and do not cover that it perforates crudely, with incomplete digestion, except that which is near the buttock, so that it does not corrupt the surrounding area of the buttock, and becomes a fistula, or it makes a term that is not healthy. It's more important that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is matured.
You know that it's matured when there is a reduction of pain and a cessation of fever, and then there is a decrease in rigor and pulse, and an acute point at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And because you know that the perforation happens at the place where pus has gone down from the abscess and comes out in a flow of prominent matter.
And perforation sometimes is through the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the divisions of the muscles or feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerve cords, of the arteries; and, finally, in all hollow places where there is no reflection; because in those that do reflect, use perforation according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it's better to delay perforation until digestion is confirmed according to the complement, as we have said; because if you perforate that then, it prolongs the body of the patient with foul and dirty matter, and strengthens the labia of the patient which are indurated and deep.
But some abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or body which needs it, or according to that of which the affected member is in need.
And you know that small perforations are administered, and in large abscesses a large or ample perforation is made, with multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses are those in which you know that the code is conquered and enclosed, when it's made thus and it's in a term that has already stiffened, thus as one that accumulates in troops of dubleness and of bubbles.
And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus as a figure of a leaf of myrtle, thus as the abscesses of the angles.
And of those in which a round section is administered and a lunar section, and similar to those.
But that one which cannot be touched thus as the superficial abscesses of lions, you know that you perforate that with a superficial perforation, or a plain one only.
And you know that when the abscess is large and has collected much sania, that you perforate it and do not think of extracting all the pus at that hour; having extracted a part from it, and then opilate the abscess until another day, and then extract a larger part, and then make those matters evacuated gradually until it is fully purged.
And especially if the patient is of fragile virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit is much resolved by the evacuation of the sania, and it strengthens the patient, and you operate on them.
You keep this chapter with great caution, and then perform your perforation on which you perforate these abscesses, knowing that you will clean the wounds and consider if the wound of the abscess is small, or it's a plain section, then you administer the remedies of oil or of anti-putrid matter; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you know that you pause in whatever tract until they come together again.
And if in the abscess a part of the code has been cut off or has concaved into the circuit, then you know that you complete it with very fine cloth or with a thread made from a linen cloth, thus as when you have treated pans or roots, with humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then process it and cure the patient of what you know of the ulcers until they are healed.
But if there is a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then you administer fresh water and wine in those which mix with a linen cloth, and pause that over the place of the bleeding flux of blood, evacuating gradually.
But if the bleeding of blood persists, then you know that you administer regulation and cure and powders which have been recommended in many places of this our book and division.
But if it's in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you know that you apply powders in wine and oil, and pause those on the places.
And if it's in summer, and the places are fleshy, then you know that you pause powders mixed with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all that is fresh until the third day, thus as we have said, and then you know that you dissect the abscess and clean it and administer in the cure of what is convenient for it to be healed.
And thus it is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction already said about each abscess in which manner it is via the cure of it, per capita, singularly.
Chapter 41. (Note: It seems that the text has ended and there are no more sentences to translate.)
The removal of abscesses that come in the hollow of the head.
In the hollow of the small head abscesses, and these are special knots that contain tunics which are their own doing; and these species of theirs are very moved.
And of them they are swellings, and of those that contain humidity similar to a lime. And of those that contain humidity similar to poultices, and they resemble them; and of those that are lumpy, hard.
And in the removal of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as long as the extraction of those does not cause contrarian arthritis.
And the operation in removal of those is that you separate them with an instrument in the form of which you approach thus, which is called entromes, until you know that it contains.
Because if there is something that contains humidity, then you section it in removal according to its longitude for superficial removal according to this form:
And begin in the removal of the line of .B. until the line of .G. Then, when the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that which contains that humidity, and do not leave any of it, because too many weakened returns, if they remain from some cause.
And then submerge it in Egyptian ink, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that plague and let it penetrate until another day, because I think that it corrodes all that which is rough from that skin.
And then iterate over that spot with Egyptian ink secondly and thirdly if it is indicated for him, until you are confident that there is no roughness from that skin; then cure the plague with Egyptian ink until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fat nodes, then you incise it according to this form: In the removal having the form of a cross, and cut between two labia of the removal and scrape off all that part, and exert your strength in extraction of the tunic which contains it.
But if your arthritis makes counter-pressure, then do so that you first reconstruct the primary joint.
And similarly do in the lumpy abscess of removal and of cure according to what you have said; and removal from the lumpy abscess is less grievous, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
And some veins are so close to these abscesses which are in the head in certain homes where they do not have humidity; the cause is that you have incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and have touched the abscess thus like a rough, harsh, white stone, which could not be grasped, and if someone had touched it with that percussion, it would make a plague.
But in the other abscesses that occur on the head another than this capital, thus like the abscesses that come to the heads of children and have the roots of the earrings, but the removal of all these is superficial removal.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part, thus that it may be alleviated to the body of the sane person at the lower parts.
And then cure those with water that converges to that of cure.
Chapter 42.
On the removal of scrofulas that accumulate on the neck.
Weakened matters descend to these abscesses on the neck and in the axillas and in the armpits; and some weakened matters accumulate in other parts of the body.
And those that accumulate on the neck, and those matters that are engendered between them, and all scrofula of those is united to its own proper tunic, and thus like in the nodes and abscesses of the head, thus like we have recommended.
And the species of these scrofulas are matters, because some of them are lumpy, and some of them contain humidity, and some of them are malignant which do not obey cure.
Then in that one which you have of good disposition in the Tocament, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the hollow, and it is magnified to all parts, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arthritis, and it is not swollen, because you incise it in superficial removal from the part above to the part below the line of .G. until the line of .B., and scrape off that entire part, and extend two labia of the hollow to one inch, or some inches if there is need of those, thus like we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve should not be incised.
And it is a space not so agitated, that it does not adjust to your hand in incision, or quiet the patient, and incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised vein or artery and prohibited your operation, then pause in the plague with veterinary trissat or other powders which stop fluxes of blood, and strengthen the plague, and let it penetrate until the acuity of the abscess is repaid and the plague is mollified and begins to be purified. When the blood is separated.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then investigate whether it indicates some cause of the other small scorful eruptions, so excavate them and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the large vein, then beware that you do not excavate that scrophula from its root. Be careful that you do not double the file too strongly and that you release it inside so it does not cause harm.
And then fill the wound with a lot of vile oil which you have already mixed in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
And if you excavate the entire scrophula, then beware that you adjust the two lips of the wound and cauterize as much as possible so that there is no remaining superfluity.
Perhaps if you see that there has remained superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, beware that you understand how to excavate the root of it, and separate it, and administer a suture and what is said.
And those scrofulas that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation here at the place where it appears to you, and pause the perforation of what is said to be the pus beneath the skin, just as we have said.
And then administer perforation, with some ointment and resembling those, so that it corrodes what is left of the corruption. And then when you see the wound is already clean, then you heal it with an ointment of generating flesh inside so that it becomes healthy.
Chapter 43.
About the section of the pill of the accidental abscess that occurred in the groin.
They discussed these antiquities in this section about the pill, and they didn't see anyone in our land who made it happen.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those ones.
Perhaps in those homes they have experience, beware that the extraction of the pill is avoided, because it was not done justly for all the veins and major parts of the patient are here.
Perhaps in those who have abscesses cut into the mouth or groin or two kidneys, when the illness is not in the cane, beware of using the section of the pill to flee from the destruction which is done by perforation.
Then beware when you want to excavate it, that they excavate the pill beneath three circles of the circles of the pill, or four with a small section for the latitude in what is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in ciphac, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for excavation, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood of the patient are few.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, beware then that he extends the cord of the groin with an onion, and then inserts the cord inside so it reaches the canal, perhaps evading the blood vessels if you see any cause from those.
And then excavate the ciplach according to what we have recommended; and it is significant regarding the section of the canal for the flaccidity which is of that exit with water that is from the patient's disruption and for the abscession of the wound.
And thus the wound remains open for some time.
Then when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add the two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew it only to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow inside so that it becomes healthy.
And thus Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposition is not but that you see that some of these abscesses have already operated on the groin of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his soul is between the scissors, and some go to excavate the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound for some respiration, and is saved from death.
And for this command to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and it is the evil of it for three days; and then command thus the wound, and cure it inside so that it becomes healthy.
And what I have seen through my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and placed it in the left groin and excavated there a part of the cane of the lung, and I was called to cure him, and I hid the mugwort thus as it is hidden from the dead, and discovered the wound and hid the blood which was issuing from the small wound.
Then I confessed that I had not excavated a vein nor guided it, and the wind was issuing from the wound, and I cured it inside so that it became healthy.
And I did not accuse the servant if he did not return to the wound, and then some days returned to the milking of his own dispossession.
And now I say that in the section of the pill there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
About the swelling above the navel which occurs in the groin area beforehand, and it is called a hernia of the groin.
This swelling, called a hernia of the groin, is a great sign according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
And it is according to two manners, because it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, it is not possible to cure.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one resembles fat knots, and the other manner resembles a swelling made by a knot of an artery, and in that there is fear. And it does not cover that which makes a presumption about the lump unless it is small. And you examine it and investigate according to the said, and if you find it resembles fat knots, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you incise it thus like the knots, and extract what contains the fluid from the skin and bursicle; and otherwise, then you thoroughly inspect the entire site, and accordingly cure the place with the treatment that enters in order to be healthy.
Chapter 45.
About the swelling of the species of knots.
There are many species of knots and I have already mentioned all the species of them in the division.
And it covers how I recommend distinguishing the difference between a knot and an excrescence, as it makes doubt.
Therefore I say that an excrescence is a quality of heat and fever and violent pains until the inflammation of the abundance is calmed down; and it is a completed putrefaction that when it ceases, the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But a knot is not heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that dry, lean quality which is in its own proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a boil and it is made thus like a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, because one is fat and contains humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore it covers, when you penetrate to the cure of a knot, that you expound on that and inquire into its beginning with an instrument called introemes, according to which you will find its form in the chapter that is about to come.
And it is the manner of inquiry into swellings and all knots, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place where you find humidity in the swelling, and you rotate the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated to the core.
And finally you place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the swelling, and you extract the introemes and consider what is written in the remainder of it.
And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it on the surface according to what I said about other swellings.
And if from the remainder of the introemes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fat.
And it cuts above it in the form of a cross according to this form: Thus you will show it, and suspend that in the onions, and scrape the core of all parts facilitated, and keep the skin or sac, if you can, above that and extract that sania from the knot.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sania, and many things are spoiled, and then you extract it by pieces until nothing remains of it.
Because if nothing remains of it, little or too much, the knot returns according to its nature.
And if you see that some small part remains, then complete the plague with some corrosive powders and strengthen the plague, and pause on that which is a cautious swelling, and cure it with another treatment until it is healthy.
And if it is a large knot, then you kiss the two lips of it and cure it with that which incarnates.
But if the pulse is at its opposite, or non-pulsating, then you bandage and fill the place of seven trissat that is vetriol and let it stay for two days or three until the plague is reduced and the inflammation of the blood subsides; and finally return to incise what remains of the knot.
Chapter 46.
About the forms of instruments necessary for cutting and piercing.
About those are the forms of the introemes, and they are of three species, one is large, one is medium, and one is small.
The form of the large introeme is this:
The form of the small introeme is this:
Made of iron, of alum, of well-sharpened extremities, in order to fix the instrument in the swellings.
And these are the forms of experience, and they are not named clearly, and one of those is called fever.
There are three species, because of their size, greater, medium and small.
The form of great experience, its own form:
The form of medium experience, its own form:
The form of small experience, its own form:
It is suitable to know about those abscesses and exits and fistulas and buboes, so that among those are the bones and other causes.
And there are roots, thick ones, lion-like, also with large needles which are implanted in the seats, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, And the worst are when they are made of copper.
And there are experiences of black plague, which occur when those abscesses burst in the cavity of those that are reflected, that are reflected with their lightness in those reflections.
And there are three species, because some of their length is long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the circumference of the abscess and its structure.
Form of great experience of black plague:
Form of medium experience of black plague:
Form of small experience of black plague:
The forms of the ulcers are from many species, because some of those are simple, which have only one curvature, and there are three species: large, small, and medium.
And their ulcers are orphans, and there are three species.
And those ulcers have two curvatures, and there are three species.
And their ulcers have three curvatures, and there are three species.
And all those are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple ulcer, its own form:
Form of a large ulcer having two curvatures: Form of a medium ulcer having two curvatures: Form of a small ulcer having two curvatures:
Form of a large ulcer having three curvatures:
Form of a medium ulcer having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels which are used to cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and there are three species, because some are large, medium, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of a medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those are which are made with a sharp section and the other extremities are not-sharp, and are not paused in such a way, but so that it is done gently in the excavation of the nodes to remove fear of incision of vein or nerve, and for those to be healthy and to obtain tranquility for a little while, and to bring comfort to the patient during the excavation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of poultices, and there are three species: large, medium, and small, also with veins.
They are made of copper and resemble a net, which is the one that makes the colophon.
And it is in the extreme pointed tip, hidden in the spatula, and in that cord there are divided parts and before, when you want, also with veins.
The forms of spatulas, which are used among the fingers to perform the perforation of abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and there are three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of vein--openers which are used to remove the flow of blood, and there are three species: large, medium, and small; their forms:
They are made of copper, rounded with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is necessary that these species of vein-openers are large, medium, and small, so that for those to remove the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you first apply them, it is not medicine.
However, they are not used to remove blood from every part of the body, and they are only used in fleshy areas, such as on the muscles of the arms and legs, and on the fat of the abdomen and groin, and similarly to their use on fleshy areas.
And some veins are made of those other small instruments similar to scissors according to this form; for which the blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And some rounded abscesses are caused in this manner:
Chapter 47.
About the treatment of men's breasts which are similar to those of women.
Some abscesses are inflated in the breasts of some men who take comfort in sleeping with women, and thus their breasts are inflated, and similar to those of women, and Roman doctors have written about this.
And to the one who has it, we advise that you should make an incision in those areas with a lunar section according to this method, from line B to line G, and then remove all the ugliness, and fill the wound with incarnated medicinal plaster, and adjust the two lips of the wound with cosideration, and cure the one who is thus sanitized.
But if the breast declines to the lower parts and is softened by its greatness thus like in women, then it should be divided into two equal parts, each with a section similar to a lunar figure, from which each one is contained in the other, until the major line contains the minor according to this method, from line B to line G. And then remove the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure, until it is sanitized.
And if you do not complete the incision of what we advise to make for the quieting of the patient's pain, and for the flow of blood, then we advise that you fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive oil and let it corrode what is rough from the grayness, and thus cure the one who is sanitized.
Chapter 48.
About the perforation of abscesses that come from beneath the nipple.
These abscesses that come from beneath the nipple are of the species of scrofula, hard, which contain a skin that is sacred.
And of those some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity we advise that they should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when everything is evacuated, what is in the abscess of the sanctity, then you complete it with much cotton and leave it until another day.
And then the cotton should be placed and treated with a convenient ointment suitable for that, until it is sanitized.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodules, and of scrofula, then you should dissect above that thus as we have said in the section about scrofulous inflammation.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes putrid, then administer to it a cautery according to what we have previously said about that.
Chapter 49.
About the incision of abscesses that occur through articular or venous means.
When the joint is broken, and the cord that is above it is consolidated, then many abscesses occur in this way: and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein are these: because when an abscess is through a joint, it is often aggregated in the front of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor.
And that which is through a vein is round in shape at the surface of the body.
And the incision about this abscess is erroneous, and it is major in that which is beneath the wings, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore we advise that its cure should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head, we advise that it should be evacuated.
But about that which is due to inflammation of the orifice of the joint, we advise dissecting the cord in the long section; and then you should open the section with an unclosed incision and then open the joint, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
And then place a thread about that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the joint with a double fold in two places,  which causes you to have expertise in extracting two joints that are in the temples.
And then puncture the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is released, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer cure in which is generated pus until the ligaments fall; and then cure it with a convenient ointment suitable for that until it is sanitized.
And if it is an abscess through a section of a vein, then we advise that you hold with your hand what is possible of the abscess in the cord, and then introduce the needle beneath the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and it should be in that double fold until you extract it from the other side, and then bind the abscess with a good ligament according to what we have said to you about the ligament of a grapevine, which has two parts in two extremities of the thread.
You should fear that you may extract the thread, then insert the thread into that angle so that you totally remove the entire abscess from the first insertion of the needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then you will locate the abscess in a suitable place within it so that when you see what is inside, then you will incise the redundancy of the code, and you will leave what is left of it loose.
And then you will pause over the pulse which has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with hot springs and poultices until it is healed.
Head of the abscess which is reached by torsion of nerves.
Thus you reach the abscess in the artery and in the vein, and similarly you reach the abscess in the nerves when you reach them through percussion or through troublesome palpation, and through similarities.
And it is done in the manner of them in the places of the joints or of the ankle, or in every place where the joints are weakened.
And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is in the major dispositions of its own body, and when it is tightly wrapped with bandages, it feels like the patient has a stupid stupor.
And it is not an abscess added to the chest of the body, and therefore the code is there, and it is weakened throughout the entire affected area and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
So it is clear that those who are in the joints do not think that they are being invaded with iron, because strongly their ends are contracted.
You who are on the head or on the forehead feel the code with a spatula. If it is a small abscess, then you take that one with forceps and abstract it from the roots.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with an hook, and excavate that, and then remove it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Head, it is.
About the section of the abscess which reaches from the hand that reaches to the belly.
It is given to certain homes moist vegetables in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies which are called fungal because of similarity with those that are fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head of that is large; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is of those that are small, and it is of those that are very magnificent.
And I have already seen one, and in their belly there were two of those which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with a small root.
And already the lips of those were inverted and split, and humidity flowed from that entire time.
So I incised them and extracted one in a weighing 18 ounces. and the other weighed 6 ounces.
And the operation on their incision is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the skin is white, humid, with a subtle root; then you incise it with a broad spatula, and you are in your presence burning cauteries at the focus, because many moist vegetables from the section of them are expelled very sanctified; and if you want the sanctified, cauterize that.
And if the patient is pale and trembles, beware of incision with iron; instead take a recently made leaden thread, and tighten it on that skin, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it there for two days.
And then adjust it in the structure of the leaden thread; therefore, do not cease to tighten the large leaden thread which is in the skin, until it is abstracted and falls through its own trouble.
If the skin is of thick root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the belly.
It is possible that you incise the worst of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to incise the skin which is of dark color, with little sensation, with light regard, because that is almost cancerous.
And I find myself reminded of cancer at this moment.
Head, it is.
About the cure of the prominence of the navel.
Prominence of the navel is caused by many causes; or by fissures of the ciphac which is above the belly, and there is a web or intestine according to how it ends in other ruptures; or by sanctification which flows from vein or artery as has been said before, or by constricted ventilation in it.
If it is by fissure of the ciphac and by settlement of the web, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lion-like pain, and appears in diverse situations. And if it is for the emergence of the intestine, then place the situation of that patient who has recounted more vehement diversity, and as you press that patient's toes are hidden, and return strongly; and it is very magnificent to move the introit of the bath and vehement struggle.
Perhaps it is due to humidity, then it is clear and not hidden when you press on your hand, neither is it constricted nor is it created.
And if it is due to blood, then the signs of the aposteme appear in the blackish declivity.
Perhaps it is due to bad flesh, then the aposteme is severe, large and hard, and it is fixed according to a quantity.
Perhaps it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is clear.
And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the artery, or of the vein, or due to windiness; then you must be prohibited from the cure of it, because in that there is fear and panic, just as you are instructed in the chapter where he said the apostemes are due to the artery and the vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must command the patient to hold their sieve straight, and it should be standing extended; and then insert your finger in the circuit of the entire navel, and then command him to stand bent between his thighs above the sieve, and then encircle your spatula flat in the circuit of the navel around the place where you felt with your finger; and then extend the magnitude of the aposteme to the upper parts as far as an inch; and then place it in the circuit with a strong faith or a decent manner.
And then you will find the middle of the extended aposteme above the ligament and introduce that finger into that index and search for the intestine; and if you have not found it nor guarded by the ligament, then you extract the extraneous and impel the intestine to the internal parts of the belly.
And if you have found the membrane, then take that patient by an inch; and remove the superficies of it.
Perhaps it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that word, and then return to your operation; take two needles and put them in those two strong veins and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the aposteme in a manner of crossing, which makes them penetrate; and then strengthen the aposteme in four parts above the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place until the extended flesh can be reduced and falls for itself; or remove that which is subtle and reduces, and then cure that patient who has been freed from the engorgements until it is healthy.
And if the prominence of the navel is from bad flesh in it or due to humidity, then you must conquer the aposteme as we have said and extract the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then cure that patient who has been freed and consolidate the place.
Chapter 53.
On the Cure of Cancer.
I have said, in the division, of a species of cancer and in which manner it goes to the cure of the patient with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid in the cure with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and I have said that cancer is engendered in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
And I will show you the ancients who have seen that some rooted cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, just as from the root of the cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and its similar members allocated to remove all that, and especially when it begins small.
Perhaps when it is ancient and great, you do not know how to appropriate it to him, because you cannot heal from that ulcer nor have seen another, nor has it been overcome by that.
And the operation on it is that which is allocated as we have said, it is that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black cholera some rooted things, and then suture that, if a manifest repetition is found.
And then prepare the patient in preparation for the operation, and then prohibit in the trajectory of the uncis which go to that; and then concave all parts of the code in a good perexcrutiation so that none of the causes of the roots of it remain. And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that liquid, and express the places, and abstract the large blood totally with your hand or instrument in which it is possible to use one of the instruments.
Perhaps if you have made a counter-flow of large blood in the incision of the vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood ceases, and then cure that patient with another cure so that it is healthy.
Chapter 54.
On the Cure of Dropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, the species of dropsy of water, and the signs of each species, for the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured in iron is not but the species of solitary altitudes, and it does not approach in iron to the species of timpanists nor to the species of hypochondriacs, because that is mortal.
When you have medicated this species of hydropic timpanist with medicines and do not confirm your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already obtained debilitation, or it is another hydropic malady, thus as if it is in the whole abdomen and seems like that, then beware that you do not meddle with iron, because fear is about that.
Perhaps sometimes the patient has an exuberant vertigo, and it is not another malady but only hydropic, and neither infant nor old, then the manner of the operation is that you elevate the patient between your arms, and place their extremity on the abdomen with their hand, injecting water at the partition below the navel, and take spathous spine segments according to this form.
It is of two acute parts, of acute extremity thus as spathous; perhaps meanwhile it is in some brief smallness little by little, so that in the operation that does not pass into the intestine, and that leads to that.
And then consider if the generation of hydropic is from parts of the intestines, because then it behoves that you have sectioned alone from the navel for the quantity of three digits to the partitions below, in the right of it above the navel.
Perhaps if the generation of hydropic is due to malady of the liver, then your section should be on the left of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
And it does not behove that your section should be on the rib above which you want to help the patient, so that the superfluities do not flow back to that free location.
And then perforate with the instrument throughout the entire codeina, and then enter into that section, and elevate your hand with the spathous between the codeina and the siphac, and you excavate it; and if it is the quantity of one ounce or around.
And then perforate the siphac until it reaches the spathous at the desired location, and that is the place of the water. And then extract that and enter an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or golden lion, on which at the lower part of it there is a small tube, and on its sides there are three tubes: two of one part and one of the other part; and it is the extremity of the instrument designed according to the manner of a feather, thus sometimes.
And in the upper extremity of it there is a handle, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it suddenly descends over the instrument, thus evacuating the water at the right moment in quantity, because if you evacuate from that same moment that does not behove in the hour, it would be very bad for the patient due to resolution of his animal spirit, or it approaches the five signs that are near death.
Perhaps evacuate from that according to the quantity of the vertigo of it and according to what the symptoms of the patient's vertigo of his pulse and his goodness indicate to you.
And then extract the instrument, and hold back the water which causes it because suddenly it is retained by the codeina which holds back the tube that is on the siphac of which I recommend to you that you perform it according to that manner.
And then insert the instrument another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do that for some days above fear, and beware of error lest you do not remove too much water.
Perhaps if you fear about the patient, and let go of a great quantity of water, then cure that one by burying in hot sand, and moving to a warm bath, and exposing to the sun for a long time; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until it is healthy.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and liver regarding the extraction of water, according to what you have recounted in that which has preceded.
The end.
On the treatment of children who are born with non-perforated urinary locations.
Some born children are thus from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixed non-perforated (or is a straight tube or not in its place).
Then it behoves to make a perforation of it as soon as it is born with a subtle spathous instrument according to this form:
And then pause in the tube a subtle silver key of lead and tie it, and you for three days or for four.
And when they want to urinate it is retained and urine; and then return that.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the location, will not leave this clarity.
Moreover, that which is extracted through the narrow channel of the spleen is administered as medicine in a key-like manner, as we have said, for thirty days until it is amplified.
Moreover, those in which the channel is not in its place, are led astray, which causes it to be because of those, that which is born and the channel deviates from the end of the head of the bladder so that they cannot urinate in the proper parts, until it raises the bladder with their hand at the lower parts; and it is not according to generation, for so long as the sperm cannot arrive at the matrix, and it is a great malady.
And the manner of operation is that the patient is placed on their back, and then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand in a vehement extraction, and insert the head of the bladder at the place of the perineum with a spatula-like instrument, just as if it were an insertion of a feather, or you do not touch any part, so that the mucus of the bladder appears like the head of the bladder and the channel falls into its proper place according to need.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times it happens accidentally; and stop yourself at the moment when you see that the blood is being drained, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 56.
About the white ulcer that occurs in the perineum at the head of the bladder and about corrosion and blackening and adhesion of the perineum at the head of the bladder.
Many times it happens that this white ulcer occurs in the bladder and is a sign of malignant flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend it with a subtle hook and to drain it until the entire mass is removed; and then stop above the submerged area with an Egyptian ointment; and then, cure the wound with a diaphanous ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color, then it is necessary that you administer cauteries at the insertion and removal of it.
Moreover, if the ulcer is in the perineum of the head of the bladder in an uncircumcised person, and one part of the ulcer is inside the perineum and another part is outside, then it is necessary that you remove the ulcer which is inside from the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer one, because when you cure the inner one, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And it often happens in the genitals and in the black and corroded perineum, therefore it is necessary that you conquer all that which has been denigrated and that which wants to corrupt or that which is corrupted; and then apply liniments over that with good honey, which is contaminated with flour of scorched millet and of bitter roots and crumbles.
And then cure it with another cure until it is healthy.
Moreover, if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cauteries in this form:
because juvenile cauteries are at two disposed moments, thus there is a flow of blood and the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the bladder is corroded and is entirely destroyed at that hour, then it is necessary that you introduce into the middle of the perineum a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the perineum at the head of the bladder (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose perineum is healthy, and over it there has been no circumcision; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the bladder is freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to disentangle those intricate things, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula for some reason of the head of the bladder and of the perineum, and thus it is because the perineum, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety.
And then separate between the perineum and the head of the bladder with a subtle drizzle, which has already been softened in the fresh water so that they do not adhere again.
And then it is cured with a seven-day stipation until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
About the purification of children and the cure of that which occurs in those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity thus as the other wounds: however, it is in our operation and our will, and those of that kind are properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and way, lest they lose their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use them in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experimentation, which causes many artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new knife and tongs; and they use ligament with faith and insertion with the nail.
And you have already tried all these methods and not obtained better modification in the forces, nor lamentation with the fingernail, since many times the codeine of the prepucil area to two tunics, and Roman tunic afterwards, and forced it is forsat to another insertion and sure pain. And in the modification that is done by alphabetic, and it is digital, of which the surgeons use, it is not secured the insertion of the extremity of the virile member, since it is forced into the trauma of it.
Maybe in the operation on the nail, it forces you to open and correct your own operation. And the code of the child is brief by nature, and many times seen in such a way that there was no need for modification, and you have seen it.
Maybe from the modification that is done with fingernails and lamentations with fingers, the goodness, I experimented in myself, since the fingers are of proportional insertion, for which the acuteness that is above is also as the acuteness that is below; and thus as you press your hand so proportionally dos acquisitions, and insert accordingly according to a comparison in one time; and it is done with compression of the finger in a figure containing the code of the entire part, with which there can be no error at all.
And the manner of the primary operation is that you make the child stay in a major position if it is one of those who understand a small one, that you do not do but let the finger rest on its own part only, and that you leave it there until another day.
And then do so as to make it happy in all that manner which is possible for you to receive its intelligence. And then make it be between your hands in a prepared state, and do not let it be seen; and hide the fingers in your hand or place them under the thigh, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the part of it and blow on the code, and pull it out so that it is ejected from the head of the part, and then modify that which is added to it with wisdom.
The form of the fingers for modification, this is the form:
Some of the extremities are not-talented and some are talented, so that the branch of the nail is not ejected, and it is the length of the two acquisitions as also the length of two manually engaged hands.
Maybe the error in modification is because it forces you to eject the entire internal code, or part of it needs insertion.
So it is necessary that you extend that from your hour to your nail before the apostema of the place and that you insert it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it on your nail, then extract it in an inch and insert it there.
Maybe if three days have passed, and Roman code that is inflated below the apostematized part, then you leave it until the apostema is cauterized, and excavate that which is facilitated, and insert it according to your preparation.
And beware of the head of the part, lest it will not return to its own place.
And then cure that with the code that consolidates the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is inserted from the code above measure, and you obtain the parts from above, that which you do not note to it.
And maybe cure that with the code that we have said until it is sanctified.
Chapter 48.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is done by opposing forces done by stone or by congealed blood, or by pus or by flesh, and similarly to those which we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved in water which we have said is vehemently made against the patient, then it is necessary to administer an extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, the form of which is: It should be of silver and very subtle, like a thin canal of a palm and a half, similar to a ray long in similarity to a fist, at which point it can be subtly inserted into its head.
And the manner of examining the urine is that you take the doubled thread and place it in the extremity of the wool or cotton for good adhesion; and insert the extremities of the thread into the back part of the syringe, and inject the fluid if it overflows due to some cause of the wool, but more importantly introduce it into the canal with vehemence And then you will empty the syringe by blowing and album of water.
And make the patient sit on a chair, and cover his genitals with olive oil and anoint them with a mixture of olive oil and other oils.
And then introduce the syringe to facilitate entry into the root of the penis; and then double the penis from below towards the navel; and then inject the syringe into that; and then inject it until it reaches the bladder, and then the patient will be purged of the vain cause, and it is not done in this order, but rather the meat in which it goes to tortuosity.
And then stretch the thread into the wool little by little, because the urine dries the wool.
Then extract that and do it for curing urine, and use a syringe, do not cease to do so until the bladder is evacuated and the patient obtains great alleviation.
Chapter 16.
About the quality of cleansing of the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments which are adapted to that.
When there occurs in the bladder ulceration or apostema, or it is congealed in that, or it is obstructed by pus, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is necessary to make an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
but rather that at the extremity of it is a stopper, so it is closed. And in it there are three channels: two from one part, and sometimes more times.
At the beginning it is a container of concavity, in which there is water that is impelled, and it is according to the quantity that oppiles that, it adds, until when some cause is drawn away from the humidities, it is attracted, and when it is expelled, with water it is attracted, and when it is expelled long, according to what the clampcedra does in which naphta is injected into the battles of the sea.
Therefore, when you want to draw humidities into the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and it attracts with that water which is impelled from below, because the humidity is attracted into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the penis according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then inject the humidity with that water which injects, because that humidity will reach the bladder soon, and the patient will feel relief.
Shape of the subtle crystallizer in which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its shape:
And it is made of silver or copper, of which the head is so subtle that it resembles a small feather, and below it has a canal with a delicate thread.
And then take the bladder in motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and heat that humidity over the flame.
And then introduce the extremity of the crystallizer into the penis.
And then stretch your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that that humidity has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parguames and make it into that circle; and perforate it with all its returnity; and then introduce strong thread into those channels, so that they are revolved; and then add the circle so that it is added alsofatur, because you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and other oils.
And then you tie that to the instrument and make it so that it is done as if it were done in the bladder, and express with your hand until the humidity reaches the bladder.
Chapter 20.
About the extraction of stone.
We have already said in the division the species of stone and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said that the patient's skin in which the evil operation acts badly.
The skin generated in the bladder is precisely that which is fixed to the bladder.
And you will now give a clear and concise exposition.
Therefore, I say that the skin generated in the bladder is mostly seen in children; and of its signs it is that the urine that is voided from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears in this arena; and the patient's vein is weakened, and many veins are diminished, and then it is dressed; and I know that there is a hole in the intestine among those.
And it is customary to heal the children of that age who have reached 14 years; and it is difficult to cure in old people. It is better in young people because it is more easily cured among them.
And of that which the skin is larger and the cure is less easy; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning to remove the patient from the crisis which extracts all the filth that is in the bad veins; because that filth prohibits the growth of the skin and diverts it from its inquiry.
And then place the patient in a warm bath and let it stay there for a while, so that the skin may descend to the mouth of the bladder, or jump from its place with some filth.
And then make that circle among your prepared hands, and his hands are placed under his hips, so that the entire bladder may be inclined downwards towards the lower parts.
And then seek out all of it and remove all of that deformity.
Therefore, if you feel the skin in the space, then you will touch it immediately with a dry application over it.
And if you do not find the whole of it at once, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil the aforementioned place indicated by the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the middle finger if he is a young adult, and insert it into his anus. And seek out the skin until it stays beneath the aforementioned place. And turn that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press above it with the aforementioned thumb, and expel it to the lower parts before the place where you make the application.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend his right hand to the lower parts above, and let his other hand remain holding the code that is below the genitals, at the place where the application is made.
And then insert the spatulum beneath the incident of which this is the form of it: and divide it into the water that is between the intestine and the genitals, not in the middle place, above the side of the left hip; and let the application be on that skin and the aforementioned thumb is in the intestine, and let it be a transverse application, so that the application before is wide and straight according to the quantity that you can make of the skin as possible, and no more, because you will compress the aforementioned thumb which is in the intestine with the skin, and it is often forgotten due to its difficulty.
And you know that some of the skin has an angle and margins, because its evacuation is made difficult for that.
And of that water it is like a lens, and it is round, and it is made for easier evacuation.
Therefore, if it is that one with angles and margins, adjust it in the crack.
And if it is not thus forgotten, then it is necessary that you operate on that, or that you strengthen over that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is thus like a file on the skin, and do not avoid it; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot operate on that, then amplify the tract a little, and if you see flux of blood, separate it into strong acid vitriol treated.
But if the skin is more than one, then at the beginning you apply the hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it into it; and then apply a little water; and similarly make many motions with the hand.
And if the skin is very great, then ignorance is that you insert it with great application, because it harms the patient for one of two causes: either he dies or he is prevented from the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not entirely consolidated.
But administer expulsion of it until it is forgotten, or operate on the fracture of it with the forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. Stop above that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil roasted and water fresh, so that the postema's heat may be tempered.
Then restore the patient to their bed, and do not disconnect the ligament for three days.
And when the aura is disconnected, apply the area with water and much oil, and then take care that the patient is free from daily fever and daily dizziness until they are healthy.
Sometimes in the plague, postema's heat is accidental, adjusted and corrosive, and of this similarity it is as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and through it the urine is prohibited (and that is known through the obstruction of the blood in the urine), therefore insert the hot instrument into the plague and extract the blood, because otherwise it will provoke the bladder to corrupt and putrefy.
Then wash the plague with a mixture of wine, water and salt, and apply opposition to the entire species, with what is convenient for their cure until they are healthy.
And take heed during all the hours of the entire cure that you read to both thighs and adjust the medicines which are applied to the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the vein, and it is fixed in it, and urination is prohibited, then cure it with what you recommend before, so that you may pierce through to secretion, because too many vain attempts at this cure have been accused of obstruction; and now you have experienced this, and it is that you take a perforator made of iron, the shape of which is like this:
of triangular extraction, pointed, fixed on a stick.
Then take a thread, and tie it to that vein below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the vein, perforating with facilitation until the perforator reaches that stone. And rotate the perforator with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you will perform the perforation of it until you make the other part penetrate; because the urine is then almost absolutely free.
Then take your hand over that which is left of the stone from the part before the vein, because it is triangulated, and it is forced out with the urine, and the patient is healthy.
Sometimes this cure does not work for some reason that prohibits it, then tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then press down on the stone in that vein between two ligatures. And then extract it. Then disconnect the ligature and loosen the congealed blood, which is done in the plague.
And it is not necessary to ligate with a thread below the stone, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is disconnected, the calculus returns to its place and takes hold of the plague.
And for this reason it is necessary to have the thread above, that you elevate the calculus to the upper parts, or that it returns to its own place with full complement, and takes hold of the plague as we have said.
Chapter 16.
On the extraction of stones from women's [bodies].
A stone in women is rarely generated.
Sometimes a stone appears in some of them, then the cure of it is difficult, and it is prohibited by many manners.
One of them is because the woman's veins are weak.
And the second is because you do not find a woman who knows how to describe the measurement of the meter when it is cast, or it is from women having husbands.
The third is because you do not find a woman who knows this art, mainly the operation with her hand.
And the fourth is that the place of secretion around stones in women is far from the place of the stone, because it indicates a profuse secretion, and in this there is fear.
Sometimes it is necessary to provoke you to this, then take heed that you take a wise woman who knows the art, and few are skilled.
Sometimes you are deprived of this, then seek a wise and subtle woman who is experienced in the art, or presents a mature woman who is knowledgeable in the field of women, or a woman who has a part of the art.
Therefore make that present, and command to her that she does all that you order, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that you examine if the woman is weak, then take heed that you put your instrument in her cul-de-sac and search for the stone.
Therefore if you find that, cut it below the instrument, and then command to her that she inserts above that.
Sometimes if it is not weak, then command the mature woman to insert the instrument into the hollow of the patient's body and search for the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and holds it with good compression.
Therefore, if you have obtained that, then it is necessary to gradually reduce the swelling of the bladder at the divided parts, in order to restore its natural virtue within, so that it may return to its proper function in the cavity.
And place an incision above the aforementioned position of the mattress on the back of the cavity, where some part is paralyzed and bent, and cut into that area, so that it does not remain constricted by the bent mattress.
And let the section be small at the beginning; and then insert the scalpel above that section, and if you feel the mattress, then adjust the section according to the quantity which you know will be enough to cut through the mattress.
You know that the types of mattresses are many: some are small and large, lean and rough, long and round, and have ridges.
So you know how many types there are of it, for what you signify above what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust the vitriolic treatment at that place and apply it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation so that the mattress is forgotten.
And make sure you prepare all the instruments which are necessary for the extraction of mattress in men, so that they may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is injured, then you stop pouring powder on the area and remove those powders and structures downwards, and do not iterate this; and leave the mattress alone and do not extract it, because for certain the patient will die from the disease. And then cure the wound.
So when the flow of blood has ceased, then apply cooling poultices, and in that place you will see it heal, then return to your operation so that the mattress is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On the section about hernia and ulcer.
Hernia is not anything but an accumulation of humidity in the white ciphal (brain) which is below the codena (codex?) of the genitals containing the humor, and it is named ciphal.
And some wounded areas are in the proper panniculus (peritoneum?) which prepares nature in the part of the humor, until it is said that there is another humor; and it is the codex (code) of the genital among the white ciphal (brain) which we have mentioned, and it is not anything but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which affects the genitals, so that in those cases it is founded on this matter, and some veins are affected by percussion or pressure on the genitals.
And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or sanguineous, or red, or it is black and fetid, or it is whitish-yellow, and that is what is most frequent.
And the signs by which it is known are these: because if it is in the white ciphal (brain) which we have mentioned, then the apostema (abscess?) is declining and becomes a little longer, thus assuming the shape of a humor, and appears in the genitals, because the humidity contains all that part.
And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus (peritoneum?), then the apostema (abscess?) is declining in the part of the humor, and thus one estimates that it is another humor.
And if the humidity is between the codex (code) of the genitals and the white ciphal (brain), then you will find the sentiment there.
And as you want to know the color of the humidity, then you will express the color of the humidity in the apostema (abscess?) within the entrails of the body, whose form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the vestiges of the entrails, judge from that which is deduced about it.
So when we come to the cure of the iron in the ferrous, then it is necessary to command the patient to take flea-bane if that is possible for you, and sometimes the cost of the iron pleases.
And then it should be suspended above the two bones about some cause a little higher, and stop there, with the fewest drops.
And then place you on the left side of it, and command the minister to follow on the right side of it, which extends its rod to one of two lattes at the codex (code) of the genitals and at the part of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a spatula and divide the codex (code) of the genitals at my middle place for the length until you reach the pentagonal.
And make the section according to a direct and distant engagement from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white ciphal (brain) comprehending.
And excavate that, and observe, and keep yourself for thus that you do not incise that; and your excavation is the one which excavates for the part just as it is suspended in the humor most subtly and scrutinized in the excavation according to the quantity possible for you.
And then thoroughly wash the affected area plentifully with ample water, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the wound with unciae, and extend the affected area to the underlying parts; and do not touch the codes of the genitals, comprising them, and insert the affected area in that manner which is as much as possible. And insert that into its entirety or in pieces, and gently increase the subtle liquid flow, because if you do not perceive the insertion of it exquisitely, it is not certain that the water will not return.
Perhaps the hour has come to proceed with that deformity of its code in the time of your operation, then when you have completed the wound of the affected area, return inside, and then adjust the two lips of the code of the genitals with a suture, and then cure it thus with the other plagues, until it is healthy.
And if you find the hour corrupted by another bad condition, then it is necessary that you remove the veins which are above the suspensors, and extract the hour, and then cure it in the way that we have said.
Perhaps the water is added in two equal parts, then you know that two are the hernias; therefore insert that part according to what you have done in the other engagement; and if it seems to you that it is an operation, then do it.
And then you should purge the blood, and enter into the wounds with a submerged lane of oil or rose oil; and pause before another lane which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over both genitals and the miracle of the belly; and pause above double drapes and powders, and apply those above the lien which is according to this form.
And then press two drapes and fill the lane of carmenade according to this likeness; and fill the extremities with those which are premured by coat or humid lane, and fill in structure on the breeches of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes hold of the backside up to the two, and the second takes hold of the part of the perineum, and two extremities over two hips below and two other extremities over two angles, and all the structure is adjusted in the breeches of the breeches.
And some hernias are artificially medicated with a cautery in place of the wound with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutellar cautery and insert it into the code of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white affected area containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form. And it is assembled in a Greek letter.
And then thoroughly wash that affected area, and ignite until all the humidity is eliminated.
And then extend the affected area with unciae, and scrape with unciae, and scrape with subtle ignited cautery; and insert that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the hour when the focus does not touch.
And you know that this operation is more saving and longer-lasting than a flow of blood, and better than an operation on the wound.
Perhaps you have made a contrary apostema in the hour of wound or in the hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then it is necessary that you cure which contrariety you have made for that, with a curative cure that convenes to it according to what has been said.
Perhaps the patient is poor, and does not expect a second operation due to its horribility, then administer a thorough washing according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified by you, for that which we have said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Then it is necessary that you raise the patient over some elevated seat, thoroughly wash the apostema in the lowest part of it with a spatula, and pause the washing according to the length of the body.
And it is a broad perception until all the water flows out.
And then pause on the coat spot and leave it there, so that the remaining water flows out. And then cure it until the plague is healed.
Perhaps the contrariety is at the urgency of the water in that hour you perform it: and this is not done except because the white pannicle in the orrifice of the plague makes contrariety and prohibits the issuance of the water, then it is necessary that you put in the plague a penalty or instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropitz, the form of which precedes; or adjust on the opposite side of the plague a small one.
And you know that the water returns, and it is augmented then via six months or during those; and as it is added, then it is washed according to that measurement and manner, because the patient will thus pass the seven days.
Chapter 63.
On wounds about carnal hernia and its cure.
It seems that the patient has lost sensation in the affected area due to the severity of the hernia, which is causing fear and anxiety in the major dispositions; because I have seen the dismissal of it and being saved from that worst evil.
And you should remember the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
So, it is said that the abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are compromised and it is done for many causes: either due to acute sharp inflammation, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion.
And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And it is a putrid abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel any sensation to it.
And some veins are made for the swelling of the arteries, and for the inflammation of those veins that have already been perceived, or for the inflammation of the veins.
But it is for the inflammation of the arteries that is recognized by the dispersion of the abscess when it compresses those tender tissues; and it does not cover what that touches.
But that which is made for the inflammation of the vein is not dispersed by any cause, unless it be compressed in the tender tissues.
And it is possible that upon this species a section was made and upon the other carnal parts; and it is that you should incise the codena of the genitals, and then stretch the skin to the upper parts, and extract that from the white ciphac, and remove the suspensors of the veins, and tie them, and incise the suspensors so that you remove that from all parts of the skin.
So if the skin is already consolidated with those carnal parts, then it covers what you extract from the skin and incises that.
And if there is adhesion between some cause of the ciphac, or between what is between the veins, then it covers that you remove all that adhesion and incise that for a rounded incision.
But if there is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it covers that you incise all that which is of it, and extract the skin as we have said.
So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin ointment and rose oil; and then cure that in another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
On the treatment of hernia which is of the vit.
Vit is an abscess enveloped by some envelope similar to a bruise with mollification of the testicles, and it is made difficult to exercise movement and ambulation on the affected part.
And in the treatment of this ailment, it is by fear for that which is preceded by remembrance.
However, it covers that I should advise operation on that according to what the first ones did.
And it is said that you should place the affected part on an elevated chair; and then apply the suspensors of the testicles to the lower parts; and then tie the codena of the genitals with the tender tissues among the veins that are probated to the verge; and hold those other ministers that you, and extend them with vehement extension.
And then incise with a wide spatula to make a transverse section in the right of the veins until they discover the hidden veins.
And then scrape off all parts as you have said in extracting the arteries which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle in which there is double faith, and tie that to the first of the places where you find the vit, and tie another vein at the back of them. And then incise those in the middle place for a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupt humors.
And then cure the wound with cures of other wounds in which you want to be healed, so that the veins fall, which do not nourish one of two genitals, because it is not bad for that.
But if you find vit in all the veins, then it covers that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for that are cleared among the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the veins, and that they are stabilized, or that they are cleared so that there is no juice among them.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is by section that ends in the extended ciphac above the belly on the part of the angular miracles of the belly, so that by giving the intestines of that rupture to some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the ciphac or of excess of it, and it happens to these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by shock, or by outcry, or by elevation of some grave cause, or by similarity.
In this case, it seems that the water of the patient, when it is through the extension of the siphac, is that it accumulates little by little over a long time, and does not accumulate suddenly, and it is an apostema that enters within to quarrel with the preon so that the siphac compresses the intestine.
And the fluid of it is when it is through the section of the siphac, because at the commencement it causes to accumulate violent pain suddenly; and it is diverse apparent apostema below the descending colon, and that is for the evacuation of the intestine, and its body is divided into parts before the section of the siphac.
And some evacuations are forced out from the intestine to the fabric, and this is called an intestinal hernia with a circular motion.
And some evacuations are done in the ventosity, and some evacuations run into the intestine's end, and here it is retained, and it is at this great perniciousness of the malaute, and some evacuations cause to produce bad pain and worsening when it is premature.
And in the cure of the species of this malady at Ferr's temperature, because it is believed that the treatment should be avoided in that.
And the manner of the operation of that is that one commands the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand at the internal parts of its cavity if it obeys the usual returnment, and then it is invested over the hollow column between the thighs, and raises the legs of it.
And then stop the colon which holds the colon of the testicles at the upper parts, and inserts the colon of the testicles totally for the length; and then fixes in two labia of the section uncis according to what is indicated to close the section with those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that you can possibly do from it, then the liquid may be forced out.
And then scrape that cyst which is below the colon of the testicles, until it discovers the white hard siphac of some part.
Then you insert the finger in that which holds the testicle, in that which is between the white siphac, which is below the colon of the liquid, and between the siphac according to, and absolves with that adhesion which is in the part behind the liquid.
And then move the hand to the colon of the testicles at the front parts, and also extend the white siphac in its own hand on the left side, and raise the liquid in the siphac to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the liquid downwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a complete solution.
And search with your fingers to see if there is any cause of the intestine wrapped in the white hard siphac. If you find some cause of it, then you will fill that into the belly below.
And then insert in the part below the colon of the testicles for section of that which runs healthy and sane, just as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the ligament which we have recommended (and some evacuations the white siphac is cauterized, which we have said then the insertion of the temen of flux of health, because many evacuations accumulate those) and leave the ligament until it falls by itself.
If the treatment of it is delayed, then hot water should be poured over it, and pause on that until it falls according to what we have said.
And then heal the plague with another healing of plagues until it is healthy.
Chapter 66.
Of Ventous Hernia.
In this hernia, it has not been seen that anything is retained under the cure of it with Ferr's temperature.
And the first doctors said that it is done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is at five; which is that you raise the veins towards the section over that with facilitated intestine; and then cut in the middle place around the apostema in what opens those veins.
Heal the wound according to what we have said, so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 67.
About the displacement that is made in the ankle joints.
Some swollen veins break rupture in the ankle joints, thus as we have said, and empty the area.
And do not attribute to the genital area any cause of the intestine to the genital area; and if you do, it is little; and return to it in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged in this way, an adjusted fissure is made in the hip joint so that the intestine comes out of the hip joint; and it happens for the extension of the hip joint which is in the ankle joints, as we have said, which causes the hip joint to be stretched, and then it becomes soft and suppurates in the area and empties.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery, as it was preceded by the narration of it.
And some swollen veins are treated with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their two hands, and then dry the area of the rupture of the abscesses emptying in sections according to the quantity of three digits.
And then stretch the white hip joint that is under the quilt so that it may be discovered.
And then take the rod and place it on the prominent area of the hip joint, and press it onto the belly button.
And then kiss the two prominent areas above the extremity of the hip joint rod, and adjust one to the other with a suture.
And then extract the extremity of the rod, and do not insert into the entire hip joint, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause, as you will know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then heal it with the treatment of wounds, and as you insert the filaments, purify it and restore the wound so that it may be consolidated; because the hip joint is constricted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more conducive to health.
Chapter 68.
About the softening of the quilts of the testicles.
Some swollen veins of the quilts of the testicles in some men are softened because of that, since the flesh that is between them is softened, and it is necessary to observe their condition.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is engaged in the treatment of it to make the patient lie on their back, and insert the entire quilt which is softened over the natural quilt; and then adjust both lips to the suture.
And if you wish, then in the beginning, remove the excess of the softened quilt with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
And then insert between the sutures; and then heal by healing of the other wounds so that it may be healthy and close the filaments.
Chapter 69.
About cauterization.
I know that cauterization in our law is forbidden, but for a cause I am led to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways, one of which is so that it may be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in it, who knows the treatment of it which happens; and the other way is that we sometimes need cauterization of other animals for our juvenation through those, such as mules, and goats, and pigs, and similar to the animals.
And therefore I say that cauterization is made in two ways: either by burning, or by making a fissure to dry.
But in that which is made by burning, the way of the operation is that we make the animal sit in hot water so that its genitals may be softened and relaxed and may hang. And then take those with your hand inside so that they may be resolved and do not appear to touch.
But in cauterization made by fissure and drying, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the quilt of its testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspensory, and insert above each hole in one drying so that two holes may be processed.
And then insert those pus so that they may be excavated somehow. And do not leave on those of the hip joint any cause, but rather the subtle hip joint which is above the veins.
And in this way of cauterization, it is better which is made by burning, because burning strongly leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal may desire to couple.
And then heal the wound so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 70.
About the treatment of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men is according to two ways: one is because it appears in that which is in the space of the quilt of testicles, in that which is between two testicles, a figure like a woman's cunt.
Some evacuated fluids of that corrupted urine which is in the cavity of the testicles.
In women it is a species: and it is that the neck of the womb over the perineum is also like two testicles of a man, a little smaller in all dimensions beforehand, as well as the penis of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two from men and one species from women. And it is necessary that you inject those adjusted meats inside so that it fugues the impression of that, and then you cure them with the cure of the other plagues.
And in the second species of men, from which urine is produced which is in the cavity of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation for it.
Chapter 21.
About ulcers and prominent flesh caused by women's affairs.
Ulcers are adjusted over natural causes inside so that they are restrained and are made light in regard; and some evacuated fluids are magnified in some women to the point that they spread also as in men, and are perceived inside during intercourse.
Then it is necessary that you hold the excess of ulcers with your hand or on a nail and inject them.
And do not insert ultimately, but rather in the region of the root, so that there is no excessive flow of blood.
And then heal it with the cure of the plagues inside so that it may be healthy.
A born flesh is a flesh that grows in the horror of the mother inside so that it fills that, and ulcers are situated at the lower parts beforehand according to the similarity of the womb (and for this reason some first callers call it "caudal malady"); therefore it is necessary that we inject thus as we inject ulcers, and cure it inside so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 22.
About the cure of gout.
Gout is when the neck of the womb is not perforated, or it is the small passage. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to the malady that has preceded it, and that is made by flesh not adjusted or by subtle cipher or specific.
And it is made in the region of the mother, or in its sides, or in its upper pus, or in its lower pus, and prohibits from acquiring and from pregnancy, and ulcers prohibit menstruation.
And the recognition of that is made by regard for the womb, if the oppression is apparent, propitious; but if it is not apparent, then you search for it with the fixed ties or with the rule.
But if oppression is by subtle cipher, and it is proposed to the two lips, then you touch and disrupt that.
And it is that which pauses over the two lips of the pubic area, and then pause the fixed ties indicating the hands of both sides above.
And the woman is on her two knees, the two extended thighs, and then extends the two lips with force inside so that the subtle cipher is broken and the oppression is lifted.
And then take an ointment and anoint the fourth olive oil and pause that over the location, and go to a man's house the day before so that the location is not consolidated.
But if the cipher is large and specific, then it is necessary that you inject that with a spatula or with a myrtle twig.
But if the oppression is by flesh, then suspend that on a nail, and inject it.
And here are the medicines that make cease blood flow from wounds, such as astringents, and dragon's blood, and herbs, adjusted with album of wolf's hoof.
And then administer a wide lead tube so that the wound is not consolidated lightly.
And hold that for several days and administer lukewarm water of milk.
And then it is cured with the other cure of consolidation inside so that it may be healthy.
And some veins are born in the native birth of other flesh, and then it is necessary that you inject according to this manner. But if it is for cancerous aposteme, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the womb not made contradictory with iron in any manner.
Chapter 23.
About the cure of hemorrhoids and of tylos and of red botch that are born in the neck of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins inside so that they corrode much blood continuously; and how ancient hemorrhoids are made and are false tylos.
And I have already said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Then I say that hemorrhoids and tylos when they are in the region of the womb and do not appear to the sensation, then in those there is no cure made with iron.
Those which are in the horrific orifice of the matrix above those which feel sensation, so those which are treated.
And it is fitting that you place the woman in a warm bath and then extend the thighs to the knees, or grasp them with a rough cloth, and insert those into the crevices.
And then powder over those affected areas with the flow of blood from one of the inwardly piercing powders, thus as it seems to be similar and assimilated to those.
And then soak the diseased feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that into a decoction of herbs and of scorched millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
And then take flour of barley and comfort that with honey and wine, and make an emplaster over the back of it.
And if the blood is absorbed, well; and if not, attach two ventoses, and to the joints their scarification.
And then take wool and submerge it in oil of colic or oil of arnagloss or oil of guarrievier with wine, and attach it to the place; and then cure the place with an ointment until it is healed.
And cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
On the accidental perforation of the uterus.
Various species of abscesses that suddenly occur in the uterus, thus as cancer and malignant apostema, lapidous and ulcerated and adherent and eruptive manifestations and fistulous hemorrhages and ragwories and thyl and other abscesses. And I have already said about these evils and the species of those and their signs and their cures in the division.
And it is fitting that I should speak about this treatise on abscesses which concerns the ones that occur in the uterus when they are of those abscesses that suddenly swell, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of iron is performed.
Now it is fitting that you consider if the pain of the abscess in the womb's beginning is acute with percussion and inflammation and fever, and sometimes it inflates and feels sentiment upon it, then do not hesitate about perforation of it, and cure it with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then it is fitting that you make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline her back against the pillow, and adjust her feet to the part below the belly, and her thighs are expanded, and place her arms below the knees, and tie something around her to what is convenient.
And then the midwife follows the straight path and administers the instrument with which one opens the horrific orifice of the womb, in the form of which you will find in those cases that will be treated.
And it is fitting when you want to administer this instrument that you place it in the right way into the womb of the woman, and what of the instrument enters into the womb should not be more than the width of the womb and lead to the evil. But if the instrument is larger than the width of the womb, then it is fitting that you place pessaries on the texture of the width of the womb so that the entry of the entire instrument into the womb is prohibited.
And it is fitting that you place the vertex that corresponds to the instrument of the straight path above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertex until it is opened into the horrific orifice of the womb.
And when the extraction appears, and it is touched by the hand and it is smooth and soft, then it is fitting that you separate that from the head of it with a spatula.
And when the sania is evacuated, then it is fitting that you place in the wound a cotton pad submerged in rose oil or green oil where there is some stipulation; and place the calculus in the section in the womb.
And then cleanse the womb and above the perineum a woolen pad submerged in water where there are swollen veins.
And then it is cured in two days with an ointment that is convenient for what is necessary until it is healed.
And some vegetables are washed in the womb and the wound, thus as it is Christened in water and honey, and then in water where there is a bulb of iris or of long aristology, and then returns to the ointment.
And if the wound is deeply seated in the womb, then it is fitting that you are prohibited from the cure of iron, having cured that with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To instruct midwives in what manner they should deliver babies that are born with unnatural figures.
A necessary cause is that the womb conceives in the beginning the figure of the natural infant development through sensations of it, and it is that when you see the woman express a desire for the parts below and desire to smell the air, and upon this is influenced by what is above her, and it fastens the sentiment of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to the natural figure, and it is the sentiment of it above the seventh month, and the second is like that which is suspended or pendant from the navel.
So when you feel those sensations, then it is necessary that the woman's womb is compressed so that the embryo descends more lightly, because it is situated above the seventh month, and it gives to it the second, and it is freed from those superfluous burdens with good moderation.
Perhaps that which is another part is unnatural and inadmissible, because when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of it is situated before the head of it and its feet, and its hand, or at its foot. or it is situated the head of it and its hand, or at its belly, and strongly it is converted on the seventh vertebra, and it seems like the unnatural figures of it.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guards against error and deception.
And you will show the entire figure of those, and which engine is in those so that it may be signified by that and established upon that.
When the fetus is situated on the seventh month by natural growth, and that is vehement upon the woman and makes a difficult part, and sometimes her virtue is already debilitated, then make that seizure, or what women have, and evaporates the conjunction of it with fenugrec powder and olive oil humectant.
And then insert the measuring rod between the seven fingers of the spatulum, and find that second one, or dry that with its own nail within, so that it corrodes what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly within, so that the fetus descends.
Perhaps if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be treated with poultices of thyme and poultices of fenugrec with cypress oil.
And then command it to her, and then the poultice, that it be compressed and make that stirring with condiments; and close its mouth and its nose for one hour, because the fetus will soon be turned out.
And if the two parts of the fetus are soon turned out at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them with facility little by little. Perhaps if it does not obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then conceal the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the parts are not yet turned and the fetus is dead, then dissect those and extract the remainder of the fetus or lift the body to its mother with a drap and extract that with equality, because that will soon be turned out.
When the fetus is situated on the seven feet, then it is necessary that you impel them in themselves, and then convert the fetus little by little, and then enfold that, and then take one of its feet and extend those little by little.
Perhaps when they are situated within the thighs, then you command it to come out, and make that exterior stirring with condiments, because it will soon be turned out if God wills it.
And if it is not turned out in what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little within, so that it pauses according to the natural figure, because it will soon be turned out with a lighter sentiment.
And if it is prohibited in all that we have recommended, then take of poultices of altaea and dissolved gum, and percute everything in the mortar for good percussion, and then line up with that the conjunction of the woman's body, the pus at the bottom of her belly. And then make that mixture in warm water, so that it reaches the hypochondrias.
And when the lower parts of it are numbed, then make to it a sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause that on it. And when you make the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make it sit on a chair, and then make that stirring and open its mouth, and lift it from that, and press the lower part with lighter compression, because the fetus will soon be turned out.
Examine the foot laterally while holding one of its hands. Be gentle in the reduction of the patient's hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her go upwards.
And if she cannot go upwards, then place the mattress on the bed, and constrict the patient's thighs with a vehement concussion, and then administer gentle remedies which you have collected from mucus.
And if the inflammation has come, then place the poultice on the affected area, and then study the reduction of the hand, and bend the foot according to its natural figure, and make the woman settle down and command her to compress it until it is forgotten.
Examine the foot on the expanded joint, its hands and the surface of its mother's back. So that the midwife holds the foot's hand and then revolves it little by little, and thus that one is facilitated.
And when it is thus and as much as it has been bent, then pause on the joint of its hip that we have collected remedies from oil and mucus.
And then command him to massage little by little, and when you have done it, then place the poultice on an affected area and command that it be inclined towards the right side, and then command him to be compressed; and make that settle down in a conditioned state. The prepared fetus is turned onto its side.
When you touch the horror of the mother according to this manner, consider, and then you insert your finger into the second opening with your nail until it is evacuated from humidity.
And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you insert it into the navel, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then you will apply the foot to the internal parts until it pauses according to what is desired, and command the woman to compress herself in some voids, and it will be forgotten in the examination of the lighter, if God wills it.
The outcome of twins or a multitude of fetuses. You know that many twins are born void, and some times three or four, but this is strange and bitter to understand; but I see causes against natural order, and do not live.
And count those, already it is that they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by a cipher, distinguishing those that enter the ligament of each umbilical cord. Some voids are forgotten thus as if it were a fetus for natural examination, and some voids are examined in an unnatural way thus as we have collected remedies.
And if they are difficult voids of their devotions to the inflammation and you come to what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you cure them thus as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what makes it facilitated and subtlety, and I have delayed, and it is ingenious according to the entire figure as it is prepared by the ingenious mind for health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some wounds are formed in the womb one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and I have already verified that a woman who aborts will not get seven, and another is totally formed, which causes false measurement of the glorious savages.
And thus I have seen that it is in the science of the midwife that she strongly holds to that small similarity of that, and therefore I stop there as I have seen.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not beforehand examined, and you are forced to use opposing operations on the mother, then I believe that you consider if the woman is of sane virtue and not among those accidents for which she is threatened with loss.
Then I believe that the woman is placed on the mattress on the two beds, and her head is inclined downwards and her thighs are elevated.
And the minister holds that one of two parts or is tied to the mattress so that the body of the patient does not extend itself beyond the extraction of the fetus.
And then you should apply a poultice to the mother of the patient's stomach, made with olive oil and mucus, and also with fenugreek and sesame.
And then you should apply a matrona to the patient's hand with olive oil and mucus, and apply a warm application to the mother in the stomach, and approach the hand to the area where the fingers are on the feet.
And places are convenient for this: then you consider if the feet are prepared to descend over the head of the sieve, and then you place the fingers on the heels of them, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or on the beard, or in the armpit, or in the convenient places of the ribs, or on the hypochondries.
Maybe if the descent is towards the patient's feet, then in the ankle, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the finger in the right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and warm the hand facilitating and place the finger in some of those places which have fingers, until we reach the underlying cause.
And then pause and place on the opposite side of another finger, or the third if it is necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its own rectitude as much as possible.
And it is necessary to massage the whole affected part, so that the evacuation of it is alleviated thus as it is done in the teeth, for the eradication of it.
And it is necessary in this water that is between them, so that the extension is mollified; and if some part of it is retained, then it is necessary that a matrona be applied to some fingers with olive oil and warm applications, and revolve around that water that is retained.
So if the part of the foot is forgotten, then the fingers should be permutated into the place where it was put again; and do so until the whole foot is forgotten.
Maybe if the hand is evacuated beforehand, and it is not possible to reduce that by its contraction, then it is necessary that a wrapping be enveloped over that; and then extract that until everything is forgotten, and place it in the joint of the hand or in the hollow.
And thus it is necessary to make points on the other hand and on both feet.
Maybe if the head of the foot is large, or it hastens to its contraction in the evacuation, or it is on the head of the adjusted water, then it is necessary that warm applications are made between the fingers spatiously and the head is extracted and the water is drawn out, or that a certain instrument is discovered with which is named "alundat", the form of which will be seen among the forms of other instruments in the chapter which is about to be discussed.
And similarly it is done if the foot is of large head by nature: and then it is necessary to dissect that with an algemat, or that one takes that with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is evacuated and contracted from the armpit, then it should be opened until the humidity which is in the feet is effused.
Maybe if it is not complicated, nor does it obstruct the evacuation, then you dissect the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
And if the descent of the belly is apostematized or it is in the hydropic, then it is necessary that you perforate it until the humidity that is in it flows out.
Maybe if the feet are above the sieve-like feet, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it towards the mouth of the mother is lighter.
Maybe if it is contracted from the belly and the feet, then it is necessary that you extract it with a wrapping which you have enveloped over your hand, and that you open the belly and the feet until the water that is in them flows out.
Maybe if the other members are stopped and turned to the head, then the metrona warms the left hand; maybe if the mouth of the mother is opened, then you insert your hand into the opening of the liver, and approach that to the head, and attract it with fingers until it reaches the mouth of the mother, and then warm it in one finger, or two fingers, and attract it to those.
And if the mouth of the mother is contracted by an apostema which hastens to the u, then it is necessary that it not be troubled over it; instead it is necessary to administer effusions of humid, greasy causes. And administer emplasters; and follow the patient with waters that mollify and humidify.
And if the feet are above the sieve-like ribcage, then if possible, it should be agitated: and administer what we have said in the living foot.
And if that is not possible, then it should be dissected in pieces, and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave any underlying cause of the disease.
When you have completed the entire operation, then administer what we have said about the cure in the swollen apostemes that come from the mother.
And if there is an outflow of blood, then apply styptic remedies and administer another cure.
You have already seen a woman with a dead fetus in her womb, and then place another pregnant woman on the same bed, and then the dead fetus is replaced by another. It happens that you have had an abscess in your swollen belly for a long time; and it is inflated inside so that the intestine swells up, and begins to make a rupture.
And you have been called to cure him, and you have treated him for a long time, but the wound is not consolidated.
Then you should place upon him some plaster of strong attraction for several causes, and extract from him a bone, and then pass some journal days, and extract another bone; and you have been too marvelous, as if there were no bone in the belly.
And then you think that they are from the bones of the dead fetus.
Then you will heal the wound, and extract from him many bones, the woman existing in the many milky dispositions, and you have seen it in such a manner for a long time, correcting one of his little ruptures.
And you do not have to show that it is strange, but rather that it is science and help in that which the artificial hand of the doctor applies for the cure.
About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of vertebrae in which the mother is swollen.
This is the form of a stretcher on which the books are placed, in which placement there are two vertebrae at the ends of two feet. I will empower this vertebral cave that is more subtle than the stretcher, and it is made of ivory or of wood from trees.
And it is the width of each wood that has two inches and a margin of some inches that have one inch, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two woods there are two adjustments of those wooden meters which are already fixed, from which the length is a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two inches, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is swollen with those things when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Another form similar to that one, but more subtle and more gentle.
It is made of wood or ivory according to the resemblance of forceps. I will empower in the extremity of him two additions also at times, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the width of each is two inches.
And when you want to open the belly, then you make the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging, opening what is between his thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument also as you do with forceps according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the belly until the meter makes it so that you want.
The form of vertebrae which the ancients described.
Form of a pushing instrument with which the fetus is pushed out.
Form of an amulet with which the great head is confined.
And it is assembled like forceps which bite into the extremity, also at times, and some veiled things are made long also like forceps according to this form, also at times, which bite also like the dentition of resonance in which it is incised and confined. Form of a small amulet.
Form of a claw having a spine.
Form of a claw having two spines.
Form of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is separated.
Form of two broad spatulas.
All those instruments are exquisite, and when they are multiplied in the species of that one and prepared by the artisans, it is more gentle to their operation and more suitable for the men according to their quantity.
And you do not have those instruments already, because it is necessary that you prepare them, for the necessity of those is inexcusable.
About the extraction of the secondine.
When the secondine is retained by the enfantament, then you command the malady to retain its sieve there, and then make that stirring in condition, and stretch your hand over his mouth and over his nose, and if it is thus deformed, well it is.
And then, you take a cup and make a hole in the cover of a tube and pause in that herb which opens the belly of the mother, also with calamus and rue and anet and camomile and scicados Arabic and cassia lignea and santal. All of these herbs or some of their kind are submerged in water in a tub, and then place it on the affected area.
And then place a tube of cane in the mouth of the matrix, and hold it until the vapor goes into the cavity of the matrix.
And then make that stirring motion as we have said, and the second injection will be quickly administered with speed.
If the Roman method does not work, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in oil of sesame or in a mixture of other oils, and then insert it into the womb and feel around with her hand, and when she has felt around, then take it out and extract it little by little. If it is stuck in the birth passage, then insert her hand according to what we have recommended, and when she has felt around, extract it little by little following the correct procedure so that the womb does not undergo violent attraction. Before you touch the right and left sides to facilitate.
And if the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with stirring and medication of the tub with herbs.
If it is not delivered by all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue over it in iteration of abstraction, but rather it is necessary that what is ejected from it into the mouth of the womb lies in the cavity of the woman, and then crystallize it with gum and tetrafarmalcon; because that will make it porous for some days and will be dissolved and delivered.
When it is porous, it rises to the bad odor at the head, and to the stomach, and that leads to the illness; and then it is necessary that they be administered with sub-fumigations and conveniences according to that.
Some of the Ancients already used sub-fumigation of nitre and dry figs.
The shape of the instrument is that with which the woman is fumigated below, to retain the menses and the afterbirth.
It should be made of iron or of copper.
And the slender extremity should be placed in the womb and the broad extremity above the focus, and the sub-fumigation should be placed over the arms of the focus.
And hold it until the sub-fumigation is consumed and it goes into another one.
Of the treatment of the birth of an unperforated infant.
Born infants are stillborn and their births are not perforated, which have a thin and obstructed pipe. Then it is necessary for the midwife to perforate with the aforementioned pipe; and if not, perforate with a sharp spatula, and beware that you do not touch the liver.
And then place it on the woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil; and then heal it with gum until it is healthy.
If you fear that it is obstructed, then place a tube in the tract for several days, and wait until the infant wants to expel.
And thus accidents of obstruction in the birth occur due to consolidation of plague or of aposteme; then it is necessary that this consolidation be incised, and then it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and of the poultice.
Of the treatment of the fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur below in the lower part are swollen and gross, those which occur near the anus before or in the space of one part.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that swelling is old and corroded by the putrid white humidity or subtle pyridura, and some of these fistulas penetrate to these.
And those penetrating ones are known through what is ejected from them by the exit and by ventilation; and some of them use the bad humor of exit, and it is ejected from them in a worm-like way.
And some of these fistulas are implanted in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of these penetrate into the joint of the hip and into the node of the coccyx.
And what is known as a penetrating fistula into the anus and non-penetrating, is that you place the aforementioned stick in the anus, and insert a thin tentacle of iron or of copper into the fistula when it is not twisted.
If it is twisted, then insert the thin tentacle of lead or of horsehair until you feel the tentacle or the hair in the aforementioned stick.
And if you do not feel it at all and there is no progress of the tract or any cause of ejection or worm or ventilation, thus as we have said, then you will know that it is non-penetrating, and then you should turn to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the signification of it is the ejection of urine from that and prohibition of it until the place where medicine is consolidated.
If it penetrates into the joint of the hip or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then it is said that the tendon has penetrated here if not ruptured into the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that it often becomes swollen at times; and that it does not respond to this medication, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas it is not a total cure, and the cure of those is troublesome and vain efforts by foolish doctors above whom it is fixed.
But in that which does not penetrate and is not chronic, health is ferried with iron, spread according to what you have recommended, and that which you have already and proposed.
And it is that the patient lies between their own hands above the two shoulders and raises their legs towards them, the hips being inclined towards their belly, and then inserts a lead or iron tentacle, or if it is in the ruptured fistula, until you know the place where the tendon penetrates.
And if the patient feels it around the neck, then you should insert your finger bent in a circle around the neck.
And if you feel with your finger the tendon that has already penetrated and is discovered to be tender, or what you feel between your finger and the skin, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not struggle in that, because there is no health in that, as we have said.
But some emperors declared that it is healthy in some homes to be bitter.
And of the medication by which youth is restored to him, it is that you ignite subtle cauteries according to the width of the fistula, as it has been preceded, and insert them into the fistula until they penetrate around the neck; and then iterate that two or three times until you know that all those adjusted, fistulated skin parts are adjusted, which seem like a feather bed of a bird.
And then heal that which has calluses enveloped in bandages until you extract all those adjusted skin parts, and then heal that with medicines that engender and consolidate the skin, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
And if the tendon goes in, and does not penetrate into the finger which is in the culo, and between that and the tendon that is merely a skin or a membrane, and sometimes the fistula in what is the surface of the codena, then you dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you see it drying with the tendon, and it is in the fistula until the drying penetrates to the place where the extremity of the tendon appears, and by the tendon it is freed and cut.
And then cleanse those fistulated skin parts which are assembled like a canal of bird's feather and do not remain for any cause.
But if it flows many times that it comes between you and your operation when you dissect those skin parts, then the thousand things that are and of the pus clearer instrument are to cauterize with fire or medicine acute, because cautery with fire adjusts well two good habits: so it is adjustment of those adjusted skin parts, and removal of the sanious excretion of humidity.
And then heal that which has calluses enveloped in bandages or in stitched causes until the place gets strength, and then heal the wound with a hard skin that engenders and consolidates.
And these are the medicines in which they are stipulated and excreted; when then it is restored, it is already healed and does not fear relapse.
But if the fistula has penetrated into the groin of the culo and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the culo and examine it thoroughly.
And then if you feel the tendon and between you and it is merely a skin or flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation unless according to the way of confidence and hope.
This cause is to be administered in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you obtain the conquest of the patient so that you can insert the fistula and the proposed cure; and do not process more than a section so that you do not injure the contents of the culo, and you approach the patient's consent of their own will; and then heal that which we have said because it strengthens the healthy skin; or to elongate the skin and remove the pus that dries it until you reach the culo, as we have said, with a tendon or another instrument of acute extremity, and cleanse those fistulated skin parts which are in the section until one can make a crust; and then force yourself to make the restoration of all the wounds with drying, and if the orrific pus above is not consolidated, and the ruptured fistula remains in the affected part, and the pus will be clearer for the patient. And the fistula is finished according to this method: it is when you insert the tendon into the fistula, and it is in the width of the culo around the surface of the body with the codena and in the margin of the culo, then take a perforated extremity tendon, which is like a prepared needle according to this form.
And you insert that vein which is enveloped by five veins or those that turn around it; and then you insert it into the fistula so that it constricts the intestine of the patient.
Perhaps it penetrates into the margin of the buttock properly, then you extract the vein from that tract also so that you insert the tieu within the buttock; and you extract the extremity of the vein and adjust both extremities thus, and strengthen each one, and leave it like that for a day or two, and when perhaps it becomes inflamed in the flesh, strengthen well that which is inflamed between the two extremities of the vein and falls.
And then you cure the wound so that it is consolidated and healed.
Perhaps the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared, but not so much on the preceding day, because it is not for you to do that so that it does not inflame the vein; and then make it so that it is healed.
The shape of the spine-like instrument is such that it is bent towards the fistula: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not-acute, so that it does not inflame what is not necessary, thus sometimes.
The stitching of hemorrhoids in which they flow with blood in the inflammation of those.
Hemorrhoids are divided into two ways, because they emerge between the buttocks seemingly like charcoal, or those that are like a bunch of radish roots. And of those there are small and large ones, and the blood flows from them at times and is one, and they are many, and they emerge from the buttock, and in their extremities.
Perhaps those that emerge from the buttock are according to the mixture of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood with continuous flux, and according to the color of the flesh.
And the cure of that which is properly in the buttock is that you command the patient to sit down and to exert themselves inside so that the buttock becomes dry and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take hold of them and suspend them in an unciform or you have them on your fingernail, and then you cut them away from their roots.
Perhaps if the nails do not hold onto them due to their humidity and softening, then take them with a rough cloth or with a cotton pad or with a lanolin-coated cloth, and extract them with the strings of the veins, and then you cut them away and powder over them with certain powders that are heated for inflammation; so that they adhere to those in place of cauteries; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterizing. And then you cure them with another cure until they are healed.
And if the buttock does not obey the exit, then you anoint the patient with an ointment in which there is a little mordicacio, and it is washed with that water that is in the buttock and that facilitates the exit more quickly when the patient exerts themselves.
Perhaps if the hemorrhoids are in front of the buttock, then the cause of them is lighter, and it is that you take hold of them with your fingernail, or that you take hold of them with an unciform, and cut them away, and then you cure them with what we have said until they are healed.
And he who has inflammation, it is necessary to administer stitching of them according to this method: take an enveloped vein and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the above-mentioned parts, and make it penetrate with the needle in the root of the other part, and envelop both extremities of the vein on the side below the needle, and thus laterally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then you remove the vein and extract the needle.
And make it all whole, and leave one of them alone and do not touch it, so that the superfluity of blood flows from that.
And then you apply a poultice over the buttock, wrapped in oil or in wax; and apply that to the buttock and command the patient to rest. And then leave it until it forms a scab; and when it falls off, cure it with an ointment or another cure until it is healed.
And since they are antiquated and of no value in that medicine, then it is necessary to root them out with the point of the spine or with your fingernail until they become humid and are held back by the scab above, which prohibits their consolidation; and then you cure them until they are consolidated.
Then you dig them out with a vehement root so that the first way until much blood flows and they are excavated; and then you cure them until they are healed.
You should know that alarmar is a sign, and it's not so if you don't notice the redness according to the color of the body seeming like a head of garlic, and it's made in the whole body and mainly in the lower parts below the feet and toes, and it's caused by those pains that come with inflammation.
And then it is necessary to remove what is in the circle of the nail, and hold it with the forceps or with a hook, and extract its root; and then take care of that.
And if you want, cauterize the following that is described in the seventh chapter.
More of a true wart is a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and many wrinkled veins come to the hands of children.
And the cure for it is to stretch and insert that, or to extract that with a file or a probe which enters the cavity. And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
More of a true ant is a small, rough, fistula or large ulcer on the surface of the body, and when it breaks out there, it seems to be a bite of an ant, and it's made around the body.
And the cure for it is to take a hollow cane of duck or vulture's feather, and make it strong, and place that over the ant hill until it contains the circle of the cane around the parts of it; and then revolve your hand with the cane until you extract what is in the circuit of the ant, and place that in the flesh of the skin, and eradicate the ant from its root.
And if you want, make it with a cane of iron or of steel according to this form:
The lower part of the cane should be thin, solid (not perforated), enveloped so that above it the grasp of it is alleviated and the revolution of it.
And if you want to cauterize the ant according to what has been said before in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter on cauterizing.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give crusts.
Some crusts are made of silver or gold or iron fondue or molten; and some crusts are made of those small and large instruments according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and of those whose hips are fragile or delicate, the crusts of those should be small.
The form of large and few crusts:
The head of the cane below where the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance from where the bag is tied, thus sometimes.
And the extremity of it below, which is inserted in the hip, should be solid (not open) like a lion, and subtle; and on one side of its width there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel is according to the size of the roots and thus a small one.
And the bag in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin, and its root should be a palm.
And it should be perforated for many channels thus as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the channels is of the same size as the finger.
And then insert into those channels a strong thread of crude fibre which is of ten fibres, or around those; and adjust it with the bag; and when it is placed in it, the bag should be stretched on the head of the crust between two distinct and strongly constricted points, and then crust-ize in each channel: More, the quality of crust-izing in this way is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be laid down on their back, and raise their legs up and place one body part over which already have holes or a lancet; and apply an ointment of oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or of similar things; and apply it to the extremity of the cautery in the anus, facilitating it; and then the minister takes the bag and extracts two more and seven times with vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine all that is in the crust; and then remove the crust and the patient raises their legs up to the wall.
And if the medicine forces out that excrement, hold it as much as you can; and if you sleep on that for a whole night, it is more beneficial in judgment.
More if you crust-ize that in the illnesses of dissolution of belly and excrement of it, then you iterate the cautery until it is healthy.
And if you have emigrated to the rear or posterior areas of the body, then the subtle and clever doctor will be the one who cures the children's critiques.
About the treatment of wounds.
You have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that which is convenient to the book, and you have said thus the treatment of those with me and my medicines according to the complaint.
So it is said that wounds are diversified according to what and where they are made, and according to the place on which they occur.
And the causes why many wounds are made thus, such as treatment of stone, or incision of the space or of the knife, or percussion with a lance, or with a fist, or with a dart, or similar to those of many causes.
Many wounds that are in the places of the body thus, such as a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
And you have recommended the treatment of some wounds because it pauses that reasoning and rule about the other wounds.
And you began with simple head wounds, for the recollection of the compound will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
So it is said that when accidents occur on a simple head wound and it's not a fracture, then consider: if it's due to treatment of stone or similar, and you have already wounded the code so gently and it's a great wound and there are fears about that patient having an abscessing aposteme, then you should touch and make a cephalic poultice at once, and don't delay; and extract from the blood according to the quantity of its virtue if there's no prohibiting cause for phlebotomy, especially if the blood is evacuated from the wound slowly.
And it's the phlebotomy of the opposite of the affected part; and beware of the patient's relapse and of vicious and gross vices.
Many times, if there is a prohibition from minor things, then it's diminished by the vice and doesn't approach flesh nor vice.
And pause on the wound, if it has an abscessing aposteme, which is infused with oil of rose or in vice on which it is stipulated.
Many times, if it is certain of an abscessing aposteme, then pause on the wound, if it is recently with healthy blood and the air has not changed that powder which you recommended to apply little by little.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause on the ulcers and wounds until they are healed.
Many times, if the wound is great or is due to incision of the space and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted for puerilities, then adjust them with a suture according to what you recommended about the suture of theirs.
Many times, if the wound has been discovered on the bone and skin, and it's not retention of it but a small suspensor, then incise that and apply proper cure to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of the code, and command the patient to abstain from vices in which there is grossness: caps and form a coyt and similar to theirs, until it's compounded.
And if you find in the code putrefaction and it doesn't adhere to the bone, then you incise all that pus and remove it, and apply proper cure to it.
Many times, if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which healthy blood flows, and it's not abscessed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that one not incised, then you incise that with a spatula, or lance that; and if necessary to provoke what we have said does not conform, then you cauterize until the blood is abscessed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; thus you powder over those with this powder, because consolidated that density before the air changes them.
And the preparation of the powder is this: take oil of apricot seed one part, dragon's blood two parts, and unextinguished powder three parts; grind everything well and crush it, and from that, fill the wound, and constrict it with good constriction until it be on that adheresca, and coagulate it with the blood.
And you strengthen that from below with pules and leave it, and don't disturb it while it is thus, because it's not apostemed, since it's not eradicated by the medicine until it's healed.
And some wounds make that alone cauterize, when there is no presence of apricot seed and dragon's blood.
And thus this method of operation is suitable for great wounds when it's convenient to pause on those and strengthen them, and so recent wounds with their healthy blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it's in summer time, then it's not intended for the position of this powder, many times cure those with what we have said, thus you pause on those ulcers and wounds that are digested, or you pause on those pores of the flour of the ordinary bread with water and honey until they get purged; and apply proper cure to those with another cure until they're healed.
More often it happens that a fracture in the bone occurs, and it is small, then you extract what you have done.
And I will direct the cure of fractures of the head in that which is coming.
Of the afflictions of the neck.
More often the affliction occurs in the neck, then it is not different in medicine, and between the affliction of the head when it is simple.
More often the nerves of the neck are cut or injured, then if they are nerves, it is not in the genius but that cure should be avoided, for it makes vehement contraction, and thus as an ointment and a plaster that seems to be veteran and similar to their quarrel, no others are like the nerves and contradict it. And there is no pause in the affliction for any total cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is to the brain, which is the worst of all members.
And if it is that which is cured by gentle medicines, thus as the cause is washed with warm water, some infused oil in rose water or non-rose water, and this is washed with warm water and other minor pains are alleviated according to this manner, and humidity is induced.
More often the affliction is great, then administer a suture, or bind the lips of it, and properly care for that with powders entering until it be healed.
More often the affliction is deep or occurs in the worst lower part of the putrid matter, then pierce that in the place most premeditated.
More often in the affliction an artery is cut and a flow of blood is obtained, then separate or dry that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessary to provoke it to stop.
More often you have cut the vertebrae of the throat or all, and so saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the codena with a suture over the cane of the throat and do not touch that; afterwards equalize that and reduce it to its natural figure, and properly strengthen that with a decent structure, and leave that for several days; and properly care for that by inducing humidity in which there is contraction and excitement until it be healed.
More often the affliction is in the bone to be broken, then pierce that, and then if there are fragments of bones, extract all those that you can from them; and what you have not apprehended, leave it until the affliction is purged, and let it be separated and the weight of it be alleviated.
And if the affliction is recent then powder over that with the powder which I have recommended to you. More often in the affliction there is made a fistula, then cure that with water of which the remembrance will come properly in the seventh chapter.
If it is a percussion of the lance or of the knife, and sometimes of its depth, then consider more often that the affliction has been ventilated when the patient is in pain; then you know that the affliction is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the affliction is recent with seventh blood, then you pause in it from the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and quiets the patient, more pause in it with an attractive humidity, and dissolve that with two infused waters a day.
And if the humidity is not present to you, then you pause in the orifice of the affliction as much as possible so that it sucks what is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps on the affliction so that it runs what is in it adjusted.
More often if the affliction has passed three days or more and does not occur to the patient spasm nor tremor of bad heart nor constriction of wings, and sometimes other good dispositions of it, then you know that the affliction is saved; and therefore care for that with warm baths and another cure until it be healed.
More often if the healing of it is excused, and already all time has been opened, then you know that already a fistula has been made; therefore care for that according to the seventh chapter.
And if the affliction is from a cut of the spatula or of the knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure that with water that precedes suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
More often if it has been broken in the bone, and thus you have cut out pieces, then you twist the affliction and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. More often if they are not separated, then leave them until the affliction is purged, that the extraction of them is alleviated.
And of the other afflictions occurring in the other members, the juvenation in cure is the juvenation of what we have said.
Of the pains of the belly.
The indisposition that occurs in the belly is great, or small, or moderate.
And the small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and thus it is that the reduction of theirs is more difficult, if you do not take account of the introjection of theirs to the same place at once, because it becomes gross and is complicated, since the instrument of it is made difficult.
And therefore the moderate disruption is better, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, thus as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
And it is known that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are convenient for sutures of the other pains of the body.
And two other proper sutures communicate with the other pains, but especially they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to each one an exposition and declaration.
So it is said that when the pain is small and some cause of the intestine is due to this, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by lessening of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is come to inflammation through the coldness of the air.
And so when it is thus, then you should scald that in this way that you submerge a sponge hot and drap humid in warm water alone, or that you cook in water squinant, and cypress, and spice, and embroques until the inflammation is resolved.
And some ravings make it clear that there is stipulation, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And so when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which there are cooked altaea and malvas, because by this it is alleviated the instrument of it with little cause.
But if it is excused the instrument of it from this cure, then you should divide the disruption a little with an instrument in which there are inserted emollients.
And the primary cure is better, when it is proper that there is no excess, and there is no occupation to evacuate unnecessary and defective elements.
Of the instrument, thus you see the form of it:
One part of the sharp-edged instrument, and the other part not-acute, and the subtle extremity, and it is not in the subtlety of a spatula, but rather it is obtuse a little.
And so when the pain is amplified and it is outside the intestine, then you should that its reduction be according to the form of it naturally, in the same place proper, if it is possible about this, because better it is.
But when the disruption is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs more high than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should raise their head and feet more high than the lower parts.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you should pause your attention and consideration at all times on this, so that the part where the pain is may be more elevated than the other.
And thus you should administer it in the great pains and in the moderate pains.
And in the small pains, pause that which is to your preparation, and prepare to make the minister among your most prepared hands, which has the disruption all in its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then discover from this to that which is the suture some cause to another.
And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the pain; and then you leave the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and stretch the needle one, another that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the code, in the two extremities of the ciphac that is below the code of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate from this part; and you have added the two extremities of the code and the two extremities of the ciphac, and so you make four orders.
And then you strengthen with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some ravings of two parts together, and then you add the two lips to the pain for decent addition; and then you leave the grossness of the finger and fix another needle there, and then you bind it with double faith as you did with the first needle; and you do not cease from doing this if it is necessary among the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the pain.
And thus the moderate needles are between grossness and subtlety, because the subtle needles more lightly pierce the flesh; and the gross ones are of difficult instrument in the code, and therefore it is necessary that they be moderate in subtlety and grossness.
And it is not fitting that the needle be stuck in both extremities of the spinal cord, so that the flesh does not become inflamed quickly and the wound heals before its consolidation.
And do not delay the stitches for too long, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
And then insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient while asleep; and place a poultice expanded over the entire affected area, which holds the extremities of the needles; and thus you will know that the wound has already consolidated.
And in these species of stitches with needles, it is more convenient to use a single needle or two around those, because they are sufficient for the stitching of their wound.
Moreover, the second stitching is communal: it is that you administer stitches to the four extremities, of the spine and two extremities of the hip, at once, with a needle in which thread is wound in subtlety and thickness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle to that same part of the thread from which it began, so that the thread retracts and pulls away the pus from the affected area of the wound, so that the stitching is done according to the stitching of fabric with which the threads are strengthened.
And stop between each stitch the amount of thickness of the smallest finger.
And this stitching is known to men.
And in this stitching, I have healed the wound that had afflicted a man in his left abdomen, which had been wounded by a blow, and was a disruption of the major wound of about a palm, and was an effusion of fluid around two palms from the navel to the middle area, and was a disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have reduced that pus which the intestine had held outside the wound for 23 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in a space of 15 days or around that, and I have cured him and he is healthy; and then I have visited him for many years, and he has converted to his usual dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle, it was done, for I had not healed him with an ointment, because it was in a place where no ointment nor any medicine was effective, but rather I placed a poultice on the wound for many days, and I assiduously washed with honey water until he was healed.
Moreover, I describe two special species of stitching according to the narration of Paraula.
And it is that you begin with the stitching of the spine, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And thus when the needle penetrates into the spine and in that same moment it straightens according to rectitude and length of the entire body, and there is the extremity of the hip where you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate from the back part to the front part on the other side of the navel.
And thus when you have made it penetrate, then you make it penetrate another way on the same extremity of the navel from the front part to the back part; and there is the extremity of the hip which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate from the back part to the front part on the other side.
And make it penetrate thus, your penetration, in which you make it penetrate into the hip at the extremity of the mirror, which is at the part of him within, until all that penetrates.
And then begin from this same moment, and sew up the extremity that is of the hip on the other side, and extract the needle from the spine which has penetrated, and then return it to the spine and body, and join the extremity of the hip which is on the other side in this same extremity of the mirror; and extract it from the spine which is part of him.
And make it one way and another, and make it one way then another way until you collect all that is in front according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of stitching is that you collect the stitching of pellicles in which you collect the skin, thus that you collect the hip one way from the part of the extremity of the spine, and that you leave another way until it is completed.
Moreover, the second species of stitching proper is that which Gualia describes, and this is to be of service to him and for his recommendation, it is that you collect it according to similarity in which you apply medicine to collect it, thus that they add the entire part to its comparable part according to natural convenience; and they apply the extremity of another to him and the extremity of the mirror to his other extremity, and this is done according to what I have recommended to you.
You should stick the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own front part, and make it penetrate to the back part on that sole, and leave two extremities of the hip; and then revolve the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in two extremities of the hip.
And then return those small tubes, and make penetrate some of the partitioning dentines into the front part before entering two extremities of the mirror in others that are not in the opposite lateral.
And this manner of suture is better than the common ligature, and it is a suture about which preceding memory recalls.
This is the serum of Gualia
And the most discerning doctors, the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you introduce in these a few threads, and begin with the introduction of a needle from what is yours, and make it penetrate into the other lateral according to the suture of those which sew up the swollen veins.
And you know that when disruption is in the middle place of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
The greatest judgment of medical treatment for plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
The cause is because when you congregate the recent plague with the healthy blood that is given to it, and reduces the intestine and sews it up decently, then pause over that incarnative powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over those discerning doctors who are present until they make hard and dry pustules, and consolidate the cypress and mirror; and then cure it thus as is the curing of other plagues until it be healthy.
But if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that instant, because it begins to take effect quickly, and changes those two veins during the day, thus as you are instructed, until it be healthy, for you do not need another medicine in many dispositions when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague communicates to the principal members, then cover that you immerse the woolen thread in oil of triple quality, or in rose oil, and pause it in the circle of places that are between the joints and below the wings.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the healthy intestines, because many veins are there, then crystallize that in vi stipatic black tar, and majorly if the pus is generated in the intestine and makes a penetrating exit into its cavity.
And you know that what is of the large intestine is of purer healthy matter than what is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "ggnu" does not receive healing from plague that falls into it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it, and to its magnitude that is in those, and to the subtlety of the body of that, and to the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you obtain that recently, reduce it according to your correct method with which you reduce the intestines in a healthy way.
But if it has passed to the space and already becomes green or black, then that you stretch it with a thread over the place that is denigrated of it, so that healthy fluxes come, for in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And then insert what is another ligament, and pause two extremities of the thread pending from the partition below the plague forth from it, so that over you be alleviated the attraction of it which is the cause of the fabric's emission and release of the arm of the plague.
Memory of the plagues when they happen in the intestine.
When disruption happens in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, because thus you saw that which was affected by plague in the healthy belly with percussion of the lance and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its gestation and ventilation.
Therefore you understand the curing of it already, which was not confused in its healing, but rather continued to subtily investigate until it be healthy and the place is consolidated.
And you saw that the place was already consolidated, therefore you spoke about the patient who suffered an evil accident in the healthy belly; and it did not happen for that evil accident and remained in its many diverse dispositions, eating and drinking, and then entered in a bath and was exercised in its own ways.
And already many experienced doctors who when they encounter plague in the intestine, and it is small, then cover that it be tied according to this manner: and it is that you take granules of great caps; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and pause a granule of those which has an open mouth over the two lips of the plague; therefore when you take hold of those and stretch its mouth, remove the cap of it, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then pause another granule proportionally for the first way, and do not cease from making granules until you make another according to the quantity of all the plague.
And then return that plague and dress the wound; and remove those annexed caps from the intestine within so that the intestine may be healthy; and do not press on the patient's neck during the night.
And it is possible that the intestine may be lifted with a subtle thread which is made from the intestine of a beast annexed to it, since it is in the same vein; and you should take the extremity of this thread of intestine, and it should not be too decayed, and then tie the extremity of it to the thread of the patient, wrapped, and then insert that thread into the veins and dress it on the intestine, and reduce it to its proper place.
And this manner of suture with formication is not based on the way of confidence and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not possible except with subtlety, and it is not a healing of the entire thing.
About the cure of ulcers and fistulas.
We know that every wound and abscess when it becomes inflamed and old, is an ulcer, and if it is not consolidated and healed in a short time and does not dry up, then, wherever it may be, it is universally called fistula and we call it that ulcer.
And fistula, according to truth, is a nodular, hard, white ulcer with no pain and which is conquered thus as it is conquered by the penalty of absence; and for this reason it is called that ulcer "rizatz", that is, penalty.
And it is in a humid wound which heals slowly; and for this reason the humidity is dried up in several hours. And some evacuated humors are thick, and they are few, and they are coarse, and they are subtle.
Now I have shown all those causes, and the signs of those and their cures with medicines in the division.
And thus I have made you aware that you should know the cure of fistula, which is done through surgical operation with a hand.
And we know that fistula affects all the members of the body; because among those are fistulas that penetrate to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the spongy parts of the back, or to some of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and among those that give proximity to the principal member and similarity.
And thus among those fistulas that are according to this manner, they are of the maladies of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with them is trouble and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas some depth of which does not penetrate to those places that I have said, and you hope and trust in the cure of it, and you want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with fire, and if the fistula goes according to rectitude, and you acquire that with the patient.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate that with a subtle probe of lead, because lead in the lightness of the dry body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
And if the fistula has very horrific holes, it is not possible for you to signify about them with a probe.
Then crystallize the holes for their own holes, because the humidity through which you crystallize those goes away from the other holes and corrects them.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves, and it is the conquest of the long-standing or proximal fistula, or it is a fistula with many holes and this is about all your strength, in your entire fortitude, in which you fortify the patient, and the invention of the pain away from your compression on the hand over the place, and similarly with the signs and accidental causes against the abscess.
And since you have stated about all those causes in a stationary truth, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, far from the joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or of veins, or of one of the places which you have said.
When you touch the fistula according to what is said about the narration of it, and this is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and this which is born from the orrifice of the flesh, or of the heel and of similar things, and cure that within so that it may be healed.
If the fistula is of long-standing profundity, and it is according to rectitude, then cover that with a poultice as soon as possible, and carefully cleanse all its corrupted flesh; and carefully administer enveloped medicines acute, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which has conceived an iron instrument.
And do so that some of the virtues are inserted into the acute medicine to corrode all that which is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it may be healed.
If it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to certify this, then you should inquire into that and touch it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member thus as we have said.
If the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and blackness, then you should scrape that within so that the corruption may be held entirely; and then care for it with what will incarnate within to heal it.
And if it is not healthy and throws out pus thus as it was doing, then you will know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again secondly and exquisitely the reason for it and the mundification of it with the last strong fortification, and then restore it.
And then if it is healthy, good; and if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep profundity of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you do not engender anything but leave that.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible to remove that, then you should remove it with subtle forceps which are suitable for this.
And if many bones, then you should exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and of those do not leave any cause in your fortitude.
If you have made opposition to any cause of the humidities, and in their inception there is no fear nor error, then you should inset those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and release the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones at your hour, then pause over the wound which may worsen the wound, and leave it until it is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the wound that it may not be consolidated, and the section which you have inset in your operation may be constricted.
However, if you fear, pause over the submerged bone situated above the tritured oil, or submerged bone in Egyptian unguent, or in some of the green vertue unguents, because when they will pierce those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and from that attraction is alleviated.
If it is a large bone thus as the bone of the chamber or thigh or similar to those, and what is corrupted in it is only the surface of it, then scrape that with resolution thus solely behind so that the blackness and corruption may be removed, and then restore the wound.
If what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and insert into the place where the corruption has pervaded, and then care for it until it may be consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you should endeavor to go to a man in his thigh for that you may pause and exemplify and assist over your operation.
A young man of around thirty years, to whom occurs pain in his thigh, and from the divided parts it is manifest that it is above the matter that divides the body so that the matter has pervaded to the thigh, and it is a matter of apostema in great apostema, and I do not find an extrinsic cause.
And then I extend the time in that error of the doctors so that the apostema is hubbed, and I correct the matter of the moved materials, and its cure I pause until the thigh becomes fistulaed, and they are in the marrow orifices which all got purulence and humidities of the body.
And then I cured many doctors around two years, and I did not find in those wise men anything in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of him and the materials that flowed from him through those orifices for great body; and already the body of that man was totally stabilized and the color of him was citrine.
And then I introduced the probe into one of those orifices and pervaded the probe to the bone.
And you should have carefully examined the orifices and thoroughly cleaned those that come from all parts of the leg.
Then you should have touched and inspected over one of the orifices that enter to disclose a part of the bone, and you should have probed that corrupt thing, and it was already decayed and corrupted and denigrated; and it was already corrupted a part of the leg until it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then you should have sawn through that which I had discovered and prepared from the uncovered bone.
And you should have cut out that which was not in the bone but that corruption which you had separated and sawn, and you had already destroyed.
And then you should have paused the restoration of the wound with medicine that consolidates for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
And then you should have iterated and uncovered the bone again according to the primary discovery, and you should have continued to corrupt the bone.
And you should have sawn away that which appeared to be that corruption, and then you should have made a perforation to facilitate the cure of it and its restoration, but it was not restored.
And then you discovered it again and did not cease to inspect the small bone little by little particularly and perforate its restoration, but it was not restored until you inspected around an inch of it, and that extract came from its marrow, and then you restored it with medicines, and it is consolidated gradually and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on it and sectioning of it except for the disposal of its fragility and for the smallness of its tolerance and fear of death, because it hastens in all hours due to a superfluity of evacuation syncopes badly.
And thus it is healed entirely, and nothing remains in place of the hard flesh; and it is well-disposed in its own body and returns its virtue; and it is converted into its own dispositions and does not do the opposite in walking nor harm in any cause.
Maybe it is the prominent bone in place of the body already troubled, then you should take care that you section it according to this method: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen that in the extremity of that prominent bone, and command it to extend that in its own; and pause that ligament of wool thicker than the primary ligament; and then you bind it over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend its extremity for that you attract the flesh to the parts below, and you discover the flesh over the place where you want to saw per that the saw does not harm the flesh.
And pause the saw or table below the bone decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to saw without sectioning the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary to saw over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sentiment, and it forces a new sawing.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, therefore it is one continuous part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts entirely; and then pause the saw below, and then saw that from the primary part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
And the sawing should be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, inspect that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in its generation.
And if the corruption is in the cavity of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you should inquire into the corruption in whatever method appears to you, and that you should grasp it, and mend it according to each disposition which is possible for you, and thus it may be rectified for you, when it does not do opposition or nervousness to you.
And you should know what instruments are needed and the saws to section these bones are very subtle according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; because it is necessary that you prepare a whole species of operation and convenient instrument for that operation.
And you should know that this operation depends on the species of instrument which you need; when I am great study and long and knowledgeable of the methods of this art, and testimonies of methods of illnesses, because then you have them for yourself to measure what is convenient for the instruments of all illnesses.
And then you will form in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you pause as simples as those which proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others. Form of saw:
Another type of plaster.
A larger form of other plasters.
Form of a poultice. The head of this poultice is according to the form of a star-shaped hoof, and its points are according to the form of elevated points.
And it does not fit unless that poultice is crushed against the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide mouth.
Form of a smaller razor.
Form of a broad razor.
Form of another properly made plaster: it is made with a curve of its part above and the sharpness of its iron, and the member of its boy's thigh is properly made. Form of it.
Form of a razor in which there is a concavity.
Form of another subtle razor.
Form of another razor with a curved extremity.
Form of a small razor resembling a scalpel.
Form of another smaller incisor.
Form of another incisor; this resembles a poultice, and its extremity is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones.
Form of a poultice that fits a ratio of one that is perforated by the bones.
And its extremity is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of iron from India, and similarly covers all the causes that we have mentioned about razors and incisors and saws.
Of incision extremities and of the sawing of the bones.
The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with a cure of those medicines and the cure does not concur, or sometimes the corruption becomes so bad that it devours the member which is not perceived by any cause, then it covers that you should incise that member within that hour when the corruption is most severe, so that the evil may be evacuated through death or through malice which is a greater defect of the member.
And the sign of that one to which it happens, is that the member becomes black within until it is believed that fire has already consumed it, or it becomes weakened by the blackness within until the weakening reaches that member which is its own and takes over the entire body; and therefore you should cut around the incision of that one.
And similarly, if it is a cause of corrupting percussion from certain venomous causes, such as scorpion sting or viper bite or rue and similar things.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not spread to the hand.
And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you incise that of the radix of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the forearm of the arm.
And if it worsens, then incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause in cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly, if the corruption worsens in the foot, then you incise it up to one of the toes.
And if it takes hold in the edge of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. Moreover, if it reaches into the ankle, then you incise the leg up to the joint of the ankle.
And if the corruption has already spread over the ankle, then in that case it is not possible to do anything except to dismiss, and leave the patient to die.
And the manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you stretch a ligament in the part below where you want to incise, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend one minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend another minister a ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments in this space until it is discovered entirely; and then it is incised or sawed.
And it covers that a piece of cloth should be placed over all parts so that it does not touch the area there, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and a cautious poultice is applied.
Moreover, if there is a flow of blood when operating, then you should cauterize the area carefully, or apply some powders that stop the bleeding; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
And then bind the injured member with a ligament at a convenient time, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his old age, this kind of accident which you and I have recommended, which is so accustomed to the blackness in the old foot with the adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
And that corruption occurs primarily in the blood that flows to the entire foot.
Then that man prepares himself to put his foot in a position for healing to come to the member with the greatest need of it, and he should insert his foot into the joint, and focus on healing.
A long time ago, that corruption occurred in the blood of the hand indicated.
And then I came to myself, and I perforated the excess that was superfluously placed on the hand of medicines, according to the purification of his body; and it does not reject the excess and begins to go to the other joint until it begins in the hand.
And I applied myself to insert his hand, and you did not want to do that which appears on the rejection of that excess, and more than I had fear of the insertion of his dead hand, because the virtue of the patient was in danger.
And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and came back to me that the man prepared and inserted his entire hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except to be helpful about what is said of this illness, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
About the treatment of joints and the quality of purification with medicines.
When abscesses occur in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of sania, and then it is broken and perforated, and its sania is expelled, and one returns to the place where it was previously drained, and the channel that is above it as if it were a subtle drain, and it does not arrive at a later corruption, and it does not impress upon the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption begins in a certain member, then it is called fistula and not sinus.
And the treatment of it is that one inserts the entire channel thus as it is revolved, and especially when it is subtly drained and made into a subtle drain, and one makes sure that it does not adhere to the place for its corruption.
However, if you fear that the channel will adhere and that corruption will not be achieved by later consequence, and in the channel has passed away from harm, then you cure that man with purification.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm which has a fetid odor, then cleanse that man with Egyptian medicine, which is of oil and wine and juniper, receiving equal parts, and they are adjusted in a vessel, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine is red and arrives at a specific place to melt.
And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolves the man in water and honey; and cleanse the man through that sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of twelve hours.
And then extract that man with precision; and do so for many days until the sinus is purified and the putridity is removed.
And some vegetables are cleansed with water of ash, when you do not have this medicine present; and it is that you take the ash of vitex, and mix it with the water; and then cook that and cleanse that man in it until you confirm that the sinus is thus stopped.
And if the patient does not have tolerance for the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ash, then cleanse that man with water and honey and a mixture of juniper, trituration, and cleansing, and cleanse that man with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleans, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and especially when in the wine there is an excess of acidity and dryness.
And when you do some vegetables and you confirm that the sinus is already removed, then cleanse that man with water that makes the flesh grow in him.
And it is that you take from the dyaphinicon ointment and dissolve that man in oil of rose and wine with acidity; or that you cleanse that man with some medicines and other ointments which have the properties that I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifice of the sinus is strait in which the cannula of the cleansing cannot be received, then you amplify that man by inserting small amounts little by little, and pause in the warm water enveloped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is amplified.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of that man to suture and leave a quantity in which the cleansing instrument is introduced.
And if the orifice of that member through which the arm is elevated to the upper parts, then dry it in the pus below the place that is in him because the arm will run until below, since when the arm is constricted in the vicinity of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered in him.
And if it is not possible for you to remove the sinus from around the bone, then you should prepare the member with preparation for the corridor of the leg, according to how you want to clear and how you do not hold back any cause in the leg.
Also that which is above the orifice of the sinus, which remains there for a whole hour so that it adjusts to what is just in the leg. And so you know if what comes out of the leg's corridor is much or little, whether it is digested or not digested.
And thus you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that is poured onto the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or takes proper adhesion, then you may remove it on the third day, and when you remove the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the engorgement.
Also, if from the sinus you remove a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, because health is being restored, because some homes are in those which generate slow growth of flesh in those plague wounds, and of those which make the opposite of it.
And if from the sinus you remove many days' stagnant matter, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and it is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried also with engorgement of dyaphinion, when there is an adjusted superfluity of addition of zeal.
And the last thing in which it is cured, is that you take of engorgement dyaphinion and dissolve it in rose oil, and put it on the affected area in its substance, and comfort with that what is in it, and use it for that.
And thus it seems in that action, when there is no stagnant matter, engorgement dyaphinion, but rather gather what is collected inside so that it is gross, and use it for that; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them, and sprinkle all over the gross matter which is on the focus, and thus line up above the cloth and strengthen that upon the sinus; and thus line up above the gross matter which has gathered inside so that it is gross, and sprinkle above the cloth and strengthen that.
And some few days administer to it the aristological long remedy and radish of celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and flour of errors and centaury, and use those simples or adjust them, trituate them and sprinkle above the gross matter which has been recommended; and take advantage of it.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the marrow of the leg, and thus it makes an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with a fistular cure, just as has been said before.
Of the cure of panniculus and worn-out nails and incision of toes added to the section.
Panniculus is an abscess which forms under the nail of the hand or foot, and it forms in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less prepared, or it is abscessed by a cautious abscess, or it is corrupted, and it throws stagnant matter inside so that it corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all of it, and it pervades its corruption to the bone inside so that it has a foul odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and its color becomes darkish.
And thus when you have that which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary to burn all the superfluity that remains from the nail and to cauterize the plague properly, because burning is not helped by anything else.
Also, if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail are growing again, and they begin to cover the flesh at the divided parts, and thus you remove the pain and lead away from that, then it is necessary to pause with subtle rays under the angle of the nail that pains the flesh, and impel that onto the bone, and insert that into the flesh to facilitate, and place upon that which remains of the flesh of the corrosive medicines that consume so that it is all removed; and thus cure that which engorges until it is healed.
When corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then take care that you excavate the bone and extract it, for no time is wasted if the corrupted bone is in the patient.
And if the decay and corruption are in the finger, then you cut away that from one of the nails according to what is prescribed for its healing, and take care to cure it thoroughly so that it may be healthy.
But if the nail has received a blow or injury, and has violent pain, then take care that you make an incision in the patient's skin at the joint, and carefully cut around the nail with a transverse section below, and be careful not to penetrate too far into the flesh beneath the nail, lest you irritate the patient with violent pain, and it will cause excessive growth of superfluous flesh at the site; and take care to cure that place so that it ceases to hurt.
But the adjusted finger, which is born in the hands of many men, is strongly fleshy all over, and strongly rooted in the bones, or strongly in the nail.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in the joints of the fingers. But that which is born in the finger joints does not become evil, and that which is born in the strong joints is strongly malignant.
And of those that are fleshy growths, the incision is easier, and it is necessary to cut away their roots with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its amputation.
But in that which is born in the finger and has nodules, take care to excavate at the beginning the flesh of it with a rounded incision into the bone, and carefully saw with one of those convenient saws, and take care to cure it thoroughly so that it may be healthy.
But consolidation occurs when the fingers are stiff between the joints, either by birth of the man who has them, or by consolidation of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similarity; therefore take care to dissect that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And carefully pause between the layers of the inflamed skin with rose oil so that they do not consolidate easily, and separate them from each other, or pause between them a thin layer of lead so that it may be consolidated according to what is prescribed.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in the finger joints at the palm, then you dissect that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
Of incision of veins, they are variable.
Veins are variable, and they are enveloped by thick, full, superfluous melancholic humors which come from the limbs of the body, and their greatest abundance is in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and carriers.
Therefore take care to administer purification of the body from black bile with certain evacuations strongly, and carefully bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of their iron is in two ways: one is that it be incised and the black blood be attracted, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
The incision of it is in this way: at the beginning, pour into the leg warm water so that the thick blood is resolved, which is filthy matter of the leg, and carefully stretch the patient's leg to the superior part above the thigh towards the lower part of the knee in a band, and carefully cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with an ample incision, and carefully elevate the black blood from the thigh downwards to its bottom, and from there below, so that the quantity of blood you want is extracted, and which tolerates the virtue of the patient.
And carefully bind that, and command it to abstain from the food generating black bile.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and it is necessary for the patient.
But the elevation of them is in this way: you raise the patient's leg, if it has many joints, and carefully place it on a bench and pour warm water onto the leg so that it becomes swollen and the veins are extremely full; or it is exercised with strong exercise, even if it is not present to you, until the limb is scalded.
And carefully dissect the cord in the right of the vein for incision in the loin or in the back of it near the knee, or in the lower part of it near the ankle.
And carefully uncover the cord with an incision and scrape the vein of all parts until it appears to the sense, and it is necessary for the appearance of that which sometimes declines into blackness.
And therefore remove the skin from the cord so that you find that white thread which is a cord.
And then you put your hand under that raised and girded area of the back, and suspend it in a way that an inch or a finger's breadth is left uncovered.
And then you section another section in that section for three days, and then you scrape the back of the affected area below the vein until it appears.
And then you raise that and insert it into the posterior section of the heel, and then you extract that and raise it until it is freed through the second section, and then you extract that from the section that is above that.
And make it so that you extract it from the section that is most superficial or outermost of all the sections, until everything is freed; and then you insert it.
And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then introduce a strong double-threaded needle and tie it up and extract it, or introduce it into the back and revolve your hand on all sides until everything is gathered. And beware that it is not inserted; because if it is torn, it is difficult for you to elevate that member and it comes back over the patient's bad spot through that injury.
And when everything is gathered outside, then pause on the place of the wounded spot, anointed with wine and oil, and unanointed, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the life is contracted having twisted towards that which is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to rectitude according to what we have said, then you should bend over that whole twisted part of it and the places of its enveloping, and then suspend it with an inch until it elevates everything.
And beware of your section lest you insert the vein and lest it harms that, because it will be difficult for you to elevate that; and keep your prudence in that.
Method of incidentally inserting life into the wounded section:
It is not to be inserted thus with the fingers or with a pointed extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would insert the vein due to its subtlety; having instead a superfluous grossness thus as we have said.
On the extraction of a varicose vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs on dry and cold lands, just as in the land of the Arabs and in the lands of India, which are dry and arid with little fertility, and in which there are neither herbs nor trees.
And it is generated strongly in other places of the body besides the legs.
And the condition of it is of putrefaction that you see below the back, just as venomous dentitions pierce the body, and snakes and worms and serpents are generated between the back and the flesh.
And the sign of the suspicion of the advent of it is of this vein that causes inflammation in the leg with vehement swelling; and then the place is blistered; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that blistering, which seems to resemble a plant's root.
And then it appears from the extremity, then you cover it with a piece of lead weighing as much as the weight of a denarius, until two denarii, and not place that suspended lead on the leg.
And as many times as the flow of it comes from some cause to the affected parts beforehand, wrap that in lead and remove it. And if the movement is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not insert that by roots until it is completely freed, because if you insert that, it is contracted and enters into the flesh and causes aposteme and putrefaction in the place and bad ulceration.
Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is completely freed from the back of it and nothing remains of it in the body.
And of this vein, it is said that some men who are in their longitude of 5 palms and of toes, and already I have seen one who has reached 20 palms.
And if it is inserted at the time of its medication, then introduce the ray into the trajectory of it and perforate that with a long trajectory in the body, until everything that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of apostemes.
And this vein has many times moved to the foot, and it is worse when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to the foot with terrible wounds, and it is said to be a certain kind of terrible wound.
And then cure that as we have said in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
On the section of worms generated under the skin, and it is called cow's disease.
This disease is named in some land as our cow's disease because many times it happens that the worms are born between the back and the flesh, and they go through all the body, swelling and diminishing, and it shows itself by the sentiment of seeing one member after another until it disjoins the back and goes out.
And the generation of it is due to putrefaction of certain humors, thus causing worms and serpents and lumbrics and ascarids in the belly.
It is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and penetrates into the vein, then it strongly destroys the vein in it and within, and thus it produces many worn-out veins.
And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then it cannot be done if you do not have the right ambulation and application of it to the sentiment, and then it is necessary that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with ligament and strong constriction, and thus you should suck above it and extract it.
And if it has penetrated into the flesh and does not come out, then you stop with a cautery on the area within so that it dies, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the flesh in which it corrupts the area as we have said.
Maybe sometimes it has penetrated to the head near the vein, then you strengthen above the eyebrow with a strong structure, and thus suck above it, and extract it; and it is known that the patient uses remedies for mondification of their sick body in evacuating bad putrid humors, and beware of frequent generations producing putrefaction.
About the section on annoying feverishness.
This sickness is named "nafir" in our land, and it is pain which appears in certain members, and thus it is transferred from member to member.
And I have already seen that sign which I recommend to you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her swollen arm and saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after it had been massaged for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away like a worm being pulled out, more easily than if it were silver, as if it came out from one place to another.
And then the pain went down to that place and settled in the muscle, and thus I stayed there for an hour.
And thus I ran to the other side of the body until I reached the other arm.
And thus I recommended to myself that it revolves through the whole body according to the sign that you saw; and it was too marvelous about the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member. And I had already seen it beforehand in my own veins according to that method, however I have seen many things which cause pain to be transferred from member to member. But I did not see it in the veins as in the woman.
And I did not think it was that unless it was because the woman was of vile nature, with dry body and discovered veins, and in this appears to the sentiment that ventosity is transferred.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-action in those who are delicate and have bodies with humid veins mixed together.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear at the vein as we have said, then you strengthen above it and let it go easily and suck above it until that constricted ventosity is released, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not find it in the tie of veins, then you cure it with excision from the body and with that which expels ventosity, and burn those foul pills and those of serpent-like appearance.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to species, and according to the areas of the body in which they occur, because their diversity is that of those with large points, and small ones, and concave, and rough, so solid; and of those with three angles, and of those with tongues; and of those with astelas.
And of the signs of the brain is when you cut into the arrow, and it pierces the bone, and it is situated on the cyphac which is above the brain, because it acts with vehement sod, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the veins, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and the voice is abolished and the vote is destroyed, and it is situated on the area of the humid white plague-like pustules, and thus it appears to be affected by the carnal similarity.
And then if you appear to have those symptoms, then you abstain from treatment and extraction of the blood, if it is not outside.
Maybe the symptoms of the blood when it settles in the heart, so that it is close to the adjacent breast, and it seems that it has been fixed by a hard cause, and it is not a vain cause; and indeed the movement of the blood resembles the movement of the pulse, and it corrects the plague of black bile, and it frees from friability, and syncopes; and therefore you know that death descends to its entire depth.
And the symptoms when the blood has affected the lung and accumulated spumous black bile of the plague, and the veins that are close to the colon become apostematous, and the color of the patient is changed, and they exhale a great spirit, and demand attraction of fresh air.
And if the blood settles in the velvet which is on the chest, and the pain then is close to the small ribs, and it makes a great cry with vehement pain and sighing, and it does not move all the members of the muscles.
And if the blood settles in the stomach, then indeed the eyes of the plague are full of some kind of indigestion.
And if the blood settles in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, eyes of some kind of plague's crack, or the web, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the treatment by extraction of the blood.
And if the blood settles in the bladder, and it is obstructing the urine, and it causes some cause to the previous parts, and indeed there is pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Maybe the other members are also affected, such as the face, the colon, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the adjutants, and the vertebrae of the back, and the furcula, and the hip, and the leg, and their similarity to the members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the blood does not reach a vein or artery and it is not venomous blood.
And I recommend to you that you have seen the essence of these bloods, so that they signify to you about the treatment tied to them.
The cause is, because in one case the blood fell into the lacrimal duct of his eye from the root of his nose, and I extracted it from him to another part, behind the tears of his auricle, and he was healed, and it did not occur again in his eye's document.
And I extracted another blood from a Jew whose blood fell into his eye in the tears of his own eye, behind the eyelid and then behind, and the blood was hidden and not obtained from it except for a small extremity that adhered to his own fist, and it was a great blood of the acute bloods of the Turks, with iron leon in which there were no auricles.
And the Jew was healthy, and it did not happen again in his eye's bad accident.
And I extracted another blood from a Christian whose blood had fallen into the gullet, and it was Arabic blood, and that is the one which has auricles; and then I inserted something about that between two guides, and it was submerged in his gullet; and then I subtly manipulated it, and I properly extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another blood from a man whose blood had fallen into his own abdomen, and I thought that he would die from it; and therefore, since he passed thirty days and did not change regarding any cause of his dispositions, I inserted something about the blood and engaged with it, and he was healed, and it did not happen again to his bad accident.
And I saw a man in whom a blood fell into his back, and the plague was consolidated over him, and since he received proper care for seven years, the blood was fixed at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom blood fell into her own abdomen, and the plague was consolidated inside him, and it did not change in his dispositions, indeed, and the woman did not obtain document in any of her natural opposing operations.
And I saw another man in whom blood fell into his face and the plague was consolidated, and it broke the blood, not obtaining here much pain, and many similarities to these.
And I extracted the blood of the man of the prince's people which had fallen into his own nose and had declined to the right part a little, and all the blood was hidden.
And I was called to treat him properly, following the falling of the blood within three days.
And then I obtained the plague of the blood very strongly; and then I inquired about it with a subtle intent, and did not feel it; but I felt it a little behind the right auricle, and then I perceived that this point was for the extremity of the blood.
And I applied the plaster to the place where it was attracting and digestive, trusting in myself that the place would be apostemized so that it appears to me as the place of the blood, so that it succeeds over it.
And the pain does not occur in the affected area where the arrow has reached; and you will continue to apply the poultice over it for many days without any incident; and the plague is consolidated, and removed from the extremity of the patient for a space of many days until one day feels the arrow's point within the nasal mucus and recognizes that it is mine.
And then you will apply the acute corrosive medicine to the plague for many days until it is opened, and you will try that, and you will subtly remove the extremity of the arrow's tip, which adheres to the skin.
And then you will adjust in the application of the plague medicine until it appears visibly to me the extremity of the arrow, and you will not waste time on that for a space of four months.
And then because the plague is amplified, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I will remove that, and do not obstruct the examination, then you will no longer subtly clarify and ingeniously work on that in many ways of ingenuity, until one day you begin to use those ways of ingenuity to extract it with forceps decently fashioned, according to what you will find at the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then you will restore the plague.
And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and you will restore it and the plague is consolidated, and the patient is entirely healthy, and there is no longer any defect in them for any reason.
And you recommend to yourself the quality of extraction of some arrows according to this rule and significance about what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend it freely.
And the skilled craftsmen know how to compare a little about many things; and I am presenting what is present about what is absent; and I will attempt a new operation with a new instrument, which derives from the descent of the external causes of the art when they are assembled.
And therefore you say that arrows are not forgotten in the members where they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they entered; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is forgotten through the place where it entered, or it is an arrow proceeding from a carnal place, and it is attracted and forgotten.
And if you do not obstruct the examination of the hour in which it happens, then it is necessary that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes purulent, and its attraction and exit are alleviated.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone and you do not obstruct your examination, then leave it for some days and try that with attraction and movement on any day, and already it is forgotten.
And if you do not obstruct your examination for some days, then it is necessary that you perforate the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the entire part with subtle taravel until the place is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
Moreover, if the arrow is already embedded in the body's location, and it is embedded with sentiment, then you will inquire about that in tenths, and if you feel that, then you will attract it with some instruments which are convenient for its attraction.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the plague and the length of the preon, and here there are no bones or nerves or veins, then you will feel on the plague until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if you have the aurelhas which are held, then you will deliver the flesh in which it is fixed from all parts with all the ingenuity that you can do; and ingeniously work on that, if you cannot operate on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in twisting them until it is obstructed.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location it is, then you will use a twist of your hand with forceps on all parts until it makes that obstruct; and subtly work with subtle subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
And if you cannot stand on your own at that time, then you will lie down for some days until the parts that are in its circuit can be restored, and then you will try again when it is alleviated. Maybe if you have made the blood flow contrary, then you will administer what we have said about cure in the seventh chapter.
And observe your vertebrae of incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer ingeniously in all manner possible to facilitate the evacuation of the arrow; and make it so that it is facilitated and tranquilized and delayed and strengthened, as you are recommended.
And thus you will make the arrow contrary to the arrow so that the malady is according to the figure according to which it shows the placement of the arrow in it, because it is more judicious. Maybe if that is not possible for you, then you will administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Maybe the arrows that are forgotten by the contrary of the other party, or which already proceed from some party to the external parts, or make the extremity of the arrow glibbose by sentiment of the party above the codena propdan and several times that eminent; then you section about that; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then you will try again, because it is made lighter for the judgment.
Maybe if it is retained in the bone, then you will twist the lame according to contrariness until the arrow takes root in the bone, and amplify its measurements, and then extract it.
And so, you will leave that for some days, and then try again until you are healed.
And if the thrust of the arrow is in that, then you will pull it out with your hand.
Maybe if the thrust has fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then you will introduce it, if it is dull, strengthen it with a concave instrument so that it enters the cavity of the arrow in the hollow of the arrow and then pull it out with your hand.
Maybe if the arrow is concave, then you will pull it out with a strong instrument entering into that, because the arrow is alleviated by that.
And if the arrow is poisonous, then you should dig out all the flesh in which it is, if it is possible for you, and then heal that with what is convenient.
And if the arrow is lodged in the chest, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the ribcage, and it is close to where you touch with your hand, and it is possible for you to section about that, then section about that and observe the incision of vein or nerve, and extract it, and then cure the wound if it is indignant, and heal it until it is sound.
The form of forceps with which the arrows are extracted:
They are the extremities of their own beak, like those of an owl, which are made like a saw when they take hold of the arrow so that it does not slip.
And of those are made many special types, large, small, and medium, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of its slight poisons, and of the amplitude of the wound, and of its constriction.
Like a root, so that it alleviates the introjection of it into the arrow's concave and is impulsed with that.
On the phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy, which customarily correspond to phlebotomizing in this way... of which are in chapter 16. there are two pulsatile veins which are near the aurelhas, as Alhasisain says; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of the two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and  these are the veins that are called algelic ; and there are two veins that are beneath the tongue. Maybe the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are thus. because among those is a cephalic one, and it comes from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it's dull, and it's a medium-sized vein, and it's composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic one; and the people name that "vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein which is placed in the domestic lettuce, and is named "citillar", and the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and funis of the arm, and it's placed above the elbow, and it's that one which is phlebotomized, and it's that one which appears above the joints for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it's the vein which is between the auricular finger and the small toe, and so in both ramps.
In the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is beneath the curve of the thigh bone of the wild boar; and the second is saphena, and its location is beneath the thigh bone of the domestic boar; and the sciatic vein, and its location is beneath the thigh bone of the wild boar; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of the veins that are close to the ears is for chronic and migratory and scaly and ulcerated wounds on the bad old heads.
And the quality of blood in those is according to what you have recommended: it is that it should be scraped from the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be scrubbed at the back of the head where the two veins are, with a good friction; then strengthen the patient's seat with a bandage between which appears the two eyes and the locations of theirs near the ears in two prominent places on the head; and you will see that in the said tie, and if you feel the pulse of those in the said tie, here it will be tense.
Then take the surgical lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then introduce it beneath the vein in the hollow of the knee so that the phlebotomy comes out at the bone. And then lift your hand to the vein and the hollow of the knee to the upper parts and incise the vein in an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
And then strengthen with poultices and apply them to the area so that it may be healed.
And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cautery.
More than the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the treatment of phlebotomy is for ancient and badly wounded and chronic and assiduous eye diseases and bodies with acute overflowing excesses in the veins.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what you have recommended: constrict the patient's seat with a motif until the two veins appear at the sentiment for apparent manifestation and demonstrate the pulse of theirs beneath the said tie; and then you will feel it tense.
And then lift the hollow above the vein to the upper parts with the said tie indicated, and introduce the phlebotomy incidentally beneath, and lift the vein in its own; and incise it thus as you have done in the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the patient, and pause the said tie on the vein for an hour, and then pause over that area with poultices and strengthen it from above with a strong constriction, and apply it so that it may be healed.
And now the remembrance of them is preceding, and of those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And so the treatment of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face and for migratory and rough and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what you have recommended: it is that the patient strengthens their seat with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named "fossor" whose shape is this:.
Pause at the prominent point which is at the head of the fossor on that vein and percuss over it with a pin or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it so that it may be healed.
And some veins are opened in phlebotomy, however it is not known that the phlebotomy is of acute extremity thus as the other phlebotomies, unless it is of lazy extremity, and phlebotomize it according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and strongly trencles in it when the phlebotomy is subtle.
More than the treatment of the two veins that are in the lacrimal ducts of two eyes for scabies of the eyes due to roughness and fetid discharge in the eyes, and for diseases of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize it, and you stand steady over the head of it.
And let the phlebotomy be done according to the transverse at a length of a little with little phlebotomy, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strongly the extremity of it is wounded.
And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and pause over that area, and strengthen it for one night, and then release it.
More than phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conducive to acute fever and violent sweat, and for diseases of the face and migratory and roughness that occurs in the face, and worsens when it is ancient.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of the patient is that the patient stretches out their neck and places their hand on their left side, and takes the subtle fleubotomi under the chin and fixes it in the middle of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear at first sight, and because the blood starts to flow soon.
Look that you gradually move your hand on the small fleubotomi little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and place it there for a new night, because it is restored lightly.
Maybe the juice of the fleubotomia of the two guiding guides will lead to a constriction of the wings and a beginning of leprosy and it brings many evil ulcers and corrosive sores, also with herpetic manifestations.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of those is that the patient stretches out their neck with a bandage on the column; and the artificial devices are placed over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat.
And place the fleubotoma on the vein at the joint with a small, ample fleubotomi little by little; and extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what is needed, and make it seem like the other vein.
And then loosen the bandage and stretch out the two veins with a mild stricture so that the patient is not suffocated, and lay it under the mattress because the wound is healed.
And the juice of the fleubotomia of the Algerich veins brings about small apostemes and pustules on the mouth and corruption of the gums and evil ulcers and fissures, and evil ulcers that are in the nose and in their circle.
And the quality of the fleubotomia of those is that you make the patient sit down, and stretch out their neck with a band, and then revolve their lips and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of both, and it is more evident because in the circle of those small black veins; and then you will insert each one by incision.
Maybe you have doubts there, and you don't know which one is of those, then you should take into account the incision of the larger one of those, and of the most manifest pustule of those.
And make it seem like the two veins that are on the lips above.
Maybe the juice of the two veins that are below the tongue is close to the fleubotomia of the cephalic, which is suffocated in the throat, to the evil of the uvula, and to evils of the mouth.
And the quality of fleubotomizing those is that you follow the patient between their hands in front of the sun, and lift their tongue, and look beneath the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each one declines to blackness.
And then fleubotomize each one; and beware that you do not move your hand on the fleubotomi of those, because beneath those are arteries.
And the veins that are fleubotomized in the body are those which customarily correspond to all the homes, and the fleubotomia of them is done according to two manners, either by placing the fleubotomi in a subtle, declining mirtilation or olivation; or by cutting with a fleubotomi, and applying it gently, and this is their form.
It is the side of it also with times, and converges to open the concave full veins proceeding apparently gross, and to those that contain gross blood turbid.
And this fleubotomi is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and converges to a fleubotomia of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
Maybe the juice of the fleubotomia of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the blood from the evil diseases that are below the throat and neck, and from that which dries the chest and belly.
And it converges to the fleubotomizer, when fleubotomizing that one, that he should beware of that and be above-trembling in that, because beneath it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts at the point of the fleubotomi, he will incise that artery and cause flows of blood, so that he avoids fleubotomizing with a pungent fleubotomi, unless it is sectioned with gentleness.
And if the basilica does not appear for manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave that one and that you move to another, or that you seek some other remedy; or that you fleubotomize at the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and extract that with a gentle fleubotomi, as we have said.
Mostly if you want to perform phlebotomy on the patient's ankle, then bend down and insert the structure of the arm that touches the spot between the ankles, and place your finger over the pulse; and also bend the arm and constrict the vein to create a concave curve for phlebotomy, just as we have said; and be careful not to let the percussion occur in any space around the artery.
And when you do it, with the ligature, inflate at the spot where you have felt the pulse, then that inflation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if the blood flows in phlebotomy as with the urine of an infant, and the blood is subtle red, then you know it's from the blood of the artery; and then you touch and pause the string said over that spot for a long space; and place the string said, and if the blood is abundant, because many veins are abundant, then you tighten the arm and release it.
And beware of the patient's mood, and be above fear of them and do not worry about it for several days until they are healthy.
But if the blood does not flow out, and you see that you are not present with medicine for it, then you insert the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of them is constricted, and the blood is abundant; or take a thread of floss, and do that, and take one vein and tighten it over the spot of the vein with a descending structure along the ligature and with pulvils until another day.
And then if the blood flows abundantly, it is good; and if not, then cure that which proceeds from the memory of the spot of the pulverized abscesses with abundant flow of blood.
And the abundance of blood in them is difficult in many arrangements for the small spot of the wound and the possibility of the ligature of the arm.
Moreover, the dark vein in phlebotomy is helped by extracting the blood from the subranial part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, just as we have said.
And beware the phlebotomist who is above fear in the phlebotomy of them, because below that is a nerve; and then if you adjust on the puncture of the phlebotomy and touch the nerve, it will cause stupor to them, and it is difficult to heal them, and they are not completely healthy. And this nerve appears many times at the sentiment; and if it is hidden for some homes and is subtle and does not show, then beware that you pause the phlebotomy in the spot where you phlebotomize with concavity, and avoid the nerve with your forcefulness.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you find the vein in its length.
The help of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the ailments of the eyes.
And beware in this property, if you want to phlebotomize with olive or myrtle phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve below.
Moreover, it is strongly necessary to postulate in some homes, when it is not phlebotomized in the primary percussion, and you do not touch that postulation again.
The first of them is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered unless for the conservation of health and for the hope of their recovery and caution against the occurrence of ailments, and that it be done phlebotomy on one of the veins that are in the body, such as: cephalic, dark, and basilica; and that it be done phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, above fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the food, when it appears to have signs of fullness.
And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or first hour after three hours have passed since the morning sun has risen.
Moreover, phlebotomy that is administered, moreover when it brings convenience and necessity to it, or of night or of day, at any hour and at any time.
And beware that infants should not be phlebotomized until they have 14 years, and females who are pregnant should not be phlebotomized except for the fourth month until the seventh, and the old people should not be phlebotomized whose ages have passed 60 years.
And with some people who need to be phlebotomized for certain manias, beware that you should carefully purge the seven principal veins during phlebotomy in the cleanest way, if in those there is much retained fluid, so that the veins do not attract superfluities in the phlebotomy of the members, which are pure, and do not disturb the principal members.
And it appears that the patient is not affected by sciatica or cramp, nor by bad posture or internal cold, nor by dropsy, and maybe the bloating is temporary, and it's possible that the bloating is due to colic passion, and vomiting, and pain in the belly, and multiplication of stools and urine, and exercise of fasting or vigilance, and all causes that dissolve virtue, either corporal or animal.
And then consider in subtle distinction of humors that are present if the blood is gross, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to adjust them to what is at hand.
And then enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or be excited by some exercise so that the blood is subtly purified.
And pause the bloating of the patient in the chest during the day, so it is around the hour of Terce, thus as we have said.
And perform that the chest of that patient is guarded on that day from all evil accidents animals, thus as it is anxiety, anger, fear, and all corporeal accidents, thus as it is trouble and excessive pain and sorrow resembling them.
And at his session, make the causes present in the use of which correct custom of men is aromatized and odored and with balms and resembling them according to the quantity of possibilities.
And follow the bloater above a cushion that is placed more than the cushion of that one who must be bloated.
And then extract the watery arm, and rub that with his hand the bloater two or three times; and then strengthen the ligament in the correct way and involve that two times.
And it is the tempered structure, because the structure when it is not engorged, or the structure is overly full, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is a mollification, and then it prohibits the body of the blood's excess.
And then the structure, because he who must be bloated rubs his hands together between them until the veins are inflated, and are declared to the sensation.
And then the bloater anoints the watery bloating with a little of anti-inflammatory oil properly; and then pause the watery finger of the left hand over that vein, where you want the bloating to be, so that the vein swells a little, and the percussion is seated because of the veins it is the one that makes the cord flee from the bloating, and of those it is full of windiness; and when it pauses the bloating on that, it is constricted against the bloating, and it is discovered by the bloater; and the bloating does not overcome the vein, and if it overcomes, that is strengthened.
And thus, because of this, the bloater should be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
And then pause the bloating, maybe if the vein is hubbered in one way, then it is good; and if not, you iterate another way below that place a little, or above where there is fasting, if the place is not apostematized.
And if the place is apostematized, or the patient feels spasmodic, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen the ligament, because you would strongly attract an apostemic caution, nor enter into a bath.
And then iterate the bloating if it is loved.
And if the perception is small and correct blood subtly, and you fear that it does not reach the quantity that you want, then you iterate the bloating in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the perception a little, and do so with fasting beforehand because the place is apostematized, since the place is apostematized in many homes due to scanty perception.
Maybe sometimes that is already apostematized, then do not iterate over it, because you do not excuse any cause; and pause on that certain part of the wound with oil, since it alleviates the body of the blood. And it is better in this place with oil and that other oils.
And similarly administer the wound of oil in all bloating where the bloaters block the veins from the prohibition of body blood, and make a tyrical alfador and sagzena when it is paused on one of those above the place, because the blood is subtly purified and revolved when it is gross.
And if in the place of bloating a great apostema is engendered, because many veins accumulate, and it increases to that which has not been blooded except for that vein, or in the perception of the scanty vein, and then you touch, and pause on the place spongy infused with water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And it is fitting that the sentiment of the blood of that vein is adjusted in complement to it or to another vein.
And if it remains in the place for some days with some blackness or viridity, do not note that; and if you want, pause on some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of juice of mint or calmation or similar to it.
And excessive evacuations accelerate apostemes and eminences of flebotomy from the basilica.
So then stop your hand over that, and if you then find a softness of your compression on that, then that eminence is bad and evil; and then beware that you stop for some reason that we have said, because the flow of the artery's blood is strong.
And make an emplaster in that place where it is stipicated, so that the area is hardened, and then take care to heal that wound with another healing treatment until it is healthy.
And take care to extract from the blood all bad humor according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that appears on the surface of the blood, as it seems.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow out until it becomes red; and similarly if you find it thick, then you let it flow out until it becomes subtle; and similarly if it is bitter, until the acidity of it is removed.
And take care to the one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction at once, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomist be laid out.
And in the one who is frail, do the opposite of that, and take care to extract it in slow degrees, and that the trachea be straight.
And the best way to administer phlebotomy of a vein is that it should be cross-sectional, not a puncture.
And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from flow of blood and irritation of nerves, and it is more praiseworthy and more safe than phlebotomy according to width and length.
And at the one that is accustomed to supervene syncopes from phlebotomy, and take care that you cure it then during phlebotomy with a small infusion of milk or simple oximel scaldfat; and extract the blood in three or four degrees.
And if it is complicated by completion, then take beforehand during phlebotomy to infuse in a syrup of myrrh or in a syrup of mel aromatized with special spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in a syrup aromatized and very odorous.
And if syncopes occur from phlebotomy, and it is because of the issuance of too much blood, then take care to take in drinking water of carnation and syrup very odorant and subtle; and use aromaticity with some galenic, and it should be limited to the chest area at that time.
And use other causes that we have said in the division of the chapter on syncopes for evacuation.
And whoever wants to evacuate the bad blood and dissolve the bad blood a second time, take care to the one for whom phlebotomy is for much evacuation, and the virtue of it is frail, that evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of virtue in the continuous days.
But whoever wants to evacuate the bad blood, and cut off the bad blood a second time, and the body is strong, then do it about eight hours or nine of the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wants to attract the blood of the bad body to the contrary of the part from which it declines, take care that it be evacuated on the second day or the third.
But that body in which there is too much blood already scaldfat and acidic and makes fever come, take care that it be cut off from the blood at once and a great quantity be taken away and the perception be amplified until syncopes occur, since you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and stop your hand over the pulse of the one from whom the body's blood comes, so that no mortal danger occurs in place of syncopes, because many evacuations end there when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not take care when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult to issue the blood, that you press under that with vehemence and bent, it is extended longer, because this is too bad.
Stop the flow until it is phlebotomized a second time; or remove that which has acidity from the phlebotomist who coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or stop over that of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and comprehend that with compression longer until the blood is outside and flows.
And if the vein is apostematous, then let it be and do not touch it until the apostema is calmed.
And if it is necessary to provoke evacuation of the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you will bleed that one on that place or in another arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the fuse or of the basilica, when they are not entangled or hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the blood in the patient is that the ill person mixes their hand in warm water so that the focal point becomes engaged and the vein appears manifestly.
And then stretch tightly over that limb with a narrow strip of binding; and then make an incision according to the transverse petit, not laterally nor longitudinally.
And it is a broad perception and your bloodletting is the one that you bloodlet according to the joint of the hand, a small one.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you put your hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
But if you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the iteration of putting your hand in warm water, and it is customary to place the body of the blood in warm water in winter time.
And the bloodletting of this vein is more saving than all the other veins, because there is no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
And the bloodletting of the little finger on the right hand is conducive to the illnesses of the liver.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that you stretch the hand with a binding or with your own hand, because you have put it in warm water, until the vein becomes inflated and is demonstrated to the gaze; and then make an incision transversally; and if you inject all at once, you will not feel anything in return.
And beware that you do not ultimately harm your hand with the bloodletting, because there are the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
And then put your hand in warm water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not iterate that in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of need, then you pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated suddenly; and similarly be careful that you do everything in a straight line.
But the juvenation of the bloodletting of that vein on the left hand is conducive to the illnesses of the spleen.
And do it similarly in the bloodletting of this one as you have done on the other.
And the juvenation of the saphena vein in bloodletting is for the illnesses that are below the body, also like the illnesses of the mother, and for retention of menses, and for the illnesses of the kidneys and ulcerations of thighs and legs, and for their similar appearances of illnesses.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the ill person puts their foot in warm water and makes friction over that area until the veins appear; and he places it on the joint of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein has a similar appearance to the toe's pulsation, and from there it ramifies into the face of the foot which moves rapidly.
And then bloodletting is done with a more ample vein below the leg where the toe's pulsation is felt, because it is better and more healthy.
And if you bloodlet on the face of the foot, then you beware of the nerves that are below it on the face of the foot, and pause your bloodletting where you bloodlet transversely, lest you want to injure them.
And it is a useless bloodletting.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you put the patient's foot in warm water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
And if the bloodletterer errs in the first vein, then you iterate with the bloodletting on one side, because the place is healthy; and do not fear the malice of it, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly do the saphena vein of the other foot in a like manner.
And of the sciatic vein, the place is similar to what we have said, below the heel near the hollow of the left side.
And the juvenation of the bloodletting is for pain in the ankle when it is due to bad blood.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient enters into a bath, and tightens and stretches the skin of their ankle from the side of the joint up to the heel beneath four fingers in a long, subtle bandage, because it appears only for that.
And then when it appears, then you bloodlet that according to each engine that is possible for you and transversely, and it is better; or inject that for injection or section that for sectioning, because the place of it is healthy.
And it is in many homes very hidden; and if you touch that, and it does not appear at all sentiment, then bloodlet some vein of it, and it is the one that appears on the back of the foot near the auricular and anular toes.
Be careful about the nerves, and make sure to purge the blood in the quantity that you wish.
And then release the structure and pause at the site of the phlebotomy incision, so that the bleeding can be stopped.
Of evacuation and of the qualities of using those.
Evacuations are made with clysters, or with enemas, or with veins.
And evacuation is done in two ways: one of them is scarification and blood extraction, and the other is evacuation without scarification.
And this evacuation without scarification is done in two ways, because it is either with a focus or without a focus.
And the evacuations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 14 places of the body, among which one is where evacuations are stopped; and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place is in two parts of the neck together; and evacuations below the jawbone, below the mouth; and evacuations of two spatulas; and evacuations of the alohoster, and it is above the end of the coccyx; and evacuations of two focal points, and they are of two arms; and evacuations of two humps; and evacuations of two thighs.
And evacuation does not extract the blood except from the small, sparse veins in the flesh, and therefore the virtue cannot be drawn out through them, just as it is customary for phlebotomy; nor is it believed that evacuation can be done with a focus or without a focus in any disease made by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
It is necessary to provoke evacuation for disease or for retention, administer it at all hours at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time.
And therefore when it happens in any of these causes, and properly if it is on the third or middle day of the month, then we command evacuation to be done after two or three hours have passed from the day.
And the youthful evacuation of the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and descends to the eyes; but it is believed that this should be a proper evacuation of the whole body.
And this evacuation is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it is not lawful to use evacuation on him who has a complete fracture, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great nuisance.
And therefore it is not believed that the use of evacuation is suitable for the old people, and in the heads of those who have frequent illnesses.
But to him who continues above it is done forgetfulness; and therefore it is believed that you command the evacuator to place his hand a little above the orifice at the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
But evacuation of the spleen is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and therefore it confers asthma, and constriction of the wings and scission of the instrument of the wings, and coughing, and retention.
And it is believed that the evacuation of the spleen should be done a little gently, because if it is stopped below, it generates debilitation in the body and in the stomach.
And the evacuation of the liver confers accidental pains in the head and opthalmia, and emigration, and prophocation, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilisque.
And it is believed that you command the evacuator not to press his hand on the scarification so that he does not cut the artery and accelerate the flow of blood.
And evacuation below the chin confers a bitter taste in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and a resemblance to those diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the aliheric vein that is in both lips.
But the evacuation that is done on the two spatulas confers a captivation, which is done for retention of heat.
And the evacuation of the two inner parts of the veins confers youthfulness from the phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, dark, and cephalic, because it attracts the blood from all those veins plus many that are in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins until they reach the attraction to the three veins.
And order the surgeon to not proceed too deeply in the incision, because the area is stripped of skin, and afterwards you will find his nerves and arteries.
It is a wound that is surgically treated on the buttocks and it confirms the hemorrhages of the anus and the ulcerous pus that comes afterwards.
And beware that you order the surgeon to make a large incision, and it should be in a straight line, because the area needs strong suction; and strongly ligate the subtle veins that are surgically treated with incisions.
Greater incisions on the smaller veins manifest for minimal harm, because they attract the blood from the entire body, and they confirm the ancient pains of the kidneys and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruations, and they confirm bothor and ademil; and they are situated in the place of flea-botany of two soporifics, and aloes-coben, and of two cavities.
However, I do not believe it is suitable to debilitate the entire body and to cause syncope in many places.
And from the incisions aloes-coben the juice that is propelled to the juice through the incisions of two veins.
And the quality of the position of the incisions is that it pauses the incision at the beginning of the void and sucks for temporary suction, and does not prolong the position of the incisions, but rather pauses those lightly, and remains quietly, and that the humors come to the area for a favorable event. And do not cease iterating this and continue until you see the area already irritated and inflamed, and that appears the rigor of the blood.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and afterwards consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who is of tender flesh and rare pores, beware that you scarify him gently and do not push, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And order the surgeon to amplify the scarification and make a little deeper, and afterwards facilitate the suction.
And if the blood is thickened, then beware that you scarify two gentle incisions, because in the first incision it opens the way of subtlety to the blood and to its fluidity. Greater in the second incision is the precise scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very fetid, then make a third incision for scarification, so that it congeals the decay.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we make multiple scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that you scarify deeply for scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the profundity of the coda only so much.
And if that of which the coda is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are very strait, beware that the places of the incisions are not too lenient, but rather resolute; if it is in summer time, thus as it is oil of aloes or oil of violets, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter time, then oil of narcissus, or oil of liri, or oil of camamilla, or of blood, and to those that seem similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, friable, then the oil should be of marjoram, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloes, or oil of anet, and to their similars.
Greater if the surgeon is of ample pores of tender flesh, then beware that it is prohibited from oil, and beware that to those places of incisions of their own, apply the incision with lavatory water or agua freja of solatrum, or agua de coja, or agua de bordolaguas, and similars to those.
And that of which the blood is of much humidity, wash its incisions with very agreeable water, or agua de mirt and sumac, and similars to those.
And that of which the superfluities are thick, wash its incisions with very antique water, or agua de sansuc, which is majorana, or decoction of anet, or chamomile, and to their similars.
And beware that the incision is kept away from bath; however beware that it is administered close to the edge of the bath for an hour or two, and beware that it sleeps close to the incision.
What is it that is opportune to regulate the vein-cutting surgeon from the blood-letting before the incision.
Beware that you consider at the beginning: then if the surgeon or he who is to blood-let is choleric and cuts above the agitated and inflamed blood, then beware that you take causes of infrigidation, thus as milgranas acetosas, and endivia in very agreeable and laytuguas, and secanabin, and julep, and to their similars.
And they stop their wanderings thus as in a circle, and the flesh of the affected joints is rough, and the wanderings are conditioned by the grasping, and it seems so to them.
And of that which the complexation is fresh, it is necessary to take in drink of ivory sap or sap of sacred celery, and sumac, and there is much odorant mixture between viel and noel; and it is commanded that use of little quantity of drink and of eating, and stop the wanderings of their circle and canabir and pissers and small joints and colon.
And it is necessary that on the day of ventilation and of flowering, the drink should be greater than the wandering.
And it is necessary that it be given in drink at certain hours to certain men tyrical, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or alceta during ventilation or during flowering, or then, so that the principal members may be comforted and the blood may be subtly, and do not give that scaly thing.
The ventilations that are their scarifications are ventilations that are stopped on the feet, and on the melancholy and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the bitterness of the narrow, because these members do not suffer scarification on themselves.
And it is not sought for those but attraction of blood of member, thus as stopping ventilation on the hand in bad flux of blood of the veins; and use that for dissolving fresh ventosity of the member, thus as stopping on the belly and the navel; because that rarifies the member and scales it and reduces the pain which resolves ventosity.
And it is stopped on the kidneys when they accumulate in their opilation or pus, because by virtue of strong attraction the humble opilation is fortified and eradicates the pus from its place.
And similarly it happens when it is stopped on the feet and melancholy, which drives ventosity into those enclosed.
And these ventilations are administered with juice only so simply; and some vegetables are administered at the fire.
And some vegetables are administered full of water, tepid, in the bad humors of melancholy.
And that is why the ventilation should be filled and should be more grand, thus it is warm water alone or water in which certain herbs are cooked for this convenience.
Form of ventilation administered at the fire: let the amplitude of the orifice be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the pronoun be the size of a palm; and let it be in the side of it, in the place that is in the circuit, its size, the tube being small according to the quantity that enters into it through a needle.
Let there be made of rough or citron, with thick margins, lion, and entwined and twisted so that the member does not leave its position over it.
And let there be in the middle of the transverse vein of iron or of iron, where a candle is stopped at the fire.
And this is the great major ventilation, greater than that which we have recommended; and the little less of that according to the bad humors and the state of he who uses it.
And the ventilations of the elderly and thin ones are different from those of the young and of thick flesh.
And the quality of stopping this ventilation at the fire on the member is that it extends the wax at the fire decently within a small candle of tallow, and stops it on the middle of the transverse vein in the middle place of the ventilation, so that the fire may be kindled around the part below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
And then it is stopped on the member of the patient, and the finger is on the tube that we have said, until when we have the ventilations and do not indicate that they open the finger and let the vapor out through that tube, then the ventilation will be almost dissolved.
And prepare the wax according to its manner, and then they indicate if they need that.
There is ventilation that is administered in the bad humor of plethora, with water, in which there is no transverse vein nor tube, and it is not administered but rather filled with water, and stopped on the member simply.
And this is its form: And this ventilation when it is more grand, so much the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter 148.
Bloodlettings are not administered on many members except in the members where it is not possible to position ventilations, due to their smallness, thus as the vein and gum and similar to them; or in a member denuded of flesh, thus as the finger and nose and similarly.
And the quality of using those that have been found to be bloodlettings which are in the watery parts of mundane purification.
And then they are laid down in the day and night in watery parts until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with flowering and ventilations; and then the member of the patient is cooled until it is red-hot; and then they are stopped on it.
And when they are filled and fallen.
And if it is possible to suck out the air from the wound, it is better to delay in healing.
And then, wash the wound with vinegar and add a lot of water; and it should be frequently washed and squeezed out.
And if the body is prolonged by the blood flow to the veins, and it is that which remains, then dip a cloth in cold water, and pause that above the entry point until the flux is abolished.
And if the blood is multiplied, then powder over the triturated vitriol, or gall and similarly to their stippling causes, until the blood is absorbed; or place the juice of cooked fava beans on the wound, and let them stay until the beans adhere to the wound, and the blood is absorbed.
And be careful, if it is necessary, repetition of bleedings, when it is possible to change them.
And if the bleedings are prohibited from suspension, then frequently wash the wound with recent blood or insert a needle into the wounds until blood flows; and then place them, for they sense some blood as soon as it is absorbed.
And when you want them to calm down, powder over them a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or cinders, and it will soon be so.
Thus begins the procedure of the third part: restoration. This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh, son, know that I have written this chapter for foolish doctors and the common people, and those who in times past did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter of theirs.
And for this reason it is done that this manner of the sciences in our land is private; and I do not have it and did not forget at any time to be totally ignorant; and I did not admit anything except by long study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
And then I added direction to the experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which I have passed my experience; because I have abbreviated it to you others and delivered it from the occupation of lengthiness; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed it in many forms of the instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, thus as I did in two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collections of bone fractures, from which the necessary preceding is, before we begin the recollection of fractured members and diverse others one by one. Therefore, I will discuss in the proem of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those which at the beginning are foreseen by the artisans and stationed on the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt that they know or learn this noble art other than you.
And therefore I say that when accidents occur such as fracture or dislocation or twisting or breaking, then it is necessary that you take into account at the beginning a flebotomy or alleviation of that, or some remedies, if no cause prohibits it, thus as debilitation of virtue, or it is that to which the accident occurs suddenly, or it is in decrepit state, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then be content with a diet of fresh herbs and of lean meats and of moderate crabotz; and prohibit gross meats and fill yourself with diets and total diet that fills the veins with blood, until you are secure from apostemic caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first regiment, in which they customarily dwell.
And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the patient is fed with nutritious diets of subtle nourishment and gross and heavy ones in which there is viscosity, thus as they are diets made from wheat flour cooked in water, and rice, and cabbage, and peas, and bellies of cows, and sheep, and fresh fish, and gross and similar to those, and in this regiment it is done coagulation of fracture by ligament and marrow.
And you know that the bones are weakened when they are in the old people who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit ones, it is not possible that they continue and consolidate according to their nature through the desiccation of their members.
The great Emperor Nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of all parties any similar cause like glue in which it is strengthened that adheres and strengthens until they are conglutinated and joined, until they come to the end of fortification and firmness, thus as a focus at the beginning, until no cause prohibits that from their own works.
And for this reason it is necessary to pause the veins of the patient, veins in which gravity and viscosity and thickness have accumulated, as we have said.
And we know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the variety of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone in the leg is different from a fracture of the bone in the head; and a fracture of the bone in the foot is different from a fracture of the bone in the toe; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I will come to a reminiscence of each species of fracture, explained in its own distinct chapter separate from the others.
Many varieties of fracture in the same member. And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their members; because there is an arc-shaped fracture which occurs in the stars; and some veins are made by a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagitta and astella and proceeding and non-proceeding, as it was done in the pain when it is prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And to each species belongs a proper torment in the restoration of it according to what will come, a reminiscence of it in distinct places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And for that reason a fracture of the bone is recognized: it is the twisting of it, and from that eminence and appearance of it to the feeling, and thus of it when it is compressed by your hand.
And then when there is not an apparent twisting in the place nor does it feel like a tender spot when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
It is possible that it is a twisting or small fissure, therefore you should not cover the spot with your hand and compress everything; pause over it among the medicines of which I have reminiscence at that moment what is convenient for the place; and then it will be straightened by subtle structure.
And we know that the place which is curved and not divided into two or another that does not occur in the sagitta, as it is remembered by the whole part of its comparison, then you cover from your hour to rectification of it, since it has reached an apostemic cautery.
And if it reaches an apostemic cautery, then you will leave that for some days until the apostema ceases; and then you will bind it according to whatever manner you can of elevation and of genius.
And we know that the restoration of it and the reduction of it is less troublesome than that of the bone in which an injury occurs to the sagitta.
And then you will strengthen it according to what will come, the reminiscence of it.
But if the bone is fractured in the sagitta, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And it is your position in which you pause the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member are then restored, and you perform that they return to their proper place and according to whatever manner you can in their places.
And beware according to your strength that you do not act upon the patient with your operating hand nor lesion; and perform according to your own power that you apply one bone to another as a companion according to their best forms.
And you cover that at that hour you profitably touch with your hand, and if there is some diverse cause here, rectify it and bind it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do, who make many veins that make the apostema cautery through their operation, or make counter-action in the member, as we have seen through the operation of their many veins.
And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; because we know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small, such as the arm and finger and toe, and similar to those, then you cover that the wrapping should be with a very subtle cloth.
Those who have large and hard swellings on the thigh or leg, in which there is a thick and tough skin covering, because the thick skin connects the big member and strengthens all parts with equal structure, so that nothing enters to spot.
And then begin, make your evacuation of equity, place a suitable bandage on that, over the area of that fracture with three or four layers according to the member's merit; and hold your hand firmly in a small spot on the bandage.
And then see that you go to the affected part above the area of the fracture, and hold yourself back so that you do not force your structure on the spot where you have strengthened the area of the fracture. And then elongate yourself towards the wrapping of the area of the fracture a little, and soften your structure little by little, until you take hold of the area with a great grip.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the area twisted in the wrapping, and then see to the wrappings at the affected part below the fracture; and be your operation on the structure of the wrapping and in softening according to what we have said in the primary wrapping from above.
And then pause between the layers of wrapping to stop the unevenness or curvature where the fracture's crookedness is engaged, if it exists; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
And then pause over the other bandage, and engage properly on these wrappings which are decently made, as long as there is no inflammation or aposteme in the area, and then pause over the water that settles the aposteme and removes the inflammation; and let it be for several days; and then you strengthen over the wrappings.
And let the wrappings of the treatment be made from canvas or thick paper, and be formed skillfully; or made from the bark of pine; or from palm fronds; and let each wrapping be ample according to this form and figure.
However, it is necessary that the wrapping which is placed over that fracture be somewhat thicker and longer than the other wrappings, and the length of the wrapping according to how it is adjusted on the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the wrappings with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then tie from below decently as we have said about structure, and it is that your structure should be according to the area of the fracture itself, and when it is more dislocated from the fracture, it lessens the structure.
And it is necessary that the threads be more rough in thickness and subtlety, and of a good mixture; and if the threads are too thick, thus as you have seen through the operation of several foolish people pausing the threads of the cord of the tort, and it is a great error, when one loses the structure for equality.
And excessively thin threads are not so convenient, because you will not conserve the structure in those waters that you want, and it is necessary that between wrapping and wrapping there be less than a day.
And if the patient is led by the extremities of the wrappings to the structure in those places, then pause below to stop the unevenness or crooked curvature until it does not cause harm.
Some wrapped fractures are a plague, and accidents cause disruption in the code, and you will find remembrance in that chapter according to singularity.
And you know that all torn members are not straightened with wrappings on the first day; which causes it because the member, when it is large, does not allow pauses over the wrappings until about five or seven days, according to your secure advancement of avoiding an aposteme.
And this is the method of the implanters among whom the Ancients restored, who were placed over fracture and dislocation and twisting.
Method of implantation as a rough way of restoring fracture, convenient for complex and major wounds to the veins and to the extremities, because it is about that on which there is no warmth nor cold: and it is that you take from the powder of mill, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the mill.
And you find that thus as it is, but that you scrape off that from the album of Huou, and pause the complexation of non-space nor subtlety; and then use that.
Another manner of implanting is to restore fracture and dislocation: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is a remedy for salvaging millet grain; take one denarius of each; of mirra and aloen, one denarius; of alochil, two denarii; all are well-crushed and mixed in water or album of egg whites if the complexity of the patient's injury is scaled; and then use this implanting, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones sufficiently, and confers a lot of home remedies.
Another manner of implanting which confers on fracture and dislocation: recipe of migrach and a thread of white altea one denarius; of mirra and aloen, one denarius; of acacia, six denarii; of Armenian bol, two denarii.
All you need is to grind into mortar with conflicting motion, and grind finely, and mix in water or in white of egg and it shall be administered.
Method of setting joints and separated bones in their places, and then sudden pain occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take a warm poultice and soak it in good wine and oil, and place it over the area.
Moreover, in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, but rather of cauterizing and expelling pains properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take juice of fig tree sort and juice of salvaged papaver; mix all together and make a plaster of it.
Method of plaster abbreviated administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining aposteme: take radix of altar, chamomile and flowers of violets, flour of peas, all in a portion. Grind everything together and mix in wine, if the member is not scaled.
Moreover, if it is scaled, then comfort it with water of sweet colander or with water and use its own.
Another method of plastering strongly for resolution that this first, when apostemes occur during the restoration of the member: take radix of altar and seeds of li, and of balaustia, and mellilot, majoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, all in a portion; grind everything together and mix in water of sage or water of dew or wine, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Moreover, Hippocrates did not dissect in the free will that it should be placed over the trembling member during its restoration, but rather a mixture of wax and oil, and no other cause; and recommend that it is midway between grossness and subtlety.
Moreover, Galen has seen that it is placed over the broken member during its restoration and the causes in which it becomes dry with little heat, thus like myrrh, incense and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster that comforts lesion and pain: take miga, of cezis, of skin of wounded man or penalty of auzel, and of altar, and salt, mixed together; grind everything together and mix well, and make a plaster.
Moreover, the quantity according to which you think that it will remain in the bandage and then it will be dissolved, is that you consider if there is no pain nor swelling nor the bone is broken, then you do not remove it for many days. And if there occurs a violent pain or swelling or inflammation at the location, then you touch or remove it at that hour, and change the plaster of it.
And take a drap of li and humid marine sponge, and submerge it in tepid water, and with that wash the location until the swelling and pain are calmed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place over it a warm poultice soaked in good wine and oil or rose oil, and leave it on for a night until you are sure of the aposteme being cauterized, and the inflammation of the member is rested, and the pain of it is relieved.
And then apply that subtle structure and small plaster, not too strong for your primary construction, and subtly until it is healed.
And if the aposteme and roughness and pain and inflammation and all the accidents are thus completely relieved, and you need no more plasters or structures, then you iterate that just as you have done from the beginning of the treatment.
And if there occurs no cause to the member among those that we have mentioned, then do not remove it unless after three days or four or five. and some medicines all that is laid on for 20 days according to what appears to you for the healing of the member, just as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And then adjust in the structure more than in your primary structure, and settle in the thickening of the wine of the patient, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
Moreover, if you see the location of the fracture is dry and thin more than it should be, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching it; and therefore embrocate it with tepid water from all medicines that are given to it; and let it be for three days; and loosen the structure a little, and by this operation correct the member, and it will be healed gradually.
However, the bone setters who restore the fracture of a dislocated member, when it is not restored at the beginning, according to what they cover, and it is restored according to twisting, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if they were to aggravate the ancient wounds in their free books and acquire bad habits.
And you have not seen at all of theirs that they do, because it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Chapter according to: The fracture that occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures occur from percussion of a bone, and the percussion thrusts all the bone into the ciphac, which is beneath the bone, just as it does in the fist, and for this reason this species is named ascial; or the bone is divided into some part of itself, and divides the flesh of it and does not pass through to the back of it; and this species of fracture is named absolute levation.
And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attrition; and its cause is percussion with a postra or falling on a stone, and its symptoms are similar.
And this fracture is penetrating that already approaches the peritoneum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
And the fracture is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like fracture, and for this reason it is named this species of capillary fracture.
And it is a fracture that is made or by falling or by percussion of a stone and its symptoms, which makes some layer of the bone enter into the divided parts, and it is made in the concave location just as it occurs to the pores of the skin when it occurs to their percussion and it is divided from their entrance into the divided parts.
And it is mainly made in the bodies of humid bones, just as it is with the heads of swollen feet.
And thus all these species of fractures are gathered, they are weights just as they are separate stars. And you will find the remedy for all this in its place.
And I will discuss all these species of fracture by detection above them and by inquiry into their tender and ostentation of corrupted flesh that is above them.
And the capillary species is recognized by this that it is discovered above the bone, and it is cleared, and limited to its tender part, because the fracture appears black.
Moreover, in the cure of fracture, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see per the accidents that signify manifest significance over pain, just as it is vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and movement of the veins and rigor of those, and symptoms similar to theirs in the major dispositions, unless it is not healed.
And if you see non-corresponding accidents, then you hope for health, and then you begin the cure of it.
The cause is because if it has come to you in the beginning as a plague and this is in the days of winter, then it covers that you studied in the ostentation of the bone within the 14th day according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it covers that you touch or starve the bone within the 7th day, having that which is beneath the bone be corrupted by the peritoneum, and that the accidents that we have recounted happen.
And if the fracture has already reached the peritoneum covering the brain, and it is with small and attritional parts, then it covers that you inject the comminuted and attrited part, according to what you have recounted to you.
And it is that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover above the bone according to custom and manner possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter above the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flowing with blood or apostemic cautery, then you oppose yourself to that which covers, and it is that you fill the place of draps infused with wine and rose oil, and make the plague repose until it be seated the apostema, and be sure of the flow of blood; and then begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
And that is according to one of two manners of operation.
And one manner is that you inject the bone with an instrument of straight style, and this is its form: And then administer another instrument like this, a little further late than that; and this is its form:.
And then administer more instruments further late than that one.
And it covers that you have diverse names of instruments, some of which are further late than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the acute extremities, and are of iron or steel.
And use of their arms facilitated in percussion on the incisors so that it does not constrict the head and lead to that.
If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to perforate in the circle of the teeth while you administer the incisors with the trowels, which are called non-deep trowels.
And it is not called thus, but rather because those do not reach the term of the bone of the tooth to what is near it, so that the trowel is rounded at the extremity or margin above what appears to be a margin or small circle, which prohibits being submerged and surpasses the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these trowels which almost converge at the specificity of each bone, so that they are present in all tests of the brain with an acute extremity, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of specificity of this test.
And this is the form of three species of trowels: The quality of perforating in the circle of the broken bone is that it pauses the trowel on the bone and revolves it with the ties until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then you permit the trowel to another place, and pause until you have traversed the quantity of the thickness of the root or environment.
And then you insert the incisors into the incisors which are between each tract of the bone, and make that very subtle pus that you put on it at the end of levitation, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause to remove the instruments which will have already appeared, as we have done, and forceps with subtle strength.
And it is necessary that you keep in total caution so that the incisor does not touch any part of the siphon.
And so when you have circled the bone perforating, and it will be separated from the siphon if it is continued in it, and you will extract, it is necessary that you raise and equalize it in the asperity of it which is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but more perfectly it is necessary that it be subtle pus and more subtle than the other incisors.
And if you find some small bone fragments and splinters, then take them out facilitated in what is of the instruments; and then cure the wound with liniments and unguents which we have said.
And the other manner of operation is the gouging, far from fear, which Gualia and the lauzec do for great laughter; and this is the sermon of it: necessary is it to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most vehement and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and have placed it beneath the extremity of this gentle and light incisor, which is the form.
And it is that the lenticular part is alone and does not incise any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides before in length, as we have said; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the siphon on the face of the acute incident in the bone.
And then you percussion on the incisors of a part with a small hammer until you incise all the bone in facility as it is revolved, and you are secure from the panniculus that does not happen in the accident that you fear in no manner, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their own; certainly, and if he was dormant.
Then if you find some additional cause annexed to the bone of the panniculus in certain places of bone, incise that of it with the extremity of the lenticular incisor, and deliver that of it in facility, because it is delivered from its nuisance and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is absent or separated from the bone is its face, and you find it in its asperity and subtle splinters, then it is necessary that you raise that asperity and eradicate those splinters with subtle razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that it is possible for you to administer them in all places most convenient for them and most direct according to what you perceive in the operation of that broken bone and its figure.
And it is necessary that you administer in your razion with which you raise the bone at the beginning the most latent of those razors, and then use them with the most subtle part of it, and do not cease far from what follows in continuity until you reach administering the most tenuous and most subtle parts of all those.
Moreover, in some of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, it is necessary that you administer care according to what you perceive for rectification of it.
And it is a cause that has not been diminished about all those who have studied in that art. And thus about what we have written, we have shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is restrained when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary that you take a drap of oil according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rosated oil, and pause it on the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled drap and submerge it in wine and rosated oil and pause it on the primary drap and make that as light as possible on it, so that it does not grievously affect the siphon; and then administer on that latent liament, and do not stretch it except for the quantity that has the wound alone.
And the patient should be treated for one or two days before being certain of an abscess-free cure; and then remove that and administer medicines which are excessively dry, such as razitz of linen and flour of errors, and powders ofenses and aristology, and similarly to those.
It is that you make powders of these medicines to be powdered over the wound, as if they were dry; and universally, administer the entire medicine of proprietary property by which it is that you clean and do not bite.
And beware that your virtue is that the wound in your cure is clean; and it should not be in the dirty diligence of ointments nor others; nor do you let virulence accumulate in it; because when it is adjusted over the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts it and puts it down, and falls upon the patient with a malignant evil malice.
And it falls upon the sinciput of the head, as if the bone is mondified and majorly when the cure of it is misrepresented, and it becomes blackened on its surface; and therefore consider then that it falls upon the patient the accidents that we have mentioned, knowing that it is a perilous total dopte.
And if it does not blacken except from the medicine that is paused above, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackening, then take heed that you take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil. and apply those liniments as a dressing, and then pause that over the sinciput; and then cure it with the species of cure that converge within so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is bruised.
You know that it is not bruised in the nose unless two parts are simultaneously pushed upwards, or one of those curved veins, because there are two bones, because the lower part is cartilaginous, and it is not bruised and does not fall to it except with attrition and tortuosity and sinusitis.
But if one of the two parts of it is bruised, then take heed that you introduce the small finger into the nasal sieve, and that you adjust that fracture gently with the index finger, and with the little finger before, until the nose returns to its natural figure. And do it thus for you are facilitated, and beware that you do not fall into that your operation on the patient's malady.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then take heed that it is equalized with the extremity of the file on which there is a small groove.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the same as that.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then wait seven or ten days for the rest of the abscess-free cure.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of linen, if the fracture is in one part, or two small calques, if the fracture is in two parts, and it should be in the large groove of as much quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
And thus some of the ancient restorers said that the calques were infused in borax, and were permuted all day, but it was not seen by me; however, take heed that the piece should be infused in album of egg white combined with powder of mulli; and then leave the calque until the bone is firm and the cartilage is indurated.
And some curved veins are introduced into the nose, in place of a calque, without any pain because it is enveloped by cloth of linen and lion; and it should be that you already have the fracture of the nose very vehemently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do calques.
And if another abscess-free cure falls, plaster the nose with wax or cotton soaked in rose oil, or with a dialectic.
But if another abscess-free cure does not fall, then take heed that you plaster it beforehand with flour of Sizami and powder of senses coated in album of egg white; and then pause over the lion's paw, and do not lift the nose for any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are bruised with a small fracture or so comminuted, then take heed that you separate over those, and extract those with instruments that converge on those; and then close the scission, and cure it in that which encarnates and consolidates, and plaster it conveniently.
And if a wound falls within the nose, then take heed that you cure it with calques and administer plumbs of lead until it is completely healthy.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is bruised.
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not with a wound, take heed then that the fracture is beforehand only so much, and it is not bruised in two and is curved to the inner parts, then its cognition is lighter.
Here is the translation:
And if the fracture of the mandible is separated into two, then you should administer extension of two parts according to rectitude until it is possible to set it in place.
And if you meet with commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those with which you expect will remain in a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and place a bandage over the broken mandible, cerot, and place a bandage over the double layer, and a bandage over the great star-shaped dressing, or a small peg alone at the length of the mandible; and then tie it underneath according to how you have prepared the ligature and so that it is convenient for application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and tranquilize, and pause eating the food of their usual meals.
And if you think that the figure has been altered in some manner, then you will touch and dislodge it on the third day; and then rectify what has been altered of it and apply a poultice made from ground moly, album of egg, or flour of cissami, since you will have removed the cerot of it, and place the poultice on the affected area.
And then put on and adjust that poultice over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, so leave it, until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
And if another time aposteme occurs, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and remove that aposteme.
And if the fracture is a plague, then consider whether it is a separated or dislocated bone, then you will subtly remove those dislocations so that they are conveniently set in place for the removal of those instruments.
And if the horrific aspect of the plague is strong, then you will amplify it with flea-botany according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then when you will have removed those dislocations, and of those none will remain, then you will soothe the horrific aspect of the plague if it is ample; and instead, place one of the poultices that are convenient for that and incarnate that, until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the furcula when it is dislocated.
Many times the furcula of the anterior part is broken, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not meet properly; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that they meet in the dislocations, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is a plague.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is a plague, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has the assistant and holds the broken furcula, and the other extends the vein to that part.
And then join the fracture with the ligaments until it is formed in its shape according to how it was, and it is not in a state of little prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is convenient to place beneath the patient's bed or mattress, and it should be the greatness of it according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the furcula and shorten the bandage with your hand until it joins the fracture as it was.
And if you cannot reduce the extremity of the furcula to its former parts, because it is perverted to the prong, then it is convenient that the patient be placed on their back, and place a cushion under the muscle of one of their limbs in greatness.
And the minister takes the muscle of it to the parts beneath until the bone of the furcula is elevated as it is in the prong in itself, and then you rectify the fracture and join that with the ligaments.
Many times you feel dislocations of the furcula and its majesties, then it is convenient to bend over that and extract those dislocations to facilitate.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you ingenuously make an incision of it with one of the instruments which you have prepared for that, since you had placed beneath the furcula the instrument that serves the ciphac; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form of it.
And it is similar to a culier of which this is the concavity; and its width is according to what you have needed of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the littleness of it.
The length of the patient's body should be positioned so that it is as possible during the operation; that you have two extremities in this way at times, and one extremity is relaxed and the other is stretched.
And if the disruption of the wound, which you have inflicted when you have extracted the excess from the bone, is large, and you are certain of a post-surgical abscess, then adjust the two lips of the wound to suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a post-surgical abscess, then fill the wound with drapes and poultices according to the quantity of the discharge from the wound.
And if you suspect a post-surgical abscess, then put a warm compress on it in wine and oil, and apply it to the area.
And thus, that the stake does not press on the broken bone; and for this reason, you will see the patient every day, so that when the ligament is softened or the stake is removed, then you straighten it and strengthen the bond.
And then place the patient to sleep with their neck on a pillow, and place underneath their tiny layer of them in the night a small cushion; so that meanwhile the assistant of theirs is elevated from the side of that, and thus the fracture of the ribcage is elevated by the muscle; or the arm of theirs is tied to the neck.
And do not loosen the bandage unless you suspect an abscess or post-surgical abscess in the affected area for twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of the patient towards that, and adjust it to the structure and restore it so that it is restored and the fracture of the ribcage is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and some alleviated in some houses are done in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder.
The scapula is broken in the lateral part of it and does not break unless the edges.
And then when it is broken in its place  and it is broken in the middle of its place  and it is not recognized unless by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you prepare it and reduce it according to its natural shape in every manner of engineering that is possible for you.
And then apply on the dusty place of millet flour in albumen of egg and straight spot; and then apply double poultice compress; and then apply on the subtle table stake according to the quantity of the entire scapula or more or less.
If the stake is concave in some of the places of the scapula, then you bend that concavity to a straight spot, and then adjust the stake according to equality.
And then strengthen it below with a long humane treatment, free from constriction and firmness of the stake, until it is not removed from its place.
And examine the bandage every day; and all alleviated that it is softened, another alleviation and strengthen it and equalize the stake if it is removed from its place.
And leave the patient on their side thus.
And the scapula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And then when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you will see that it is secured because those are some of the bones which were not injured nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed to the place of the bone and put underneath the ribcage, then you separate it from above, and remove it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the ribcage caused by post-surgical abscess if you suspect it here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of fractures of the foot.
The foot, some alleviated, is broken in the middle of its place and that is altogether ended; but the extremities of it are very ended, cicatrized and comminuted.
From the accidents of it when it is broken the back of it, it declines into the internal parts and accumulates in the great pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and strong vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the feeling.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be resupinated on their two hips, and a cushion placed between their spines with a servant; and then press also the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs to the two highest ribs, and subtly proceed in the operation and in the equitation according to all manner that is possible and that converges to what is possible, until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
And then place a poultice over the plaster and stop it from being above the table of subtle sauce or of calves or of their similar levitation, because you envelop that in a cloth; and then subtly proceed to bind that over the broken bone so it doesn't become inflamed; and go with the bandage according to the retonditat on the straightened back, and strengthen it with decent structure; and then consider the bandage at all hours, and when it is mollified, strengthen it.
And if it is necessary to provoke the dissolution of that which corrodes or ulcerates, or pain, or aposteme that accumulates in the area, then you cut and separate that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what accumulates through that manner of cure; and then return the plaster, if sometimes to the face; and adjust its structure until it is healthy.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
You know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places that follow the back; and of the extremities of their part, which do not accumulate contradiction there, but for what quarrels are cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling because of the inquiry into its defects.
And the restoration is thus that it equalizes the fracture with its defects according to the possible manner, until it is equalized as it was, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel, if it needs that.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines into the internal parts, then it accumulates in the patient vehement pain and puncture, thus as puncture that accumulates in one who has suffered a fall, and for what quarrel the bone puts forth a veil; and it accumulates in the difficulty of breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Antics were ingenious in that with many clever inventions.
And of them it is said: they discovered that the patient's belly generates inflammation and wind, because the stomach should be inflated and extended, and the fracture is driven to the foreparts.
We have avoided that so it doesn't cause the leg to generate a cautious aposteme, if it doesn't accumulate; and if it does accumulate, then it helps with that.
And they said that some of them who were placed under the windows and then sucked with a strong fortitude; and it is similar to reasoning, but I, however, fear that the window attracts the superfluities to the area due to debilitation.
And they said that some of them: the area should be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and poultices are placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage is equal when you envelop it according to retonditat; and then the patient should be cured with a cure of pleurisy by means of food and medicine.
And if it causes vehement constriction of the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts forth a veil with punctured ledent, fear about the patient, then they found that on the area, they discovered the broken rib, and then they placed above that instrument which conserves the cipher, the remembrance of which is preceded, and they inscribed the bone with facilitation, and extracted it.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with coagulation, and cure it with plasters until it is healed.
And if it accumulates internal aposteme, then you cut and put poultices in hot rose oil and place them on the area, and that the patient should be cured with what is suitable for the internal aposteme.
And it should be resupinated on the mattress on which one sleeps, until it is healthy.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fracture of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
Some times it happens that fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and then it goes to their vertebrae, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back. And with that it accumulates to some and you want to know if it will be healthy or not, then consider, because sometimes the hips are more mollified and stupefied and dead and cannot move nor extend nor strengthen them and when they constrict them with their defects or pierce them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that it is not healthy, and in the same disposition it is mortal.
And if those evil humors are sensed in the constricted areas and points, then it is known that the nuchal bone of the back is saved and the patient's gout is cured.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to that and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then examine his feet.
Then if you see that it has become mollified, it is clear that the evil humors have settled in the limbs, and then when they have descended to the two kidneys, and digestion and evacuation are hindered by his will, and some urine is retained above the two kidneys and cannot be urinated, then it is known that he is mortally ill, and therefore do not struggle in his cure.
Perhaps if there are no obvious causes for those things, the cause is better and more subtle.
And the cure for him is that you perforate the sediment of the aposteme with a cautious heat because it settles on the atrighted vertebrae, or with mugwort of the same kind; settle on those evacuations during the day until the aposteme is sedated cautiously.
And then apply one of the comforting and expelling emplasters, and stretch over that limb; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side where he feels pain until he is healthy.
And if it becomes clear that the essence of the satirical bones or some cause that has already been separated from him, then it is necessary to succeed over the codena and to remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with a great suture if it is large; and then cure that encarnated flesh of the joints, until he is healthy.
Perhaps if the bone of the hips is broken, and it is the end of the coccyx, then it is necessary that you introduce the pointed instrument of the left hand into the anus, and that you adjust the broken bone with the other hand according to what is possible for secondary equilibrium; and then apply an emplaster and a bandage, if you need those things, and then stretch it.
And if you feel broken bones in him, then you focus on that, and remove it, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded until he is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the narrow passage.
The bones of the narrow passages are easily broken, and if they break, the fracture of theirs is only communicated in the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the divided parts; and it causes pain to the patient in the place and point, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of him is that you extend your hand over it until it is on the fracture which is the shape of his figure.
And if the fracture is in his extremity only, then you adjust it according to what appears to you for equilibrium adjustment until it is assembled to its natural figure.
Perhaps if the fracture is in the loin or has already declined to the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on his back abdomen until he is prepared for your restoration of that fracture. And then when you have adjusted it, apply an emplaster to him, and then apply a bandage of wood or of codena, and stretch by stricture over which there is no threat of fracture point nor movement of the bandage.
And adjust the concavity to that which fills it until it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Perhaps if you sense aposteme heat, then cease the extension of him and his restoration until the aposteme heat is sedated, and apply to him what sits according to what is preceded; and then return to his restoration, and stretch it thus as necessary.
And if they are in the satirical bones or are communicated, then you treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of the fracture of the adjoining.
The adjoining is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of him is in one of two manners, one of which is that you take wood placed in the middle of the groove according to this form.
And it is fastened with two extremities of two ligaments, and then it is suspended from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a stool; and then put his broken arm on the wood until it reaches the tiny place of the wood where it is annexed to the curvature of the wood.
And then suspend it on some heavy cause or the minister extends it to the lower parts; and then the doctor will see that the fracture is in its proper place, until the fracture returns as necessary.
And the other manner is that the patient is resupinated on his cervical vertebrae and suspends the hand of the neck with a ligament; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture in its proper place; and the other holds it below him; and each of them extends to their respective part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen it over the fractured limb with another ligament, and almost all of the two ministers extend to their respective parts.
So if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the ligament over the cilium and the other half beside the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is necessary to place the ligament over that location and over that elbow.
Straighten that which has been facilitated and its treatment, and then apply it according to what is necessary and it is applied for good application, then strengthen it if there is no accidental abscess.
But if there is an accidental abscess, then lay it open within seven days, and pause on the underlying skin that is swollen in a warm oil and rozated until the abscess ruptures, and then strengthen it.
And the manner of strengthening it is that you place an emplaster over the fracture, and then place an envelopment of new drap around the emplaster; and then adjust the arm over that adjuster, and place your hand upright over the underlying muscle.
And place the drap and strengthen over the adjuster of the arm so that the arm is in a steady position, if it does not prohibit anything from any cause of the broken bone.
And then use a splint.
And it is that you place on the fracture a splint that is more laden and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers from the entire part.
And then strengthen over the splints with the structure which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your structure over the location of the fracture should be more straight. And when the fracture has been well-adjusted, the structure will be smaller.
And so if you observe the situation of the splints and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its original position, then you do it.
And if you fear an abscess, then you lay open the structure and splints within seven days as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not become inflamed or swollen in the affected location or inflammation; or it is prohibited to bring food to the member by means of superfluous structure; and therefore rectify all this according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause will occur from this, then do not release the ligature except after three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands be above the stomach.
And place on the adjuster a full covering of warm wool, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed nor dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, therefore rectify all this according to your virtue.
And regulate the patient's diet according to the order that we have given you, in such a way that the diet is subtle at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; and then it is necessary to increase the diet of it.
Because the custom of the adjuster and of its leg is that they are strengthened in 40 days; and then it is necessary that they be released and administered baths and medicated with ointments which rectify that.
And if the fracture is badly injured, then you do not release that ligament and splints for a month or until two months.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm bones; of which one is small, and it is the one that is called the radius, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small radius bone, from the part below.
And sometimes the larger forearm bone alone is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes they are broken together.
And when the small forearm bone is broken below, then its restoration is easier, and its healing is easier.
And when the bone of it is broken below the fracture, then the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
Therefore if the bone that is broken is the small forearm bone below, then it is convenient for the doctor to place a small extension with facilitated treatment until it is healed.
But if the larger forearm bone is broken, then it is necessary to place a stronger extension.
And if both forearm bones are broken together, then it is necessary that you place the outer structure more strongly.
And it is necessary that you place the figure of the hand from the restoration of it and the extension of it stretched out over a cushion, and let the palm of the hand be at the upper parts above, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be seated on a well-cushioned chair.
And it is a cushion beneath them in the elevation or inclination of them, so that the patient does not incur trouble.
And then extend the minister's arm to the affected part, placing his hand or applying a bandage, and another minister extends similarly above it.
And then the doctor wraps the bone inward so that he reduces it according to the best figure that he can.
And if in the fracture of the bone there are splinters, then you perforate to reduce all flesh in their place with your true virtue.
And if it appears in the separated splinter that holds the cord and is not according to your hope for its restoration, then you finish above it and leave that according to the manner which we have described above.
Perhaps the fracture is a wound, and you have already made it into a single head, and then take care of that.
And if you find an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then you lay a cloth dipped in rose oil and white wax, and it is better between speculation and subtlety, and stretch the cloth over it with subtle structure until the abscess is settled; and then remove the wax and apply an emplaster prepared from powder of soft clay, and place the staples; and let the staple be that which is placed on that fracture so that it holds and strengthens.
And you know that the number of staples on the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is the fracture in one focus or in two foci together.
And then place your structure over the location of the fracture strongly and vigorously, and when it will be more certain about the extrication at the parts above the fracture or at the lower parts of it, place the structure a little more gently according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture are very humid cloths, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is stretched should be of a medium quality, better between subtle and gross, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament to be properly aligned for some days. And if you find some cause for which rectification is necessary, as it appears to the limb, and then you should uncover the limb in a warm water bath until that rectification ceases.
And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then return the structure.
And if the extraction is already mollified and the bone is already restored and resembles those, then rectify all with your true virtue.
And consider that perhaps the nutrient is prohibited from reaching the limb due to an excess of structure, because then you should mollify it a little and let it be for some days until it runs to the nutrient, and then strengthen it.
Perhaps if the patient does not find any cause among those that we have mentioned, then it is not suitable to delay until about 20 days or around that.
And then the hand of the patient is suspended by its true virtue of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
And you know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of fractures of the finger of the hand and of the toes.
You know that in the fingers of the hand and the toes, fractures often occur, and they do not find their own place unless with careful and gentle movements.
And when you find a fracture or dislocation in the hand, then it is suitable for the patient to follow a straight line and equally aligned according to equality, and then place his hand on that extension.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor wraps them inward so that they are well-conjoined in good conjunction.
And then you should apply an emplaster and stopping, if you do not find an abscess; and then place a staple above according to the quantity of the location, and you have already wrapped it in a cloth of yours.
Perhaps the splint is in the interior parts of the fingers near the belly of the palm, and then make a similar shape of a cloth, and command the patient to strengthen it with his own splinted palm; then it will be strengthened with a long cloth.
And let the staple of the heart be in the cloth where it is elevated, so that the heart is applied to the palm; and strengthen it according to what is suitable.
Perhaps if the fracture is in the forepart, then it is suitable to place a staple above and another staple of the part below on the palm, so that the hand is bent and straightened; and then place the structure, as if the hand is revolved between the fingers with ligaments.
And if you find a fracture at the knuckle of the toes, then it is the toe that is puffed up, wrapped according to what is suitable and then strengthened in the palm, and if you want, place a small straight staple per so que la fractura es elevada e no sia mauguda.
If the fracture is in other digits, such as in that of the middle finger, or in the index finger, or in the auricular, or in the annular, then it should be immobilized and bandaged accordingly; or similarly with continuous traction, it is better; or place a small steel on it, as we have said about the pulse.
And consider, in your restoration, and then arrange accordingly the positioning of the postoperative bandage and opposing  as you would do in a surgical operation  as it covers when it accelerates any cause of those, according to which the narration of it is repeated.
Chapter 14.
About the restoration of fractures of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone, when it is broken and separated, is declared according to the sensation as it converts to the upper and lower parts.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their back and on their face.
And then the minister extends the entire ligament to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If it is proposed to reduce the thigh bone, then the ligament is proposed above the knee joint, so that the extension takes place in them, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is proposed above the knee joint, then it should be made with the ligament above the knee joint, and the extension to the parts below.
And then the doctor unites the bone by joining the two ends together so that it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is joined with good conjunction; then it covers that it puts on a plaster and structure, if it doesn't accelerate the post-operative member. If it accelerates in the post-operative member, then you should leave it for several days until the post-operative bandage is loosened, and then return to your cure.
The structure of it should be made thus: it covers that you envelop around the fracture a hard bandage, and double or triple the thickness of it two or three times, and remove the superfluity from it; and then envelop the leg until it reaches the ankle and the thigh bone.
And introduce a long bandage between the thigh bone and the leg just above the knee joint to the lower parts, and they come to the extremities of the bandage from the upper part of the two sides, and then revolve around the leg and the thigh bone what superfluity of the bandage.
And then stop on the thigh bone in the place of that fracture thus, and stop one steel on the bone of the leg.
And then fill in the empty spaces between the leg and the thigh bone with many drapings, so that the extrication is coagulated.
And then begin a strong structure from the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four envelopments, and when you have already loosened the ligament of the place of the fracture, your structure should be smaller and lighter and more flexible.
And then extend the two extremities of the bandage to the lower parts until they reach the heel of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the steels on the other part so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the structure over that, so that it doesn't accelerate corrosive member or post-operative bandage or swelling and similar to those; and if it accelerates any cause of those, then cut away from it, and rectify what accelerates all at once, according to what we have said many times.
If in the bone there is a piece of bone that can be joined, then it covers that you should join it according to what is possible for you; and if not, finish over it and remove that, and cure with what proceeds from the memory until it is healed.
And some times it is strengthened that this fracture of the thigh bone is another thing that is adjusted to its steels, as we have said in the adjutant and in the arm.
If it is necessary in the restoration of it in such a way that it doesn't accelerate the patient's lameness; and if it is restored alone, another thing that should be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that it limps from what it used to be.
And you know that the thigh bone is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, and all that is according to the diversity of the complexities and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
About the restoration of fractures of the kneecap.
You know that fracture of the kneecap is often encountered, and it accelerates many times with attrition.
If it accelerates to the fracture, then it is not just a crack or hole in its parts, and that is a plague or several plagues, and about that all is stated according to the sensation.
And the restoration of it is in such a way that it should be reunited with what is broken from its parts, and they are reattached together until it is aggregated and joined according to what is possible for equipoise and facilitation and fabrication.
And then place a poultice on the round stool, if it is indicated for that; and remove the strictures underneath to make it convenient.
And then consider all the dispositional remedies that we have recommended for other fractures, and also how to apply a cautery in a similar way, so that you can oppose all accidents conveniently until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of a thigh fracture.
You know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is large and is named after the name of the thigh; and the other is subtle and is named forked.
And sometimes it happens to the species of fracture that it happens to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, restoration of it is made similarly to restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is converted into complete parts.
And if the subtle bone is broken, the thigh is converted into the anterior parts.
And if the large bone is broken, you will encounter those difficulties, and it is for these reasons that they are not easily healed.
And then administer extension, equalization, and ligamentation of the bones according to that joint.
However, Emperor Cove, if the fracture of the thigh is old and has many rough edges, then extension should be milder and less frequent, and it will help your virtue.
And in the thigh there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you join the bones and complete the whole operation, then you will take pieces of wood from a pine tree which is placed beneath the causes that are placed in solitude; and so they make an instrument of branches of palm; afterwards, from those to the ones that have small grooves, and do not touch the handles, and let the length of those be according to the length of the thigh, and from the denuded area to the most beneath.
And then envelop on each side a drap in two envelopments according to the length of it, and place one over the part of the thigh on one side and the other on the other side, and so from the denuded area to the most beneath the base of the foot.
And then bind the two bones in three places of the two extremities and at the middle place, because with this structure the thigh is prohibited from inclining to the right and left sides, and it stands for good stability.
And then administer a wooden splint according to the length of the thigh; and it should be placed on the thigh so that it conserves its movement.
And Emperor Cove says that you do this in fracture, and when you have that plague properly.
And then consider each day the thigh and study it for further study, and you will guard against apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and when some cause of those happens, then oppose yourself to it until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not suffer total fracture; however, the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fractures in certain ways; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fractures, and they do not suffer it unless there is great violence in the means of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot receive a fracture and sometimes those bones are elevated above themselves between them, then the patient places his/her foot on the ground prepared in such a way as a nest.
And then place one foot on that which is elevated by those bones, and then calcify those, and press, and join them together until they return to their places.
And then place a poultice and stop underneath, and place beneath the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat plates.
And then remove that from the foot in descending structure, since you have enveloped that with drapes and other causes of which it is worthy.
And when it passes three or four days, then you will release the ligament, because you will find the joined bones, or they are broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is thus as it is known.
However, if some toes are broken, then restore them, and join them thus as you do and recommend to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand. And then place the broken toe bone according to the length of the toe, and let it be held by one side; and then place beneath the foot this table which I have recommended to you, and remove that from the structure in a decent way.
However, if that which is broken of the bones is two or three or more, then you place on each toe bone of its quantity enveloped in a lion's drap, and remove the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the plates of the table above the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
It is convenient for you not to overlook that you do not consider all the causes which I have told you about in other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and pause to think about each accident so that you may cover it.
Chapter 18.
About the fracture of the neck of the thigh bone and of the os pubis and of the wound of the man.
When the neck of the thigh bone is fractured, then make a seat in that wounded place, and incline it towards the division of the two small ones, and hold it back.
And place the compress on the neck of the hip, and make it so that the neck of it is like a sphere; and place the thigh in a concave position, and elevate the two small ones little by little, because all this has been forgotten until it is seen in the division of the neck as well as the fractured bone returns.
And place pillows under its back, and when one wants to urinate, remove the hip to facilitate it and make urine flow, and reduce and return according to the manner in which you started, and return to the first pillow.
And do it like that for seven days or around those, because then it is restored.
And if you wish, take an egg of owl and stretch it over the tract of it a canal of cane; and insert the whole bladder into the neck of it, and blow into the canal until the bladder is inflated within the neck, because the fracture returns.
And place it filled with hip and stay like that for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the pubis of man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and consolation of it what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
And that which is straight is not hidden in these proximate fractures and few happen, mainly to those who have some study and use of my free book; because that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via direct restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand well.
When the wound of the man is fractured, take a poultice of water, and put the wound in it; and place a pause over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and place it to rest for three days or around those, and let it be healed.
Chapter 19.
About the restoration of fractures of bones when they are affected by plague.
It is convenient for one who suffers from fracture with plague, and mainly if the bone is large like the bone of the hip or of the joint, or similar to that, that you take care and remove as much as possible if the conditions of fleubotomy are suitable for you or testify like we have said before.
And if the plague flows with blood, then it is necessary that you take care of the retention of it in such a way that you pulverize on the dry, troubled place, if another cause is not present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if you do not suffer from apostema.
But if you suffer from hot apostema, then leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the apostema is calmed, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered cartilage, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce it and enclose it with your fingers in a facilitating and gentle extension.
But if the extension is not prepared and the equipment of it with your fingers, then reduce it with your fingers as much as possible in this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight inches and its width is according to the quantity of the plague; and for that reason it is necessary for the doctor to take four of those three or four according to the quantity that he indicates in the cure of all types of fracture.
And let it be rounded, and let it be in a small groove so that it is not doubled over itself during the operation hour.
And let it be of acute extremity to which the margin is in the seven extremities; and let its underside be with a gross tendon tending, and of its majority within the parts.
And this is its shape:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means small plate.
Because it is necessary that the extremity of the acute elevation be paused above the extremity of the prominent bone.
And insert it into a sheath until the bone returns, and let it be enclosed with some equipment.
And therefore it is necessary to enclose the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the extremity of the broken bone is subtle, and do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
If you cannot reduce the entire bone that we have recommended, then cut out that part which is not covered by skin, or it will be one of the saws in some way that is possible for you.
And also scrape off that which remains on the bone of roughness and of small scabs.
And when the bone is reduced, and the reduction brings great pain to the patient, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore you do this so that you confer great benefit to the patient.
When you have completed your restoration which you do to the bone, and then submerge it in a strict black drap, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the open wound or any other cause in which there may be oil, so that it does not induce putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer stitches at the time of completing the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can insert the tube for draining and use enveloping materials according to the quantity of the wound.
And beware that you do not strengthen the wound on the fracture, because many times they are made in such a way that doctors' follies, and fierce corrosion occurs over the same patient's dead or corroded members, thus it is unhealthy. And if the structure of the wound loosens, softens, and differs from the structure of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear about those evil accidents that we have recommended, and it brings pain to the area, then do not think of pausing over those stitches, but rather make an enveloping of hard drap in place of stitches and strengthen them there.
And when one or two days have passed since the wound began to suppurate, then you remove from underneath the drap which you had placed over it, and administer poultices, in accordance with our customary practice of treating wounds, just as we treat tetrafarmacon and similar things.
And it is convenient for you to dissolve the liament and consider the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and think that the member should be prepared in such a way that putrefaction can flow from it to the lower parts and be facilitated.
If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated nor has it abscessed from the pus, then you know that here are the signs of small ulcers because it begins to inquire about the wound in a tentative way. And of those signs, those that are separated remain and extract, those that do not separate and put the member in pain, therefore try to insert them according to what is possible for you.
And if you find the wound to be in a state of ulceration or decay, it is a symptom of corruption and putrefaction, then you know that you should pause at one of those things that are convenient for the cure of which the preceding narration has been made in the same chapter.
And of that which you know to be the best sermon and you make your presentation: when the bone is broken, examine it over the member just as the bone of the thigh and of the helper, and similarly to those of the large members, and do not attempt to attract it, nor extract it because many times they are made for death; having left that until it purifies, because it is strong enough to last for 20 days or more. And then heal the wound if you have seen it, and if not, leave it alone.
Chapter 20.
On the cure of swelling that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Many times this swelling occurs in the vicinity of a healthy fracture, and it is especially near the joints, and it is obstructed by the shape of the member; and it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer in it those medicines that have been stipulated, such as aloen, enses, mira, sercacollo, acrassia, and similar to those; so that you take some or all of them, and confound them with stipulated wine, or album of water, or stipulated ague, and place it over the swelling in a stopper, and constrict it well over it for good constriction.
And leave the extractions that do not dissolve it for many days; and then dissolve it and iterate another, until the swelling is reduced; or strengthen over that lamina of lead decentment, because lead has the property of reducing all that which is inflamed in the members.
If the swelling has already converted into stone and is strengthened and necessitates provoking a more hidden coytadament, then you scatter it through the superior part of it, and insert the superfluous and eminent, or scrape that with some alcus rezoris until it is reduced; and heal it until it is sane.
Chapter 21.
For the restoration of fractures when they are restored, it is proper to return the subtle member to its natural form following the usual nature.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and it is proper to return the subtle member to its natural form, then it is not done solely for multiple causes: one of which is the dissolution of the ligament and the loosening of the restored part not according to nature; or due to superfluous strictness of the ligaments that prohibits nourishment from reaching the member; or due to excessive inflammation; or due to excessive movement at an improper time; or due to a lack of health in the patient's body and debilitation.
And the care of this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender, so that health may be multiplied in them; and administer baths; and put gentle touches and letizia on them.
And then pause the poultice over the member, so that the poultice attracts the nutrient matter to it, or continues to imbue it with warm temperament, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
On the care of broken bones when they are restored tortuously and prohibit the operation of their own that is natural.
When accidents happen to the member already restored, then immediately remedy the tortuousness and prominence of the broken bone and nodosity, and it is because of this that the form of the member is fed, more empowered the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then it does not occur that you receive the word of him who existed before that member was newly broken.
More have I seen foolish doctors and restorers who have done this on our earth; and this operation is very reprehensible, producing great fear in the sign of which is mortal.
More if the contraction and nodosity are recent, then it occurs that they have imbued warm temperament in which they have collected soft mollifying herbs, thus as they are fuels of high altitude and roots of them, and melilot, and similar to those; and it is done to the emplaster with mollifying emplastering thus as Dyallaquilon has well done; or that it takes mucilage of root of high altitude and is continued in gray of walnut or oil of cinnamon, and is emplastered there; or that they take fat figs and are trussed on females' colons, and similar to those of the medicines that are named as permanent consolidations.
And some of them are dissolved in assiduous friction of the ligament that is in the most humid places, and is administered with movement of the member to the entire part at all hours.
More if the tortuousness has gone downwards and is made strong and converted into stone and provoked necessity for care of it with iron, then it occurs that the pus above has ceased and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and it is incised that what superfluously nods from those metacarpals in the bone at subtle incisions, and is administered facilitated in that which is solicited and studied.
Chapter 23.
On the sermon of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints from their natural place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is distorted, and brings to the patient great pains and large lesions.
Therefore when accidents happen to some dislocation, then it occurs that it must be reduced as soon as possible, and do not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes apostematous and very strong with what is done, making difficult the reduction of dislocation.
And for this reason it does not occur that it is manipulated or stretched at the time of the apostema, because many vigorous movements bring about spasm and severe pains.
More when that happens, then it occurs that you should resort to the flaubotomia of the patient, and then it is laid down until the apostema subsides; and then the member is imbued with warm water and oil, and then it is reduced with facility.
And every member is cared for in water of which the reminiscence will come into its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the upper part of the body down to the lower part.
Chapter 24.
On the care of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
So the two lower jawbones are dislocated if they do not close; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods: either they are restored to their places with little movement, and thus mollified a little; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and completion, until they are mollified at the joint part, so that saliva from the patient's mouth flows and cannot hold nor clear its own mouth, and the tongue is enveloped in its speech.
More when the dislocation of it is slight, then in major arrangements it returns to itself for a slight cause.
More if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it occurs that reduction of it should be administered immediately, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert his hand under the one jaw in the direction of the dislocation of the mandible from the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both jaws simultaneously, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands are before them to guide; and he commands the patient to relax their jaws and release them from any tension; and the doctor guides the jaw and pushes it in until it returns to its proper place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm oil and olive oil, until the ease of reducing both is facilitated and the reduction of both does not take long, thus we have said.
And then when they are returned and set in place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, then pause on those pillows of cloth with cerote, and make a mixture of wax and olive oil; and it will be easy to facilitate the limbs' movements.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head standing between two pillows, so that they do not bend to the right or left; and do not force them to hold any position; having eaten a light meal, forbid them from eating anything heavy, until when the pains are alleviated and the jaws are relaxed, then they can eat what they want.
And this is administered to facilitate, and do not trouble them about the perception of the mouth unless there is eating and drinking and excitement, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and not converted to their proper places, then apply warm medications and assiduous soda, and strongly bind the patient's belly, and strongly bind and induce pure coleric vomiting.
And when you see this, then you know that it is pernicious; and apply warm medications for the one to whom this happens in ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The ankle is not dislocated from its joint because of its continuity with the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated to the front part, and that is declared by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And then bind the area with your palm in strong binding, so that it will return to its place.
And then pause on that plaster and pillows and strengthen it.
The extremity of the one who has seized the thigh and its continuation to it, is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and set in place according to what we have said and according to what appears to you.
And then pause on that plaster, and pillows, and traction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its proper place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated to the upper part towards the lower part.
And the second is that it is dislocated to the upper part of the muscle, and that is done with difficulty; and it is not dislocated to the back parts because of the shoulder; and it is not dislocatable to the front parts because of the nerves.
And especially it is dislocated and beforehand exits to the lower parts because of the tendon, and especially in those whose flesh is little, it is easily dislocated; but in those with much flesh, it is exited with difficulty.
And strongly it happens to some men by percussion or blow, and the muscle of it is affected by a hot aposteme, and it is seized for that which has already been dislocated.
Then it is necessary that you spread this out until you are above-certified about it, and then you will proceed with its treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation of it is at the lower parts because of the tendon; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound muscle, since you find differences manifest among them; and you find in the head of the concave muscle and below the tendon from the top of the muscle thus as one whole, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to the proper joint, nor can they move it at all.
If it is dislocated from the foot or above, then you will find a manifest sign, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises his hand to the affected parts above; and then pauses the tender touches beneath the tiny licentiousness of it, and raises the joint with strength in its own place, and the minister raises his hand, and extends it there; and then pauses it beneath so that it returns lightly.
Perhaps because of what we have said does not return, and so from the beginning that an accident occurs, many days, then it happens that the patient is bathed in warm water and is administered a gentle brocade that mollifies and lines up thus if it is coytz razitz of alta, and fenugrec, and melillot in water, and is administered.
And then the patient is placed on their back and paused beneath the tiny licentiousness of it, waiting for the moment when it is balanced between levity and strictness, and then the doctor pauses his hand above the spine, and raises the head of the muscle with a vertebra, and touches the hand of the patient so that it is not injured in the affected parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not injured in the affected parts below, because then it returns to its own place.
And if you want, reduce it according to this method: and it is that you make yourself present in a home where the patient is longer than usual, and stay on the side of that bed, and insert your hand beneath the tiny licentiousness of the patient and raise the tiny licentiousness of it to the affected parts above so that the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the affected parts below the back. Perhaps the patient is lighter, then it happens that I have another cause that is suspended, so that gravity overcomes it, because the dislocation returns soon.
And it is reduced in this way according to another method: and it is that it is fixed on the ground a long pole with a rounded figure, thus like a mortar, that is not large nor subtle, and then paused beneath the patient; because being paused above the head of the pole drags lines, and the patient is stretched according to the length of the pole, and then extended his hand to the affected parts below the other part; and its body is extended from the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its own place with velocity.
And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole of the quantity of which is in the length of two arms, and its width is of four fingers, and its thickness is alleviated on the surface of the tiny licentiousness according to this form.
And then above the rounded head, threads are dragged lines so that the pole does not touch the patient.
And then paused beneath the tiny licentiousness of the patient, and extended his hand or arm above the pole to the affected parts below, and tied the pole to the adjuster and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then paused the arm on a scale of steps according to the width, and the hand is extended to the affected parts below, and the other body is suspended from the other part, because the joint enters soon.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to whatever method that is possible for you, and then it happens that you pause beneath the tiny licentiousness of the spine in a quantity of equal balance; and then pause an emplaster prepared with powder of molybdenum and album of huou over all the muscle, thus as it is revolved above, and then strengthen beneath the tiny licentiousness with decent strictness; and the ligament is revolved over the emplaster, and the hand of it is annexed to the neck of it, and it is relaxed, and it should not be injured for seven days.
And it happens that the food of the patient is paused for a little while, until the member is comforted, because it is lighter at the healing of it.
And then the food is given more abundantly, and exercised with a movement; and so if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
Perhaps the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that affects it or for another cause, then it happens that in that case a cautery is administered with three tractions, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and seven days are delayed, the ligament and the joint are not strengthened, and the emplaster and strictness are reduced over it many times, and it is not strengthened and cannot be elevated to the affected parts above, then you will know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already inscribed or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint will never be fixed in its own place.
From the dislocation of that which is done from the foot and the little finger or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns.
And it should be administered in that other structure, and care for it from within so that it may be healed.
And if you hasten the healing of the affected limb and slow down its movement, then the patient uses many weakened motions within so that the gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and mostly in the part in front of the part behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you, because you feel the weight or touch according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip in its place, this is declared manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch that same muscle.
And you see that the hips, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to the apostema's caution, because if you come to the cautious apostema, difficult is the reduction of it, and hardly is it entirely healthy; and mostly when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many weakened motions are shown in that leading to death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the hand of it should be extended in two directions, and its arm should be expanded, and the muscles of the thigh are above the hip and below it, and the bandage wraps the joint with the toes of its own hands together, or at the base of its palm within so that it returns to its place.
Moreover, if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns also by bending the hand with its own hand, until it strikes the hip at the base of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong movement.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same thing with two ministers so that it is not removed from there by the extension.
And then revolve the arm from all parts, because it is enveloped by a double bandage wrapped long over its hand, or ligament.
And when the thigh touches the joint with its hand, until it finds some oil for so that it may be those causes which help in lubricating the joint to facilitate; and then wrap the joint with a strong bandage within so that it returns.
And then the reduction of it is that it should be placed on that plaster in which it is stitched and excised with an album of egg whites, and it should be extracted in a descending structure, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for some days.
And then it is disjoined; and thus if the joint is formed in its own place, then you disjoin the ligament of it and leave that.
And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you iterate the plaster and ligament, and leave that for some days until it is extracted; and then disjoin it.
Moreover, if you hasten the gravity towards the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidity in many ways and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or pause on the alleviated joint, so it is a motive for gentle motion; and then it is bound, and leave that on the bone day and night. And then remove that, and put it in many ways; and when it sweats, then you scrub the joint with tempered friction, and then iterate over that alleviated, so it is rotational of motion, one time, and the second, and the third. in an instrument of many ways, until it is finished.
And if you want, pause on that moist and scaled wound with bandage and strengthen over that; and do some weakened motions, because it is moist and reduces its disposition.
Chapter 28.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder of the hand sometimes is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is lighter, and on the contrary it is of the other joints, moreover I believe that it should be velocity in the reduction of it at the hour in which it is dislocated, because the place should be apostematized or accidie in its cautious postema.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends the hand of it, and the thigh places its hand or its palm over the vicinity of the joint, and wraps it until it returns to its own place.
Moreover, I believe that it should be considered if the palm is already rested on the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of its hand on a table with extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding from the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand of that one be inwardly on the table, so that the hand of the thigh falls over that vicinity of the joint.
And then it returns quickly, good is; and if not, then the aposteme is strengthened by that empaste, and it does not irritate, because if not, it does not swell nor does it put pressure on the reduction of the pus that passes to the days.
Perhaps the Roman Emperor's joint is bent according to its twisting; and do not notice any cause in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are numb or weakened, and then it is not generated in the unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the treatment of the case and strongly conferes any cause.
So when the evil humors are returned, then stop over the empaste which we have recommended, and it is relaxed and strengthened for five days; and then it is dislodged and relaxed, and the patient's hand is exercised.
Perhaps if the movement of it is stagnant and falls into some gravity, then apply that water treatment and friction with some gentle strokes, until it is alleviated.
Chapter 29.
On the cure of dislocation of the toes.
Some gentle strokes can dislocate the toes completely.
And when a toe is dislocated from those on the palm or belly of the hand, then stretch the toe and push back the dislocation with the fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in that seventh day.
And when it is night, lay it according to that narration, and do not cease to dislodge it during the day and exercise it with movement, and lay it at night; and do so for several days until it is straight.
And do similarly to this, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and lay it in that part and do so on the first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated at other parts.
Chapter 30.
On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When there is a complete dislocation of one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and so many vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death accompanies the patient.
And it is sign of that the evacuation of the patient is outside their will, and cannot retain it; and many gentle strokes can soften some members of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many gentle strokes are removed and many gentle strokes make the removal of that in four parts.
So that has already been removed to the back parts and is called paralysis.
Perhaps the cure of it is that then you consider if the paralysis occurs from weakness, because then in that case there is no cure nor complete healing.
Perhaps in that which you see through treatment or percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients described the methods of cure with prolix speech, from which the most returns to profit; perhaps you already have and abbreviated from that which I had little excuse for the trouble of it, by my own proximity to the intention of my own exposition, in which I have expounded and formed diverse instruments of that which I will show you and explain.
And of those there is no cure except for that which occurs on the back properly with what you have recommended.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face over a pillow or proper support, and be extended below with a soft mattress so that the foot of the patient is not lifted.
And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the extremity of the pillow around the head of the patient, and another stick in the air with the feet of the patient on the other extremity of the pillow.
And the minister holds the stick, and it is not fixed in a hole; and another minister holds the other according to that form.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and below the small linen bandages firmly; and extend the extremity of the linen to the stick which is at the head of the patient, and lay it on him; and then strengthen the other bandage over the ankles of the patient with the denials of the patient, and with the legs of the patient; and then adjust all the bandages and lay them on the other stick which is at the feet of the patient.
And then the minister carefully extends the bandage to the part of the stick, and they are not removed from the two sticks and the bandages from their places in which they are fixed, perhaps however it is not fastened thus as we have said.
The doctor places his palms on the patient's spine for reinforcement until it returns to its place, or he places them on that one table, and then adjusts the six feet on the table so they return to their place.
Perhaps it does not return in this way, then take a table on which the width or length is about three handbreadths, and carve into the side of which we have said is proper for the patient a place where the extremity of the table enters. And then place the flat surface of the table on the spine, and the doctor places the six feet on the other extremity, and stretches it until the spine is straightened and returns to its proper place.
And if you want, lift what has been turned around with your hand; and it is that you fix on the ground with the head of the patient at the back of two wooden feet, the length of which is one arm, and from the head to the back of the other two wooden feet; and let the length between each foot be a palm, and already it has been made in each foot a hole in which the iron turns, and each one should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be a round wooden foot in which it turns, and let it be turned around the two holes of the two wooden feet.
And on the extremity of it there is a hole in which the wooden foot is formed, the length of which is one palm where it turns around; and in the other two wooden feet it is similar to that.
And then stretch the ligaments that have been extended on the chest of the patient to the hole which is at the head of it, and the ligaments that have been extended on its thighs to the turning part which is at its feet.
And then it is necessary to have someone turning the turning part and a servant holding the turning part with their hand, and the doctor straightens the spine according to what we have said.
And then since the spine has returned, and the place is held, then take care that you apply a plaster cast made of albumen of egg white, and then stop; and then place on the cast a table of which the width is three fingers or around that, and the length of it is as much as takes up the space of the gibosity, and on the part of the spine above.
And then let it be tied with the ligament that we have said, and use the patient's subtle nutritional substances until they are healthy.
And if some impediment remains in the place at the end of the healing, then take care that medicines are administered which soften and loosen through administration on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it has been administered in that place a lamina of lead.
And some vertebrae may have fallen behind in the back of the spine, and it is adjusted for that dislocation; and it is that bone which has already been mentioned so that no one makes a false promise to him about this medicine, because it will make you fall into mortal danger.
Chapter 21.
On the cure of a dislocated ankle.
You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not end up in dislocation only by themselves, and they don't fall into those which fall into other joints with small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the front parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of dislocation of it to the inner parts is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the patient, it is then longer and the denuded part is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee towards the shin, and it is the place where the shin is separated from the calf by a distance of an apostema of about two fingers, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived there.
And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the outer parts is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the front parts is that it expands the leg in a complementary way, but meanwhile it does not bend that knee which has pain in the denuded part, and if you force it to walk and it cannot support itself on the front parts; and its urine is retained and its shin is separated, and its ambulation is supported on the ankle.
And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the back parts is that it does not expand the denuded part, nor can it bend the knee that bends the shin, and its leg is shorter than the other, and its shin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at that place.
Moreover, the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been treated with that which you have administered reduction to it according to its disposition, then it is not in that complete cure; and therefore it does not happen that there is false promise made about it.
In cases where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocations, then you should reduce it to its proper place, extending it to the internal and external parts, and moving it to the right and left sides, because force returns it and does not allow for another cure.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong minister and extend the leg from the affected part below, or take his hands, or take the ligament that is laid on the leg below the knee; and another minister extends the hand from above downwards so that he holds the affected parts with his fingers; and you should strongly hold the ligament over the knee joint, and have another minister hold the extremity of the ligament.
And it is an extension of it or from the internal part to the angle at the elbow, or from the back part to the part of the spine.
And it is an extension of all those in a single direction into which the patient is elevated with his back close to the ground and remains suspended.
And this type of extension is a common species to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that I will speak of in terms of proper cure.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the internal parts, you should resupinate the patient on his back with his shoulders raised; and then pause the ligaments over the knee joint at the place where the head of the thigh and the angle of the elbow meet; and then extend the ligament from above to the part of the elbow to the further part of the spine.
And then another strong minister takes hold of his arms, and grasps the large area of the patient's thigh and extends to the external parts for vigorous extension, because that returns it to its proper place.
And this species is of easier cure in which this member is reduced than the other species.
But if it is exhausted above you and does not obey the entrance in this species of cure altogether, then you should have the two feet of the patient tied together with a strong ligament, lightly, over both ankles and both knees.
And it is the length of each one by the quantity of four fingers, and the patient's leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient is suspended over the top of the beam, and it is in the balance; and the length of it from the ground is a quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong youth to move the head of the thigh, and it is suspended with the patient another youth, and the other youth moves the thigh in strong empirical force, because the joint returns to its proper place with velocity.
But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the external part, you should let the patient sit on a stool according to what we have recommended in the previous gatherings; and then strengthen the ligament over the affected leg properly and over its feet.
And then two beams are placed, one at the foot of it, and the other at the head; and then two adjusted beams are fixed to the middle of the pole set over which the humid drapings are enveloped, so that the patient is not damaged by the beam being between his thighs, so that the extension to the lower parts is not hindered.
And then each minister extends to his part, and the doctor places his hand in his hand guiding the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the internal parts, then you should let the leg be extended lightly, and it is according to this narrative about the pole; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patient's elbow, and then he cuts with the other hand, and in that cutting he pauses the extension to the lower parts at the part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then you should not let the patient's leg be extended to the lower parts, and it is elevated above the ground; having been placed on a hard cause, thus as you have seen the anchoring if his ankle is dislocated to the external parts, according to what we have said of the anchoring of it on two anchors; and it is on its face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no difficulty.
And you should administer compression with a table on the place where the joint is.
Therefore, as the reduction is completed according to what you should  and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see those joints and the patient stretches his own leg and expands with that excuse, then you know that the member according to what you should is returned  and then you adjust both thighs and place them in a bandage and stretch them thus that the ankle is not hidden in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
Then remove the ligament and the poultice, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see that the veins are in their proper position, then you know that the dislocation has been repaired, and so you will leave the patient to recover.
And if you see some cause of softening, then return and apply a plaster to that, and extract it according to your primary structure, and leave it for three days.
Then remove that, and make him walk slowly around the room for several days, until he is comforted.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated to the front parts, and to the inner parts, and to the lower parts more than to the back parts; and to the upper parts it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you order the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient stand upright, and if possible extend their leg, if they can do it; attach the two toes to the face of it, and place their foot between the two toes of yours; and then make them attach their ankle with both palms, and hold those between your fingers on top of their ankle with strength, and another servant extends their foot until the ankle returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction of it is that their leg adheres to the thigh without effort.
Then apply a plaster to that and make them attach the leg to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then remove it.
And do not allow the patient to walk around for several days, until they are healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it is successful, then you will administer a strong extension to the ligaments which are involved in the treatment of the preceding ankle injury.
Chapter 33.
On the treatment of dislocation of the anklebone.
Some anklebones are returned by small movement, and some are dislocated according to completion, and the dislocation of it is made either to the inner parts or to the front parts.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that sometimes the anklebone swells preceding the part to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment of its movement is by gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with facilitation of the muscles and should be bandaged until it returns.
But in the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to completion, it is necessary that you make the patient stand upright, and hold that with a strong and valiant servant from the back part of their foot in its proper place.
And then you will have your right hand straightening the foot from the upper part, and your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the place of the anklebone.
And then pull the foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two movements, and then extend it with your left hand; and you will feel the bottom of the foot with your right hand towards the leg, which is in three movements.
And make that two movements according to what we have counted.
And then you will feel the bottom of the foot at the leg on the third movement, and you are at the anklebone.
Then if it returns in one movement or in two according to this method, and if sometimes the foot is bandaged, it is good; and if not, then you will repeat the operation, because it returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it in what we have recommended, then make the patient sit on their back on the ground, and stretch a pillow strongly under them, and enclose it between their thighs, and you will have enveloped it with a cloth so that the patient does not move.
And then the servant of it holds its thighs, and another servant extends the foot with their hands or with the ligament that lies on the ankle; and then extend that certain servant against the extension of the back, and the pillow is extended between the thighs of the patient holding it, so that the body of it is not pulled to the lower parts because of its extension.
And then the doctor bandages the dislocation with their hands, and another servant holds the healthy thigh at the lower parts, because the dislocation returns to its ease.
And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause the plaster and extract it strongly from the ligaments, and bind the foot to the leg.
And beware that you do not injure or hurt the nerves which are behind the anklebone, lest the ligament on it be vehement and hold it strongly.
And then leave it for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, extract it.
And you should release that in the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from making movements for forty days. Perhaps it is forced to go into that space, it is not safe that the dislocation is not above it dissolved and corrupted, and then do not receive treatment.
And if you reach the acute aposteme, then take care that you administer in the sedation of the water in which our narration proceeds, in another place of treatment and of embrocation, until it is reduced.
Chapter 34.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
It is necessary that the one who is dislocated be restrained with little external extension of their limb; and it is not difficult, since it is easier.
Perhaps the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient sit with their foot on the ground or on a table, and stand thus as if they were going.
And you stand on feet, and place your foot on what is imagined of the joints, and then calcify that in your foot in virtue until it returns, and see that it is already restrained and does not appear in the eminent place.
And then place underneath the belly of the foot on a table that takes the whole foot, which has two cups, and then strengthen that in structure decently and firmly for three days; and then release that and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and the return is assured.
Chapter 35.
On the species of dislocation that are caused by a plague or a fracture or some other evil circumstance.
When you reach some cause of those, and you persevere in the treatment of that and in the restoration of it, many successful cures follow, succeeding death.
And for that it is not necessary to presume on the treatment of the presumed, but rather one who is wise in the art, with long usage, merciful and piteous, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses in the beginning of medicines that calm apostemes so solely, and releases the patient to divine judgment, but rather to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope. And then it is necessary to hasten so much the reduction in the beginning of the cause, since it will prevent the acute aposteme.
And then if the limb returns according to what we want, then administer a regimen that calms the acute aposteme and cures the plague with what is convenient for it of the swollen and desiccated joints.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and reaches the separated bones, then you perform the statement of theirs, and do in that what we have said in the simple maladies of that which is preceded in their places.
And beware and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to what has been preceded in my prediction; for it is better for you to give thanks to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your cosmos as it verily appears in your time. Thus end the paragraphs of Albucasim perfectly, on which God may be blessed. Amen.
