Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of its consequences, and for the explanations of it, and for the declarations of it, it seems to me that you complete it to you at this treatise, which is a part of my operation, so it is surgery.
Because the operation in our region and in our time is totally private, until the fierce persecution of its science, and its followers were ostracized; and there remained no remnants of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the most and endeavour to avoid that error and hesitation until the intentions of it are clarified and its force is elongated and the art.
And it seems to me that you will vivify this order of this treatise in this second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of the ferramentz of cautery and of the other instruments of the work are added for the declaration, and for its preparation, which cause is necessary.
The reason why no artificial hand is found in this our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that it covers the whole actor within, which exercises in the science of anatomy, which Galen understood until he knew the juvament of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and the knowledge of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and their function; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their emanation.
And for that Hippocrates said that a name is a motion, mostly in small works, and more in the art of medicine.
We have already said that in the introduction of this book; because whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not evacuated from error, for which many men die, thus you have seen many of them, because they are formed in this science and get away from it and its experiments.
Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has incurred an apostema scrophilous in the womb of a woman, and has incised certain arteries of the womb so that great blood flowed until the woman almost died among his hands.
And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man's bladder which had progressed to his state, and the stone was large, and came to him and extracted that stone in a vessel, so that the man on the third day died.
And you have already called him a destroyer, and I saw that because of the greatness of the stone and because of the disposition of the patient's body, he knew that he would die under his hands.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and gave to a craftsman a black crust which was to be broken in the thigh of the patient; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he broke the fracture on the wound, with poultices and astelas in a strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And he followed the desires of his followers, and he followed the relics, and he followed the prescriptions for some days and commanded that they not disband the liament; and it was thus until the thigh and the foot were apostematous, and he brought about perdition.
And you have already called him a destroyer, and he appears to disband the liament, and consequently he achieved tranquility and also ameliorated his pains.
But the corruption was confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained, and did not cease to walk with the corruption in the member until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous apostem, and it was ulcerated for several days, until the malignity of it was magnificent in the lord of it.
The reason is that the cancerous tumor is pure melancholic humor, then it does not cover that it perverts everything, but rather it is a member that suffers from all that has been hostile.
And for that, sons, it is necessary for you to divide the operation in two devotions: one is an operation associated with health, and another work in which there are major dispositions of danger.
And you have already existed everywhere in this book where you found operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the fools do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And then take up your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your maladies are alleviated and strengthened.
And you will walk on the best way for the grace of God to obtain salvation and laudable success, and you will leave the terrible maladies of difficult sanitation, and you will put away your arms from that which makes you fearful, so that you may have faith in your heart and in your name you may not be evasive: because many remain in your glory, and also in the world and afterwards in your sanctities.
Sometimes I diagnose in certain evil hours: "There is no bad medicine for a bad disease, because bad doctors are not named."
"And I have divided this book into three chapters."
"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part." "The first chapter deals with the head and feet, in the forms of instruments and in the furnishings of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation."
"The division of the second part." "The second chapter, on incision and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of poultices, and of extraction of arrowheads and of similar things, all capitulated and ordered according to the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and of curvature of the spine and of similar things; chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments."
"I will discuss the quality of the juices of that cautery and of its instruments, and in what complex cases it is prohibited to use cautery."
"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juice of cautery and its instrument is long and prolix, subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken greatly about it, and they are discordant among themselves, and to me it suffices a small part of their sermons, fearing prolongation."
"Therefore I say that cautery universally conforms to all complex cases, which is the material or its materials, except for two complex cases, which are complex cases of cold materials."
"In the complex case of cold and dry materials, they disagree; for some said that cautery is helpful for that, and others said the opposite of that, that cautery is not convenient in a disease which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that the cold and dry disease is healed by cautery."
"And they say that one who says the opposite of that, that by cautery it is made a remedy in all cold and dry diseases that are found in men's bodies, because when you compare men's bodies with the humidity of them to the complex case of fire, you find men's bodies cold."
"And I say by the sermon of that one, that I have experimented and already discovered something at some times."
"Moreover, I do not know who will come to agree with that which has been experimented and exercised in the chapter of cautery by last exercise, and to recognize the diversity of complex cases of men and the disposition of diseases in their seats, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those."
"Moreover, in the other complex cases, it is not about your fear, and mainly in cold and humid diseases, because all doctors have agreed on those, and do not disagree about the remedy with cautery in those."
"And know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery is fire and its goodness, so about cautery as medicine comburent, it is because fire is simple, the action of which does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not touch another member unless it is adjusted with a small benefit."
"Moreover, the action of medicine comburent penetrates to that one in the members which are near it, and strengthens its coming into the diseased member of difficult healing and strengthens its listening."
"Moreover, fire, by its sublime nature and good substance, does not do anything except that it superfluous; And it is already known to us through experiment and long service of study in the art about the truth of causes; and for this I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not that it is not read in my book at this time, you would secretly possess the fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion through which it expels diseases, a philosophical demonstration, which would be acquiesced in your own pages."
"And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to apply cautery and pause at the best time of spring."
"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the remedy of that which has been cauterized, and mainly if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and firm, which do not suffer delay so that it is feared by those who come with malice, which is greater than small harm entering at that time."
"And it is not found in your pages, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that at that disease which is healed by cautery, there is no return to all time, and they pause at that consequence."
And the cause is not so much in the quickness of the pulse, because cautery is only in a place of medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the humors which are the cause of the pains.
Perhaps emperor's cautery is excessive in medicine, wanting to show off the value and virtue of its operation and greatness of his noble lord.
And it is possible that his illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of his illness, and its virtue, and what has been prepared in his body from the accumulation of excessive humors, and what has been obtained by him through the acquisition of vices and similarities to those causes; but that the illness for which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in some parts with few excessive humors and moisture, thus like cautery of tooth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that he does not return to that pain, rather it is done in small steps.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, for they believe that it is not a cure that profits in medicine nor another cause that profits from cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is not but when they administer the many ways of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause they administer homem cautery, and it profits from that. And henceforth I will not say that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention which common people and foolish doctors understand.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a crack, as it is not absolutely virtuous, for you already know that it proceeds and you have experienced that it does not do this except in certain bodies which are among others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but when you make cautery with focused fire of gold, it is not declared to you, for it is done according to the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and prepares to receive freshness; and if you adjust it over the ignited gold, it makes a focal point in the fire, and sometimes in the fire certain layers are formed so that the artisan can occupy himself with that.
And therefore it is done to make cautery with iron, we should not push lightly and not push deeply into the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that one can easily find what they want from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers on the moisture and coldness above the accidental service of which there are two causes, so it is a cause of swelling and multitude of flux rheumatic, called corrosion, from the head to the parts of the veins and auricles fluent, and multitude of drowsiness, and of tooth pain and of gout, and universally of all illness that comes from coldness, thus like paralysis, swelling and apoplexy, and similarly in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to evacuate in medicine with a laxative cap, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and his age and custom.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then seat himself between his thighs on a wooden bench and place his hands over his own feet.
And then place the razor in the palm of your hand, placing the fingers on the razor between the nostrils. Perhaps, as the tissue of my middle place is obtained, it signs that place with a probe, and then lights the olive oil cautery of which this is the form.
And then place that on the sensitive spot with a probe, in a way that it descends, in which the tissue of the hand is constricted little by little, and you turn it around.
And then lift your hand lightly and regard the spot, and if you see already some quantity of head coming out, thus like the quantity of grain of errors, then lift your hand, and if it doesn't return to your hand in that iron, or another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen by the eye what I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot and leave it there for three days.
And then place it on the covered area in bandage and leave it on until the crust of the focus is destroyed. And then cure the spot with four-drug ointment until it is healed.
And thus they said that when the Roman plague was uplifted, so much better gets the crack, because it is better and more jovial.
They should remove certain parts of the cord that have been cauterized within the bone, and hold the cautery within so that it does not adhere to any part of the bone's structure.
Then return to adjusting the water that is joined to the bone, and then take care of it.
They should also push the cautery downwards, so that it penetrates into the bone strongly, until the bone breaks, and this is the method of breaking small bones. They estimate from that place where the vapors of the head escape.
And hold the open wound for a long time, and then take care of it until it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two special kinds of cauteries, except in certain homes according to the way of fear; and thus, you see, I, better am in health, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity with the aforementioned, as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the first kind of cautery is more saving and better for me; and from that house and I do that work in health.
Following chapter.
On the cautery of the head.
When the entire head is afflicted with chronic and long pain, and it is in prolonged illness, and uses remedies of gerbras and cochias and capipurges and emplaustres and guatz and cadels and gualinas and semblantz, and especially if it has been cauterized by a cautery that recounts and does not alleviate any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not fragile and atrophied with great frequency, then that cauterying is another cautery below that one. And then cauteries that one on the horn of the dry head with a cautery until the cord is divided. Cut the cord and discover in the bone the quantity that we have recounted and cautery that one with a cautery in the posterior part of the head at the place where it is called "vas" - and it is that place where the veins are situated. And lift your hand in that way, and do not discover the bone, because the patient will suffer great diverse pain from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And you will direct this cautery to its place, because it is known that the cautery is the one that cauteries the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one that is cauterized in the middle place of the head; and this is the method of it.
Chapter three.
On the cautery of non-ancient migrating [humors].
When pain is felt in the head, or it is stagnant pain until the vein, let it be evacuated with mondifying medicines of the head, and let another cure be administered, which you have described in the descriptions of illnesses; and if nothing alleviates, then cauterying is done in two ways: either cauterying with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
A cauterying medicine that burns is one that you take a bundle of straw, and burn it and scatter the ashes at both ends of the two heads. And then incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it is in the very same place below the cord, until it is hidden.
And then strengthen it above the stop made for descent constricting, and let that be for three hours; and then remove it and pull out the straw, and let the wound be for two or three days, and then pause on the sewn-over place submerged in a bath until the place forms a crust.
And then cure that one by sewing it up until it is healed.
And if you want, make some burning medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
A cauterying with iron is done according to this method: ignite for cauterying, of which this is the form.
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus in the form of a key in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small prominence.
And then pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand - so that the artery which is below is not adhered to - and turn the small iron quickly little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it that is adhered to the structure of the cord is thus as much as its size, and hold your hand so that the artery which is below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then soak the sewn-over place in salt water and pause it on the place, and let it be for three days; and then pause the sewn-over place in a bath, and then cure it by sewing it up until it is healed.
And if you want, cautery the extremity of the cutting instrument according to cautery, and beware of incision of the artery in this non-ancient migrating [humor] properly.
Fourth chapter.
About ancient emigration cautery.
When you treat emigration, that which we have said about the previous cure, and that which we have said in the divisions of the illnesses, and do not hasten the cure, and sometimes because of the illness that does not abound with what we have said about the primary cautery in medicine or fire cautery, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery cutellar until it is whitened, since it signifies above the line of longitude of the place where the pain is, or perhaps that; and pause your hand for a while and strengthen it before you incise the artery and pervade into the bone.
It is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which is worn down by chewing, and that the ligament is not injured and the nerves are not damaged, so that there is no spasm.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is blocked, because in the blockage of it there is fear, and moreover to whom it is unknown what it does and is not studied and experienced; and thus the operation begins on it at the commencement.
And you will find the reminder of the rule for the flow of blood affected by the accident of the artery, according to the usual manner, in this free place.
And if you see that this illness does not abound with this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cautery it in the middle place of the head thus as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter of straightening of the artery with cautery having two ends, and it is a better cautery than this one and more convenient.
Chapter 5.
About the cautery of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain from cold and it is treated with causes of laxatives and another cure which has been said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one which has been named puncture, of which this is the form.
And return the puncture to the ignition, and it should be led around the entire ear thus as a wheel is revolving, or in the circle of some things if the pain is somewhere. Besides this, I have the cautery of the root of the ear little by little, because you should feel the place where you are touching.
And if you cautery many points on the entire ear, and perhaps that, and then cure the places until they are healed.
Chapter 6.
About the cautery of gout.
Gout which is treated and cured with cautery is not only of the species that come through flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of the illnesses.
It is necessary to cautery the species that comes from dryness or from spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that species of gout with roots and roughness and bitterness, and it does not conform to your cure, then it is necessary that you cautery the patient with three cauteries: the first is at the root of the ear, and the second is a little below the temple, and the third is at the junction of two lips.
And pause your cautery for the opposite part of the affected limb, because mollification is not seen except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cautery is that you cautery it with the cautery on the right of the extremity of the ear, then slightly above the horn of the head, and in another temple, the longitude of which is according to the length of the pain, and pause your hand at the cautery until the quantity of the magnitude of the species of the codena is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of cutting, the form of which is shown in the table. Moreover, it is necessary that you subtly understand that one thing thus as you see; and it is necessary to cut into the excessive fat a little.
And then cure the place where it is shown in process until it is healed.
Chapter 7.
About the cautery of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said and it does not conform to your medication and the patient has no fever, then cautery it with four cauteries: on all the horns of the head; and with a cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the nape. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it is cautered on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more hidden; and then it is cured with what proceeds.
Chapter 8.
About the cautery of oblivion caused by flux.
It seems that the patient's body is being opened at the beginning of the treatment, and great pains and pills are being administered to serve as a remedy.
And then you will remove the entire head of the patient and place it on the wooden board described in the treatise on surgical implants.
And stop those bleeding veins, because that is a bad way to cauterize. And do it according to the method and order which I have already said.
And so if the patient is not well; and if not, then make three cauteries on the back part of the head, which will descend from the upper part of the head into the back part below the neck. And stop between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then take care to make the cauteries in such a way that it is proceeded with.
But if you find the patient is more tolerant, then make the cautery in a mild place; and if you find greater tolerance, then cauterize above the two horns.
Then take care that it enters so that it heals; and let the olive oil cauteries be according to the form previously given.
Chapter 9.
On Cauterization of Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body.
Because you are proceeding in mondification of the head with pains and as we have said; and then remove the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with cauteries on the mild place of the head, and with cauteries above all the horns of the head, and with cauteries on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of softening of the body due to many diseases and the patients are tolerant, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and gradually make the cautery so that it is combined with the codeina motion of it, and elevate the good hand. And then take care that it enters so that it heals, and let this cautery be olive oil.
Chapter 10.
On Cauterization of Epilepsy.
It is not the epileptic who is being cauterized, but rather that epilepsy is due to flux.
And so it is necessary to mondify the brain of the patient at the beginning of the year and the other cure which we have dictated in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of the medicines.
And if it is an infant who does not suffer from the medicines, then administer gentle remedies and mastigatory servings of mondification, beforehand for a few days, with good purification of the food.
And then remove the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the mild place of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery on the occiput of it, and above each horn of the head, it is cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said, having paralyzed and softened the body above the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the olive oil cautery be according to what has been previously stated.
But if the patient is an infant, then stop and make a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter 11.
On Cauterization of Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and gross flux, then cauterize it with the cauteries which I have said in the paralyzed state.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous and declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give to drink that which mondifies the brain of it according to what has been previously stated in the division.
And then remove the head of the patient, and then make a gentle tortoise-shaped decency around the circle, and then stop that in the mild place of the head.
And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let it be held firmly on all parts.
And then stop the liniment; and it is better to use an old antidote of eggs. And warm that over the fire for temperate heat by measure, which it is said to suffer when it is mixed in it. And then put that in the mild place of the head of it in the circle, and let it enter so that it is refreshed.
And do that to the patient for an entire week, another regimen of good boiling water so that it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points according to the size of it, but you should have a hand with a cautery thus ordered: this is a special kind of cautery which humidifies the brain in equality.
And then stop that cooked mixture in an old bowl or in gray stones of Gualina.
Chapter 12.
On Cauterization of Water Descending into the Vein.
When you have declared the commencement of water in the vein through the senses which you had diagnosed in the division, then begin and give to the patient who Mondifique heads the capital of it, and guard that from all humidity.
And make that ointment in a bath for ten days through various joints.
And command it to raz the dry head, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the commencement of water in two veins, or one side if it is the commencement of water in one vein.
You should cauterize all the veins and arteries which you had diagnosed as being in the codeina; and place the cauteries in that long line in the latitude of the temples.
And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, remove that with some medicine, which is as much as possible for you.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and abstraction of those and caution of fluxes of blood.
And some veins are cauterized in the neck beneath two bones with two cauteries, producing derivative products.
Chapter 13.
On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
When the tears of the veins are old and assuaged through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head before, and it is verified that those are superfluous fluxes of phlegmatic humor, then cauterize that with a pointed cautery which we have recounted in the chapter on the commencement of water flowing from the veins, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on the temples, and with two cauteries beneath two bones. And if you notice signs of addition, then cauterize that on the entire side of the vein above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small pointed cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the Cauterization of Foul Odor of the Nose.
When you medicate that with water which we have said in the division and does not profit your medication, then prepare and give to the patient the cochias for three nights; and place your hand over their head, and cauterize it with a pointed cautery more mildly than an olive-tree cautery. And then cauterize that with a clave-shaped cautery on the two eyebrows beneath the hair, a small one.
And beware of the artery that you do not inflame there.
And this is the form of the clave-shaped cautery.
Chapter 15.
On the Cauterization of Softening of the Eyelids of the Veins.
When the eyelid of the vein is softened by malady or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery according to this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form.
And if you see fit, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a small one with two cauteries on each side, and also lengthen the temporal areas. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is affected.
Chapter 16.
On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Vein when the Fleshes are Converted to the Internal Parts and Punish the Vein.
When the fleshes of the vein are converted to the internal parts and punish the vein, cauterize in those according to two manners, because cauterization is either with iron or with burning medicine.
If you cauterize it with fire, command the patient to place that which they had read on their fleshes in such a way that those which are mundane are prolonged and grafted; and if you punish that vein for its evil nourishment, then strengthen the veins of it with a band so that it is not again nourished until the fleshes are born.
Since they are born and grafted, then pause the head of the patient in the same place, and place a sign above the eyelid of the veins of it with a tender touch, like the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and let it be the commencement of the signal proper to the fleshes.
And then pause and apply a cotton pad or a soft cloth over the vein, or a padding of ptilli above the vein.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form.
And then cauterize above the figure which has been marked, little by little, in well-divided motions, until the surface of the codeina is burned, which is as if it were a leaf of myrtle, totally apparent and proper.
And the signal of the healthy work is that you see the eyelid of the vein already contracted and the fleshes of it elevated from the puncture of the vein.
And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place a pause on the outer border to prevent the scab from forming. And then treat that with an ointment until it is healed.
Perhaps it returns to the skin for some reason, and then its relaxation and the eyelid is softened, then do another pass with the cautery over the entire area as you had done previously.
Perhaps the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural place and is equalized and the skin does not touch the wheel.
Perhaps the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift the skin until it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a chart of the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
And then take a handful of soap made from congealed goose fat and living water in an urn. I apologize for the mistake. Here is a revised translation: Or that water, and mix those causes well, and make that a fermentation for so that it is not frozen; and spread that over the chart which was made thus in the form of myrtle leaves, and place that on one wheel of both hands; and place below the wheel's outer border enclosed in a box of wood, and the patient's head is in the towel.
And place the finger on the medicine and press it a little and do not touch it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because the bite is in it thus as from fire.
And then as you perceive that the strong bite, then let go of the medicine and hold it with your finger; then as the bite ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the wheel with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid is lifted thus as it is washed from constriction by fire or incision, because then it is; and if not, return to that part of the medicine on the place where you did not impress the medicine and do not deny until your operation is equalized and the wheel is constricted.
And then place on the outer border to prevent the scab of the adjustment, and then treat that with an ointment or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, from your operation that you keep with vigilant diligence so that no residue of the medicine falls on the wheel, and if the eyelid is softened for some days and some cause of the skin touches the wheel, then repeat your medicine on the place where the eyelid is softened, and properly thus as it was done at the beginning, and place it in a wrap until it is healed.
And this is the shape of myrtle leaves.
And you know that the wheels of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and therefore according to that which was made your contraction.
And it will not be amazed at the way of rectifying to that which is studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
On the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with water that we have said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confuse your cure, then be careful to cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place their head on the towel, and hold the head of some minister between the towels but in such a way that it is neither weighed down nor agitated at the head.
And then place the outer border infused in a box of wood or in a mucilage of ptilly over the patient's eye.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which is conical, thus as it is a shape of cane or of wing of vulture, from one extremity to the point where the cautery was made.
And if you see, it should penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want it to come out thus as it was held.
Perhaps emperor, that which is concocted is better for the entire work.
And then take the fistula if it is opened, and draw out its sap and dry that. And if it is not opened, then open that and extract the pus from it.
And then place on the wheel the cautery which was well ignited, and hold it with your hand a little away from the cautery of the eye at the bridge of the nose, so that you do not err with your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the wheel and corrupt that.
And then if at the beginning of the wheel cautery you perceive it entering into the bone, well; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave that thus for three days, and then place on the outer border with a bordered edge and wrap it in an ointment exsiccated until it is healed.
Perhaps if they were passing eleven days and it is not healed, then place on the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the previous chapter.
And another method of cautery for the fistula is to first locate the area of the fistula and close it off with a subtle form; it consists of a quantity of one ounce of lead; and you must hold your hand firmly around it, so that the lead does not spread out beyond its bounds; and be careful that you do not place it on the patient's skin or near their flesh, lest the lead adhere to the skin or get stuck in the albumen or water, for the lead adheres to the area of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and the cure, well and good; but otherwise, it is necessary to administer treatment through the nose and reduce the fistula back to its proper place in the nose according to how it will be in its own location.
Chapter 18.
On the cauterization of the fracture of the toes.
Moist wounds accidentally create fissures on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your care, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this form that is described:
And it is the conquest of it (the fissure) according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Then pause and carefully cut into those fissures until the cautery reaches the root of the fissures.
And then take care to heal that wound thoroughly until it is healthy.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, an abscess forms and then breaks, and then it is ruptured, and then it is antiquated, and correct that it is a fistula, and then you treat it and do not deepen your cure, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery according to the quantity that has been received in the fistula, and then place that ignition in the channel of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron ignites at the root of it, and afterwards make one or two wounds; and then take care to heal that wound with what we have said about the cure until it is healthy.
And therefore if the wound is abscessed and healed, well and good; but otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and stop the corrupt bone according to how it will be in its own chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cauterization of teeth and mollification of gums.
When the gums are mollified by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines and do not confound, then pause the head of the patient in the same place, and ignite the cautery in the form that will be seen, in this way that you pause the gum over the tooth and insert it into the ignited cautery, holding your hand firmly until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth being penetrated.
And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to how you wish.
And then have the patient rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards stop it, because the decayed tooth is strengthened and the mollified gum is constricted and the corrupt humidity is dried up.
Chapter 21.
On the cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or if there is cold or worm in it, or does not respond to medical treatment, then the cautery is applied in two ways: either cautery with a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with a cow's horn is that you take a cow's horn and boil it in iron water, and then take the tip and wrap it around the extremity of the tentacle, and then merge it into the boiling horn, and pause it over the painful tooth firmly until it is cooled.
And then repeat it several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, submerge the needle or tip in the aforementioned horn, and pause it over the painful tooth, and pause over the ignited iron until the iron reaches the root of the conquest of the tooth.
Moreover, the emperor orders that cauterization with fire is that you attend to the quantity of iron or of fire, and it is in the core of some grossness and the acuity of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form that will be seen, and pause it over the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times because the pain will be relieved or on that day or on another day.
And it is necessary that by impression of that cautery the patient rinse his mouth with good broth and hold it for an hour and then spit it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And you should cauterize at the point where you see the extreme pain according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
On the Cauterization of Deformed Toes.
When toes are deformed by flux and cold humors and do not respond to digestion through medicines and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the shape that is this one, having two extromities burned so that you can pass the fumigation through the other extremity, and pause that ignition over that aposteme for a while, and another if it is indicted by that, until you reach the root of the aposteme.
And if the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and place it on for three days and pause over the swollen area until it is reduced what the fire has consumed.
And then heal that wounded area with tents and dressings until it is healthy.
Chapter 23.
On the Cauterization of Wounds of the Veins and Constriction of the Wings.
When humidity comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is with complete coldness, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that which is the root of the gullet in the previously mentioned place.
And be careful not to penetrate the cautery to the gullet nor burn the coding of it, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery which is at the junction of the colon in the rear spinal cord of it. And the cauteries of it should be tempered according to the preceding method.
And then heal that which is previously mentioned until it is healthy.
Chapter 24.
On the Cauterization of Lung Disease and Coughs.
When coughs and lung disease are from cold humidity and the patient has no fever nor tightness and it is an ancient disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the previously mentioned places of the loins and ribs; and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between two nipples; and temper the cauteries according to the preceding method.
And if you wish, let your cautery be pointed with the cauteries that are called points, in the form which precedes in the punctuation of auricular pain.
And make points until they reach those; and then heal that which is previously mentioned until it is healthy.
And there are three ramps because the cautery is in that: one can make three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter 25.
On the Cauterization of Tickling which is the Head of the Helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not remain in its place at the time of its return, until it is in its usual custom of returning, and then by a small movement it is displaced, as we have testified, then it is necessary to first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be reversed over their back or side; and then elevate the coding which is in the internal partition of the citillic to the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the internal partitions.
And then ignite the cauteries having two heads; and this is their shape.
And then cauterize the coding until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cautery at that time with four heads of cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
And then pause over the cautery, because it is salty, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the member should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is done in that way, then cauterize over the muscle with tempered cauteries or three pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healthy.
Chapter 26.
On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
When cold and humidity come into the stomach, until that extract from its completeness and so multiply the raumas to it, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confide, then it is necessary for the patient to be on their back lying down, and extend their hands and their thighs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger in tempered cautery, and two cauteries below the two sides of the cautery, until the figure of the triangular cautery is obtained; and elongate between those who are not adjusted so they will make purging.
And if the depth of the cautery is equivalent to the quantity of the two tertians of the greatness of the coding.
And the figure of the cautery is added in this form, and if you want, make a large cautery on the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized at the point to that which from this cautery is frightened: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want to hold, and then cauterize that with the cautery in the points; and then cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healthy.
Chapter 27.
On the cauterization of the fat foot.
When the foot is painful due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness until the normal complex composition is altered by excessive outflow, and it is cured with the medicine that we have said and not comforted, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and you feel with three cauteries according to this form and quantity measured over the foot below the hips, where one perceives the decubitus of the same.
And it is the space which is between each cautery according to the greatness of the finger, and it should be a cautery according to the length of the right body.
And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery motion.
And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equivalent to the quantity of the mattress of the specification of the coding, and it is not yet adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then they should be seated, who has already extended their thighs, and elevated their legs.
And it is possible that you can cauterize these cauteries with a cautery cutter, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not process too much in the cauterization, and it is absorbed the specification of the entire coding so that it is absorbed throughout the body and penetrates into the intestines, because the coding here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the perforation of an abscess of the foot with a cautery.
When there is an ulcer or abscess on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tendon, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will have grave trouble and acute pain.
And if it is in the tendon of the foot, then the pain is greatly acute and often that the doctors are weary of curing it.
Then it is necessary that the patient be turned onto their back; and then feel the place of the abscess with your hand; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a rag, in the shape of which I previously mentioned on the other page. And cauterize with that cautery until the entire coding is combined, until it penetrates to the ciphalic, until it reaches the healthy part.
And then cure that by curing the other abscesses until it is healthy.
And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the hands of which many maladies are known; more, this experimenter has sometimes been bold about this operation, but I have left it to you, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
The ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology ulcerate wounds according to this manner of being a maker, and it is this that you take from the roots of aristology a long dry root which is found, and it should be of the greatness of the finger.
And then submerge that in oil and expose it to fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at the place where it is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and make two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and make two cauteries on what is declining between the fifth rib and the cistern, declining slightly towards the back parts; and make another cautery in the middle place of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the back parts; and make one cautery at the place where it is between the two shoulders, and make two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And it is not necessary to comprehend your hand with the cautery, but rather in the manifestation of the coding in the work.
And thus I have described the ancient methods that are ancient among men who use iron-like cauteries resembling a ray and ignite them, and place them in the place where it is between the ribs, until they penetrate to that abscess and healthy flesh is forged, just as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
More in this perforation with pointed cautery is not customary, because one humor accumulates so much in the location of the fistula that it does not heal.
Chapter xxx.
On the cauterization of the mole.
When you treat the mole's disease as we have said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are direct, one of which is to make three or four linear cauterizations according to the length of the mole, according to the figure of the cauterizations of the veterinarian, whose figure has preceded.
And it is between each cauterization the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cauterization is the manner which we have said in the cauterization of the veterinarian's guild.
And do not grasp your hand on the cauterization; and the mole should be elevated above the two knees.
And there is another way of cauterizing, so it is that you should ignite the cauterization having two vertiments, which causes we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevates the codena which is at the end of the mole where it perceives the pain of the affected mole.
And it is your elevation which you elevate the codena according to the length of the body, so that there are made pointed cauterizations according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two vertiments, ignite motion, in that entry where they penetrate the codena of the other part.
And then extract the cauterization; and thus there are made four pointed cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cauterization having three vertiments.
And then you heal the cauterization because you have already laid aside the remedy to grasp for three days, since it is more comfortable than the other preceding causes in the healing.
Chapter xxxi.
On the cauterization of hydropsy.
Cauterize not in hydropsy itself, but rather in the adjacent areas properly.
When you treat hydropsy in the manners of healing which we have said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that those cauterizations are four cauterizations around the navel and one cauterization on the stomach, and one cauterization on the veterinarian's guild, and one cauterization on the mole, and two cauterizations between the vertebrae of the back, and one cauterization on the right foot, and one cauterization on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cauterization should be proportionate to the spiciness of the codena.
And then leave the cauterization open so that it grasps for a long time.
And do not evacuate the mole from healing then with the cauterization because it is necessary that it be added to the two intentions, and it will be fortified with the help of health.
The shape of the cauterization which is cauterized on the belly is club-shaped according to the shape of that which precedes, and it is that which is cauterized on the back which is olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Chapter xxxii.
On the cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are apostematized in hydropsy and are full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot at night, where it is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand on the cauterization and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it at all, because the stagnant water resolves.
It is the cauterization according to this form: And then make points on both thighs two cauterizations, and in each thigh there should be made a pointed cauterization at the extremity of the cutting cauterization. And it is the cauterization according to the length of the thigh: one at the knee and the other at the middle location of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauterizations.
And then leave the open plague for a long time of healing so that no stagnant water remains in it.
And then heal the hand because of those causes which we have said.
Chapter xxxiii.
On the cauterization of the belly and intestines.
When the belly and intestines are full of cold and humidity within which they debilitate the vertebrae, so it is the digestive and retentive vertebrae, which are in the stomach and in the bowels, and it is healed because of the manners of healing and do not confuse, and sometimes the mole suffers from cauterization of vertebrae exhibiting, then cauterize that with a great cauterization on the navel according to what precedes in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterization of the circle, and four cauterizations around the subtle navel, with a club-shaped subtle cauterization; and one cauterization on the alcatin above great alozis, or two cauterizations.
And if sometimes the exuberant humors are tolerated by the patient, then cauterize that on the perineum and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the groin, for it is a perfect cure for youthful vigor of which there is no error.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that corrupts or of corrupted humors, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not contradict the true cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus below the small spine of the back and a small triangular cautery, and with a cautery above the umbilical region for two digits.
And if it happens that their stomach is inflamed and their food is not digested, and their face is sometimes apostemated, then cauterize that on the stomach with a large cautery as previously stated; and with a cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the mesentery of theirs with a clavicle cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time, and afterwards cure them so that they are healthy.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of asthma, suitable for the abscession of the lungs.
When you abscessate asthma, then you ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row. Then insert that ignited cautery into the abscessed asthma, and finally place your hand so that you reach the cauteries at the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
And make it a week or two, because if the ache is too strong, then cauterize some of them according to what we have recounted, and afterwards cure those with what confirms their healing so that they are healthy.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the kidneys, it is more beneficial for youthful vigor.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of the patient's divided parts.
When the nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then cure with a cautery.
Therefore, when you find a fistula in the patient's nature, and it is ancient, corroding their sanity and corrupted humors, and therefore it is more worthy that the covering is what proceeds with subtle tension, and afterwards consider the quantity of the profundity of theirs before the aforementioned tent.
Then ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row. And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which it enters the tension.
And iterate over that with the cauteries until those corrupted bodies are completely burned, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think that it does not penetrate.
And afterwards cure the place until it is healthy.
And if the place is sealed, and their matters are abscessed from them, and they remain like that for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely cured.
And if the matters are not abscessed from them, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the prison of their corrupted bone, or it falls into one of those causes which will bring remembrance to its place.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of the kidneys.
When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or gross ventosity, and thus the quiet of the patient's body is affected, then it is fitting that you cauterize that on the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney and a clavicle cautery from which proceeds the remembrance.
And strongly cauterize them in the second way, for three lined cauteries will come, and thus they will be more beneficial in youthful vigor.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to cold and humors, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that on the lower part below the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on their left side.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the nodes of the foot; and cauterize that with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And let there be a clavicle cautery according to what has been stated.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the matrix (womb).
When the thigh is affected by cold and humidity, and for this reason it is prohibited to perform physical exertion, and its muscles are corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and it causes pain in the joints, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries in a circular motion around the navel, as we have said about the cauterization of the bladder; and if there are two points on the back, or one point above and one below, then the clavicle should be cauterized.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When humidity collects and infiltrates the part of the ankle, and cold causes the swelling of the affected area, and it is signaled that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the area of the dislocation is strengthened by its own natural force.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the part of the ankle with a circular cautery, since you will have signaled in the circle of the part thus as it revolves, and for this reason the part falls into its proper place within the circle.
And let the cautery be the one that precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterialize it with three cauteries in the form of a large olive-shaped cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and properly cure that which is inside, so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle area, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured with what we have said and not contradicted, and that which is ancient, then it is necessary to free the patient from gross humors through foul-smelling pills or artificial pills; and then properly cauterialize.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either a cautery with combustible medicines, or a cautery with fire.
It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that which cauteries it on the part of the ankle with three triangular cauteries in this form; and do so with good depth. And let the space between each cautery be according to the quantity of the thickness of the said and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Moreover, some vegetations should be cauteries on the same place on the head of the ankle because there are four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterialize with the circle of which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, where it is a containing circle and combusts the inspection of the entire code.
And this is the manner of cautery in cases when pain is adherent to the ankle and does not extend inside to the thigh.
Moreover, if it is extended inside to the thigh, then cauterialize it with two cauteries on the thigh at the place where the patient's pain is; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers' width below the affected part.
And if the cautery is cuticular, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
And if the patient finds that the pain is extended to the place close to the fingers of the feet, then cauterialize it here where it finds with three points or four or even more if it is necessary for that.
And if the patient finds pain below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterialize it here with a cuticular cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not exceed with the cautery so much that it combusts nerves or great arteria, and that for this reason you are above the patient's evil occurrence or contradiction.
And you have already seen one and another of those who cauterialize on the hip and exceed in the cauterization, and the burning fire inflates inside so that the tumor achieves the foot, and fire perforates and corrupts the entire foot. And then a strong solution of wine is needed, and then it leads to death.
And if the pain is in two parts at the same time, cauterialize each one according to this manner.
And I will describe the wise men in the cauterization of ankle, where this is the manner: make a cautery similar to a circle of iron whose circumference is the width of a palm; and let it be on the affected area according to the thickness of a finger or a little less.
And let that circle be another third; and let the space between them be according to the quantity of the mark on the foot; and let those circles be separated into two parts; and let their length be a mark or two marks, and make a decently apparelled iron margin in those circles; and this is the form of it.
Then ignite the fire within so that it reaches and produces sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the water, the patient is seated with their loins exposed. And then apply a cautery to that limb with three red-hot irons in one go.
And then leave it like that for three days; then apply a dressing to the affected limb and leave the open wound for many days; and then cure the affected limb until it is healed.
Say Albucasis: oh, sons, I have used this type of cautery few times for the terror of the regard of it, and because few have found those who take care of it.
May the good cauteries be to him who suffers them, and may they benefit him in that place of his.
May the cauteries be medicines that adhere, and you make two circles with an armula perforated in which they insert the hinge of the iron door; it is the length of the partition in the night of their sign, two nodes or those hinges.
And if the space which is between almost the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and there are holes above and below, and it is that they contain themselves among their following this form.
And then stop on the affected part of the water, the patient sitting with their loins exposed, and grasp your hand over the affected part of the water; and then take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be in a small fire little by little, and hold that for the quantity of an hour, and let the patient feel the warmth and the adjustment of it  because that warmth feels like fire  until the pain ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and evacuate all the hot water from the entire affected area into warm water.
And then leave it like that for three days and stop on that affected limb until the blackness of the remaining adjustment disappears, and leave it like that for some days, and correct its pus-formation; this is the last step in the treatment.
And then cure the affected limb until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or leg, make a statue of it in which it contains water according to what is done in the affected limb.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkaline and caustic not extinct from two years ago on one affected part, and sprinkle them and stop in a new vessel of which the affected part below is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into the vein.
And stop below the bottom of the other vessel enviraged, and place it over that alkaline and caustic living water which collects those for one finger, and since you grasp them with your good hand for good compression, and leave the hole that releases the sharp water from the affected part to the other vessel enviraged.
And then adjust all that water, and place it over another living cause and other renovating alkaline, because at that time it will be of much stronger acuity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cautery of the other members, because the operation makes fire.
And it is one of the medicines that are those which are cautered deeply, thus you will find it and mix it with honey and other ingredients in a sauce, so that they are mixed together.
And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure for which it is cured of pain of water and of sciatic vein, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because it is healed in one go, thus I recommend, because he strongly inserted himself into a bath and escaped from that.
And it is that it takes some green certarragi, and if it is not found green, take fresh figs; and much is sprinkled with a few gray ones and placed on the water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and bound.
And let it be for three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
And then put him in a bath and when his body is relaxed, insert it into the soil, because the pain ceases and it is healed.
And you know that I do not recommend any use of cauteries in these medicines except for the evacuation of the body.
May I, Escorides, say that when the vein of the goat's head is cautered, it is beneficial for my body; and let the cautery be according to this method: take a woolen thread and dip it in hot oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fingers.
And then take a dry goat's head and inflame it in fire until it is made into charcoal; and then stop placing it on the woolen thread and leave it until it is stretched out. And then repeat this, and do not cease until the sensation of the pain penetrates into the water and relieves the pain.
And this manner of cautery is called horseback cautery.
Chapter 42.
About the cauterization of two pains.
Some evacuated pains are in the back due to multiple causes, whether from a fall or a blow or from excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons, from an infusion of cold and humid matter.
And cautery is not used except in this one species which is caused by effusion of cold matter.
Then the covering, then evacuate the patient with soft pillows and similar to them, which are placed on the back where the pain is three lines according to the latitude of it, because you have tenths in each line or cauteries, more or less, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the strength of it.
And this should be done with pointed cauterization using a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four at the middle clave, according to this form:
Chapter 43.
About cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Many evacuated ends have this disease in small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they stumble upon their own structure in the wings and elevation, and the movement.
And the vertebrae in the upper part of the back and ribs start to rise above the other vertebrae.
And then when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize with a cautery that is circular according to this form: which takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the vertebrae in a circle.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circle of the vertebrae with a pointed cautery two lines or three. And the points are properly spaced between them.
And then heal the area within, which is healthy with what we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Chapter 44.
About cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And then how gout caused by cold is cured in a manner of cure and the pains are not left behind, then they remain for cauteries.
And it is that you cauterize with evacuation around the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And this cautery is olive-shaped, of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains move into the teeth or to other joints, and many evacuated ends have this, then cauterize with three cauteries or four of the entire affected part with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed for this cautery, then cauterize it and do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery beforehand, just as much as is sufficient to encircle the specific area of the code.
And if the pains move into the tooth and back, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands, and it is called sciatica, then point around the circuit of the hips thus as they revolve, point on those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then point around the circuit of the hips above each rib and on the edge of the hand.
And if the pains move to the surrounding joints or muscles, then cauterize all around each part of the joints.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good regimen and the flesh is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Chapter 45.
About cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the limbs and the intestines are dislocated from their cavity, and this begins to evacuate, then it is necessary that you order the patient to remain quiet for seven days and use lenient causes so that the fissure of the seventh ventricle may close.
And then follow the patient between your hands on the seventh back, and command him to hold his seven wings within so that it may be restored or the cavity or intestines may appear.
And then return to the ties of the fingers and sew with threads on the rupture above the bone of the fifth nail, signaling the extremity of which it is similar to the circle of the underlying separated parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
When the motor spirit is agitated and the tiny circles (of the eyes) are constricted. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant is on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then pause the cautery on that sign at your hand, and you are cautioned to straighten your fingers, and then you will have the consolation of relieving the pain in the joints; and if not, then try again another way, for you did not succeed in the first attempt.
And carefully observe the movement of the intestine during your cautery, lest you harm that intestine so that on the patient's body no mortal or great evil occurs.
And know that when you are applying the cautery, do not touch the bones, lest it does not confer your operation.
And be careful that the cautery for children is subtle according to their age and measurement.
And then take care of the area of the cautery for three days, applying a poultice in order that the scar from the burning be removed.
And then take care of those with other afflictions until they are healed.
And the patient should sit on a soft cushion for 40 days in order that the place and the wound be sealed.
And be careful to pause the nourishment of his according to the length of time of his cure, which will lighten the stomach of his, and that the intestine does not come out because of the effort of healing.
And then when you want to get up after 40 days, administer the decent food gradually, and hold onto that for another 40 days.
And avoid excessive labor and replenishment of food and drink, and violent vomiting, because when you use this entire regimen of healing, you will be entirely healthy.
And you will direct the healing of the ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you want that there be no delay, then cauterize the rupture with the cautery red-hot according to its quantity, and it is what is expelled from the codena thus as the third part of it; and then take care of what we have said, and do not adjust.
And you will discover some primary causes that the rupture is cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is signed in the tent.
And it is a paused line that goes for the width in the lattice above the rupture, and another line below; and pause your hand with a clave-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is rather lighter and better.
Chapter 46.
On the Cauterization of the Torso.
When the pain is fixed in some members by fall or by percussion and persists for a long time and does not confer with the cure by medicines, then be careful to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And it is the cautery of each member according to its size and smallness, and its vertebrae and development, and location of torso and pain of it.
Therefore if it is healthy from the first cautery, it is good; and if not, then try again on him with the cautery; because it is customary for those pains to be punctured in a member near that member which approaches the one, so that you know how to relieve those pains by the cautery until the patient is healthy.
Chapter 47.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
The leprous ulcers are seen to be cauterized with a great judgment, and it is magnificent if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And so when you want to cauterize it, consider if the leprosy is contagious and as that cure is with what we have said in the division and not delayed, nor is this, and fear about the patient that the corruption comprehends all of their body and all of their complexity, then cauterize it on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and on the forehead to the end of the hair; and two above the horns; and one behind, on the nape or service.
And finally place your hand with the cautery a little within so that it impresses on the bone a small impression, and from it are dislocated the scorches, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from him; and cauterize on the worse part according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then be careful to cauterize it with those cauteries which we have said on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on the two sides of the neck, and two cauteries on the two vertebrae of the spine, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one great one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on the loins, and one on each loin, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the thighs, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the seven feet; and cauterize it on all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each ankle of the seven feet, and on the soles of their feet.
And beware of the nerves that are above the ankle, so they do not get burned.
Some veins are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the feet.
And know that the more you adjust cauteries, the more you will benefit and confer; and know that the patient does not have pain from the cautery, thus as they have said, so the body of the patient is already stunned.
And it is known that the cauteries are great or small according to the members and joints, as it is preceded by the specifics of the instruments.
And then heal the cautery with a warm poultice, and apply another cure within so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 48.
On the Cauterization of Stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and it is not healed, then you cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And thus the fire of the cautery enters into the inspection of the codenna (knee) a little. And then heal that with an ointment inside so that it may be healthy.
And some veins are cauterized for a certain stupor that reaches the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back and the movement of the nerves which govern that member, and the stupor is removed.
You should not presume anything about this except what is known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter 49.
On the Cauterization of Ulcers that are Morphea.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to the remedies of medicine, then you cauterize on that with a cautery pointed in a little spot according to the quantity of the specification of the knee inside so that the whiteness and color of it may be removed, and its color may be changed.
And then heal that with a warm poultice of rose oil and lentilhas, and leaves of dragon's blood, and the blood of a dove or the blood of a pigeon, each one a part and all are mixed, and then lay a linen cloth over the area and place it so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 50.
On the Cauterization of Cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize that with a circular cautery around its circuit, thus as it is turned back.
And I will tell you that it should be cauterized with the rear cautery in the middle place; more, I have not seen this, because I think it may ulcerate, and you already saw some veins.
And it is better to cauterize in the circuit of it with a circular cautery thus as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On the Cauterization of Induration.
When some induration is delayed in maturation, and thus it is due to the superfluous fat making that, or because of the state of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of induration; then cauterize in its circuit with many small pointed cauteries; and then leave it alone, for it will fasten into maturation.
You should also want to make a perforation of it with the cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and pause that in the middle place of induration so that it penetrates the knee.
And if you apply the cautery in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and then heal that until it is healthy.
Chapter 52.
On the Cauterization of Corrosion.
Corrosion is a corrupting ulcer in the member, which corrodes that thus as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you apply that corrosion in the place where it suffers from cauteries with fire, then you ignite clave-shaped cauteries, many small ones, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where there is corrosion.
And then you cauterize that entire part so that you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause of it remains.
And then leave that for three days, and apply above the cauterized places a mixture of oil and triturated scarabs so that all scars are totally eradicated and all corruption.
And then heal that with carnation generating flesh.
You should also wait three days until the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, good; otherwise, then repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted places.
And corrosion is treated with some herbs with sharp medicine, because that is midway between cautery and medicine. Master, I will always use a hot cautery to remove pus from the ulcer.
And you have already said that the cure for him is with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that which of his wings is hindering.
Chapter 53.
On cauterization of wounds and other similar things.
Moist wounds that are found in the affected parts of the foot called a claw, and it is a gross, inward cause, which hurts the foot; and cauterization is done in two ways, namely burning with fire and scorching with hot water.
Master, I will burn with fire because you should ignite the cautery like a burning iron similar to a pen, which is made of iron according to the quantity that the claw contains in each affected part, and it should have subtle margins.
And then stop the burning iron on the claw, and then turn your hand around the cautery in the circle of the claw until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw. And leave it like that for three days until you start to feel relief. And then apply a plaster made with malva and salvage roots crushed in salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, because that will eradicate its roots.
And then heal the place affected by generating flesh until it is healthy.
And if it does not convert, and moist wounds appear on the surface of the body, mainly in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer to those cauterizations with hot water, and it is necessary to take a small quantity of iron or fire or pen, and stop it on the claw; and then put it in the hot water for a short time, and withdraw your hand, and you turn around it with compression of your whole hand, and it will be inserted into the margin of the canal at the root of the claw, and the hot water will pass through to the root of the claw; and wait for the patient for a little while, feeling the biting of the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus I do in those cases, and then add another until you come upon all the places of their seat in the body.
And then heal those ulcers whose roots of the claws are eradicated with that of the affected flesh, which will generate new flesh.
Chapter 54.
On cauterization of tremors.
When you find a tremor caused by cold in the nerves or by fever from a cold cause, or by another similar cause, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauterizations or five above the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and make a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, make an olive-shaped cautery.
And the tremor of it will rest and strengthen the health of the affected cold.
Chapter 55.
On cauterization of sudden accidents to the body.
When the body is suddenly afflicted, and pustules appear which are made of gross corrupted materials; therefore it is necessary to begin by appearing, that it should be cauterized on every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle wood, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of long horsetail; or with a slow cautery.
And similar wounds are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and if they are not credible, and it is disrupted, the superfluous flesh makes them, and they will be healthy.
Master, I think that it should be done with evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 56.
On cauterization of fluxes of blood accidentally caused by incision of an artery.
Moist wounds that have fluxes of artery which are incised by the wound that has occurred before, or by the incision of abscesses or cauteries of the member, and similarly, it is difficult to remove those.
Therefore when you reach that point, then you should hold it with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop above it the thread said before, until the fluxes of blood below the thread are stagnant, and they do not flow out.
And then stop in the fire the olive-shaped cauteries little and large, by name of many, and blow on them until they are ignited.
And then take one of them, small or large, according to the place and wound in which the artery is ruptured, above that vein firmly, so that you may reassemble the thread, and you may cauterize until it is tied off and restrained, and the blood is stopped.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you reassemble the thread and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully prepared from the cauteries which are in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this until the blood is restrained.
Be careful that you do not confuse the nerves here, and that you do not bring upon the patient another evil.
You know that when the arterial flow is healthy, then it is not possible to restrict the flow in those places, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four methods: either with cautery as I have said, or with extraction when it has not been extracted, because when the extremities are burned they are restricted and the flow is restored; or that it be tied with a strong ligature or tightened with forceful constriction; or that they be paused over the medications which virtue is to restrict the flow; and they are strengthened in the pulvinar with decent constriction.
Perhaps he who administers decent restriction to the ligature and structure drops or for positioning of causes that burn and resemble, does not compare but rather tart.
Perhaps if he endeavors to reach an end and there is no doctor present or medicine, then make a pause over the indicated finger on the orifice of that vein as I have said, and intend to great constriction within so that the blood flow is stopped from the supreme part of the plague, and above the artery it does not seem to be diminished; and above the artery it seems to be sprinkled with much cold water of great coldness within so that the blood flow is congealed and thickened; and perhaps you should consider whether cauterization or necessary medicine is needed.
Of incision and perforation and ventosas and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similar things.
I have said in the first chapter all about the bad humor in which cautery is convenient and burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for its forms; and I have ordered the chapters according to the inferiority of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in that method, so that it may be alleviated to the one who desires it, then above what will be demanded.
And then that I begin here, it is fitting, sons, that you learn that in this chapter it is to terrify what is in the first chapter of cautery.
And for what you think is in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuated evacuations are made, such as the evacuation of blood from the vein or incision above the aposteme or perception of exit or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrow or beginning of a fistula and their similar things. And all those things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the end of their catastrophe death.
And I have warned you that above you do not fall into the state of being stagnant, because some evacuated cases are due to your manners of men with many manners of bad humors. And of them it is said that they are fleeing from their bad humor and it is far from death, and thus for the vehemence of what he finds of his bad humor, and for the length of his bad humor, and in the bad humor it is for what signifies death.
And of those it is that which gives to your son to have and to say, you are waiting for that sanity, and the bad humor is pernicious.
And therefore do not think that you consent to what comes to you from this manner; and your caution should be greater than what is written and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause about it unless you have certain scientific knowledge which verifies what comes to you, and to which you perceive laudable success.
And you will be established in the cure of all your bad humors with prognosis and indication of what is converted health, because in that you are helped above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspires your understanding and does not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinctly into chapters according to what precedes in the chapter of cauteries, from the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be alleviated to you what you demand of it and of which you have necessity.
First Chapter.
On the cure of water that is contained in the head of infants.
You know that this bad humor has many evacuated places in the infants from infancy and when the nourishment strengthens the head of the infant, its vitality.
And some evacuated places are due to a hidden cause which is not known.
Perhaps you have not seen this bad humor except in infants; and all those whom I have seen are touched by death, and thus it is to me a visible work in them.
And I have seen that an infant's head which was full of water swelled, and the head of it was always magnified until it could not hold itself upright due to the greatness of its head, and perhaps the humidity increased until it died from heat.
And at this humidity or it is added between the kneecap and the bone, or it is added below the bone above the spine.
Because the operation is such that the humidity is between the kneecap and the bone, and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head in a latitude, and the length of the incision should be two inches so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula.
And then if the humidity is more augmented and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions according to this manner.
And if the humidity is below the bone, it seems that you should sometimes compress the swollen areas of the head with a full partition and the water is squeezed out when you compress them in the same manner at the internal partitions and it does not seem that you are making an amputation. It is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner.
and then extract all the humidity; and then strengthen the incisions with bandages and plasters; and then put on a poultice above the wound on the fifth day, and then remove the ligament and cure the plague in tendons and swelling, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member is comforted and healthy.
And there is another manner of incision, which considers how to appear the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some evacuated areas are more in the occiput, or in the front, or on the right, or on the left; and then attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the water is replenished, and do it according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and avoid those fluent flows of blood and kill the patient by that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter third.
When there are some catarrhs or bruises on the heels or feet, and it is an old thing, and it does not confer in that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision of those two arteries.
And then it is necessary when you want to incise those that the patient's vein makes its own head, and then apply a rough bandage around the area with a pointed instrument so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some bandages; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the places of each one above the places which are near the ears, and they hide themselves until some hours.
And then place a sign above the artery in tension, and then incise each one with the spatula of each partition until an incision is made entering into the bone, and it is for the latitude of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and turn it to reach the incisions in the upper parts.
And the length of the incision is two inches adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood is ejected in pulsating egress, which ceases before frequent cessation.
If the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary to measure from the ear the quantity of space of three inches, and then place a sign in tension, and make an entrance into the bone.
And it is necessary to extract from the blood a quantity of six ounces. and forcefully take from him more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and of the replenishment of the artery of it.
And then consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone some cause of the spine, then incise that so that no abscess is caught.
And then strengthen the plague with plasters and ligaments of bandages, and then cure it in swelling until it is healthy.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When there are some old accidents or bruises on the temples, with humidity and quality in the veins of the temples, or an old vehement and similar thing to those, and it is medicated with the manners of cure of medicine and that does not confer, then we have spoken about these maladies extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient's vein makes the skin which is on the temples; and it appears in the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden until some hours by the vehemence of the bandage.
And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some bandage; and then apply a rough bandage around the area or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then you take the spatula of which this is the shape: And then you scrape the outer layer of the skin in that area to facilitate penetration into the artery; and then get onto the ontium and extract it from the upper parts into the artery, and uncover it from the underlying tunics which were previously covered, so as to expose the entire area.
Perhaps the artery is subtle, then envelop it with the extremity of the finger, and then incise it at a certain point according to the quantity for which the extremities were lengthened and constricted, and do not allow a flux of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not flow out.
And then evacuate the blood from the vicinity. up to three.
And if the artery is large, then it happens that you ligate it in two places with a double fold of strong thread or cord, and do not touch the putrid flesh during the consolidation of the wound and allow a flow of blood.
And then incise the excess flesh which is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery into the bone with a cutting cautery into which the extremities were incised, and stand in place of that same great work.
And it is a better work since the patient has fever or is of complicated complexion; because cautery is for those causes that help to eliminate the ending humidity, and therefore it is better in juvenation.
And then you have the extraction of the arteries that occupy the place of the ancient cut, and they are paused over the decently made poultices, and then it is cured with dry medicines that make the flesh and bones whole again so that it is healthy.
And if meanwhile you are working on another wounded area and a flow of blood from the artery occurs, then you touch to restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or which occupies the place of the cut, and hold your hand so that the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the finger on the spot so that the blood is congealed, and sprinkle the spot with water of vehement coldness so that the acute pain rests, and it is strengthened according to what is suitable.
And that which is put more lightly in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two cutting edges, because you have touched the two spots with tension, and paused somewhat, not much, until they penetrate to the bone and incise the vein in two spots, so that it is elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated entirely with this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And it is the sharpness of the two cutting edges together. Perhaps it is better to have a sharpness of two cutting edges, because if they are too pointed with two proper edges, they approach each other and do not incise the flesh quickly.
So since there is some roughness in those, it holds the heat of the fire in those and the flesh is separated lightly.
And this work is better in all works and more lightly.
And it is the space which is between two edges, the quantity of the roughness of the finger.
Fourth chapter.
On the cure of bodies of sharp and acidic ulcers of the eyes.
When the ulcers are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the forehead of the head before, and do not find in that any cause of the cure by medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already inflates and feels on the seat in front of walking thus as if it were a walking of ants, and the eyes of that one are extinguished, humiliated thus that already their skin is worn out, and the eyelids are scabbed by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient masters most experienced in the cure of those from this operation, and I will not mention that cure with a passage.
And it is that you command the patient to raise the skin which is on the seat in front, and then incise into the forehead three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure falls into two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third of the other part.
And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two layers, and elongate your hand from the continuity of both the mandibles. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three digits adjusted.
And if you have a piece of spongy tissue prepared or dry threads that are used to absorb the blood.
And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: It is from the division of the temples into the second incision. Extract with that instrument the entire code which is between two incisions on the hip bone which is above the bone, and then make a point of the minor incision into the second incision. And then insert this spatula into the first incision and enter with another instrument which is called a cutter, having one part and of the other not having.
And stop the flow of that cutter from the adjacent flesh of the code, and the flow of it through the bone, and fill in so that it reaches the minor fissure, and separate all those veins that descend from the head to the wheels.
It is better to continue the incision up to the appearance of the code, and then make a point in the minor fissure into another fissure.
And afterwards correct the flow of the quantity of blood that is gathered, express the places of the vessels of the congealed blood.
And then stop at some hot fissure of the cut, and stop above those swollen bulges that are inflamed with oil and wine, and watch that no abscess forms without caution.
And on the third day, loosen the bandage and administer a great infusion of hot water or tea, and then cure with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the cure of ulcers caused by catarrh and wounds that descend from the divisions of the head.
When the mucus comes with catarrh and continues, and sometimes the wounds of the patient are small and external, and already the treatment is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and because of their cause the skin, and in the forehead of the head there is acute pain and subsequent inflammation, then you will know through this accident that the materials and catarrh do not come except from many veins of the divisions above.
And the best cure for this is: that you command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in a small place on the forehead, a little towards the side (and start with the incision of the left temple up to the right temple; and it should be an incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand among the vessels of the temples which are affected by mastigation), until the bone is uncovered.
Dry out all the blood with a sponge or absorbent cloth, and then refill between the two lips of the incision with hot iron or absorbent cloths. And then strengthen below with swollen bulges that are inflamed with oil and wine, so that no abscess forms without caution.
And when you loosen that and see that the abscess has diminished, then it is necessary to clean the bone until it reaches the new flesh, and then cure with a regiment of desiccative ointment which makes the flesh new, thus if you take two parts of flour of wheat and four parts of colofania and mix them, and make an emplaster from it, and administer it to these wounds of the native flesh.
Chapter 6.
On the cure of that which falls into the ears.
The entire cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, whether it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus like iron and copper, or it is from a plant thus like ceeze or fava, or it is a fluxible cause thus like water and wine agree and its similarity, or some beast.
And then when peyra falls into the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not adjust in the ear, and stop the ear from the sun, and if the peyra is violent, then distill it with some violet oil or sizami, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the sternutatory condition amenable, and open the nostrils for the arrival of sternutation. And then stop at the circle of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts below, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not evacuated, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtle, of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten in the gesti, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument subtle of few double-foldings.
And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a canal of silver and insert the extremity of the canal into the tract of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oil mollified so that nothing comes out except the canal. And then extract it with the tieu wind which has strong attraction, because many evacuated matters come out with that which we have recounted.
It is better if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alum bath or prepared vessel with which the vessels are pressed to release a small quantity, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then wrap it decently around that stopped hot thing. And then insert into the tube of the auricle to facilitate, and then extract the auricle from humidity.
So if not all the causes that we have recounted are forgotten, then you will touch that dentated area where an abscess or spasm is developing.
And the manner of touching that area is that you first sense the patient's vein pulse and extract the blood according to the manner of their vertigo, and then make a circle between your fingers and convert the auricle to the underlying parts, and find a small fissure in the root of the auricle where the veins of it are premised. And it is the fissure of lunar figure that leads to the stone, and, the atrophied stone, or you can use an appropriate instrument; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
And if the cause residing in the auricle is one of the fatty substances that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your own judgment, then take a subtle spatula tuned according to this form. and administer to that the abscess of that fatty substance which has fallen into the auricle.
And do not make that when you think that it has already been humidified by the vapor of the auricle, and place it in several small steps, and propose to extract it with the onyches or subtle gestures, or by inscizio as I have said, because the extraction of it is alleviated.
But in the water that has entered into the auricle, because the patient uses sternutation at the beginning, and fills the entire auricle with a lot of evil humor, and pours over that auricle where the water is, and if by that it is forgotten; well, it is; and otherwise, then take three or four slender pebbles according to the length of the finger, and heat them in a few minutes, and the patient inserts one of those into the tube of their auricle and rises over one side of that part and percusses with another pebble on the pebble that touches the auricle. So it does not cease until all the water is forgotten.
So it does not cease until all the water is forgotten. And already the water will be forgotten, also that you take pieces of paper or of cotton. and place one extreme of it in the auricle and extend the other extremity into the focus until it is combined with the marrow of it.
And then put another cotton and make it so many times until all the water is forgotten, and draw that out with a cannula as it has been said of the extraordinary pebble.
But in the extraction of beast that enters into that auricle, if it is a small thing, so pierce and to its likeness, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes pain at the time of movement, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and onyches, and the cause of it is put less serious than all the other causes that occur in the auricle.
But in the extraction of generated worms in the auricle, when you cure it with water that we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the auricle to the sunlight.
And so if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle onyches; but if no cause appears, then take a straightened cannula and from below, amplify the form of it: And insert the subtle extremity into the auricle according to the quantity that the patient suffers from; and then suck with strong suction, and make many repeated steps, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if you do not obey your own judgment, then operate and close in the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experienced by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find that in the treatise on distillations.
And it is your effusion which pours out the medicinal oils into the auricle with this instrument of which this is the form: And make that of silver or of copper, straightened, in which there is a small tube, and flat beneath.
And so it is how they fill what is in the cavity of the cannula, which will be necessary here. And if you wish, take the radical and envelop it decently in the extremity of the cannula, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ausiment, or juice of some herb, or whatever you want of these medicines in the cannula  and that is in the auricle , and then insert the radical with wax beneath and express your hand to compress it tempered until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the ausiment and the patient feels the oil penetrating.
And it is that which has infiltrated in the auricle (ear) was already scaled with a focus on a small fire. And beware that the cause which you distilled in the ear does not become too frequent, because ear medications do not suffer from this.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of obstruction of the ears.
Some blocked passages in the veins of the ears are not perforated, and it happens in some homes, obstruction in the middle of the ear due to a blow or carnal injury in that; and this obstruction is made in the pronouncement of the vein of the ear which does not allow the flow, and some blocked passages are in the parts before.
And that which happens in the pronouncement of it, which does not allow the flow, is in the major dispositions of difficult healing.
And in that which follows the flow, it is necessary that you apply the ear of the patient to the sun and look at it. And so if an apparent opacity appears, observe that with a subtle spatulum of which this is the shape of it.
If the extremity of it is in which the latitude is small, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatulum is of two smooth leon edges so that it does not touch the ear.
And so if the obstruction is due to a born flesh in the ear or in its middle, then take it with subtle scissors and cut into it vigorously to facilitate entering until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the pronouncement of the ear, then take a subtle iron rod and heat it over a small fire, and then place it in the middle of the ear.
And so if you have felt the opacity in that which the patient has facilitated, due to the gravity of hearing, it forces the oppression of it to be facilitated; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
And then pause in the ear, dripping with oil according to the quantity of the width of the tube which you have enveloped in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some water and inject it into the syringe and pulverize over the still trussed area and use it; and if the ear is already infected, then it is necessary that you extract the water and permute it with another water which you enveloped in a cerate that is made with rose oil, until the aposteme is well cauterized; and then cure it until it is healed.
Moreover, if there is a flow of blood, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and pause it over the ear, and use another cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is stated in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
On the treatment of athetosis which affects the eyelids.
Athetosis which affects the eyelids of the eyes, some blocked passages are humid, some blocked passages are dry.
Then it is necessary that you hold those with tentacles or nails, and separate them from their roots, and then pause over the still trussed areas.
Moreover, if there is pain with a flow of blood coming, then you should cauterize those with a subtle, lattice-like cautery.
And the best cauterization is to return the incisions and many blocked passages when they remain some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized over fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment of cataracts that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Some blocked passages are found in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause which is assembled with greatness in its strength and hardness, and thus greatness is called.
And it is an addition of thick humidity in the lower eyelid and above.
Then the operation on them is that you consider then if the greatness is proceeding from it in that which appears of the eyelid and is moved to the whole part; and the cause of it is laziness.
Then make a cut above it with a width, and then scrape it from the whole part to facilitate evacuation, and then suspend it with nails and absolve it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that because the anguish of it restores and incarnates.
And if the greatness is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid from the deep surface, then remove the eyelid and suspend the greatness with nails, unless you indicate an incision, and prepare it for the whole part, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, it will not be noted in any case.
And then begin by washing the wound with salty warm water; and take care to clean the area thoroughly so that it heals inwardly.
Chapter 10.
About the treatment of abscesses under the eyelid.
Abscesses are grayish swellings that form in the membranes of the eyelid, and they especially affect children, worsening the eyes of those who have them, and causing them to lose the clarity of their vision because the tears collect in them.
And thus you often find them gazing fixedly at the faces of those who have them for a long time, and upon the faces of those who sleep; and so beneath their eyelids they have humid, swollen, and inflamed membranes, which have an apparent threat of impending abscesses in the eye; and when you press on the area with your fingers, you feel the abscesses forming within them.
And a certain manner of operation is on the patient who pauses his evil humor in the finger, and then pause to draw out the liquid from it and of the circle according to the quantity that contains the entire affected part, and then pause over that and press on the fingers of the entire perimeter so that an abscess forms in the middle of the circle, and then finish in the middle of that humidity at the spot incident on the fissure, and the fissure should not be larger than the fissure made in phlebotomy.
More in the preceding cavity that you find the entire code within so that you reach the abscess, because in the more dispositional processes an abscess forms through a fissure according to the form of white grayishness.
Then extract that humor with the liquid which you have enveloped between the fingers on the affected parts before and revolve it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And beware that you do not adjust on the fissure so that the spatula does not reach the eye and touches nothing there.
More if the abscess does not appear at your attempt in the beginning of the fissure, more that you adjust on the fissure a small facilitated abscess; and then extract that humor as we have said; and then submerge the liquid in water and vinegar and place them over the area and strengthen those with powders.
And thus you will find that they draw out salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains is free from that humidity.
And then cure it until it is healed.
More if the aposteme (abscess) becomes hot at the location, then cure it with emplasters of cedar until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
About methods of touching the eye.
When in the eyelids of the eyes there are born unnatural and artificial growths, then they annoy the eye and become accustomed to ways of evil habits such as continuous tears and mollification of the eyelids and webbing until it is cause for destruction of the eye which is called touching of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with a focus; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cautery; or it is touched by incision and suturing; or with canes as you will be directed.
And then you pause the head of the malady in the finger; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, good; and if not, insert a needle in that place where the abscess is beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate beneath, and it will be  near the edge of the eyelid where the unnatural growths are  near the unnatural growths, and pull the thread to the affected parts beneath the eyelid, and convert it into a vein.
And then finish in the affected part beneath the eyelid beneath the unnatural growths with a spatula incident on the larger lacrimal duct until the smaller lacrimal duct; and then extract the thread and place it beneath the eyelid with small powders of cotton or cloth, and then put a compress over the eyelid in a tent-like shape, and it will be like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
More however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because it has been diversified in men, for they are those who indicate that a great quantity should be incised from the eyelid according to the quantity by which the eyelid is mollified.
And then finish with the spatula on the two lines which have been marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal duct to the smaller lacrimal duct. And if your fissure is near the unnatural growths, just like the large wound of the king.
And then put the onion on one of the two angles of the code, and then excise all of it, and then adjust with the scalpel the two labia in a circle or thread of subtle wool, and purify the blood, and make adhere what superfluously falls from the threads above the eyebrows for some envisioning causes, if you want to do so, and if not, do not cure.
And then apply a poultice to the wound of the veins for three or four days, and then take care of it.
If you want, apply the poultice to the wound, and take care of it so that it dries and strengthens, because the eyelid is elevated from the seal of the wound and its aggregation; but the wound is better. Therefore, one should not use the ancient taxes of taxing.
Maybe the emperor will be solicited about the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And it is another manner of taxing, and it is that one senses on the eyelid figure thus as a mirror of merit, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches separately and jointly according to this form.
Maybe if it is not possible to have inches, take a needle in which there is a thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other vein near the major lacrimal, and the vein according to the minor lacrimal, and adjust between the tissues so that the veins are equal, and then elevate your hand with elevation, elevate all the code above which one senses thus as having recommended.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound to the suture, and take care of it until it is healthy.
Maybe if abscesses occur from your incision or your fissure, but that abscess is like wax and resembles it, and it is swollen.
And some veiled indications on the eyelid that the wise men converted, therefore I believe that you use them in that of what we have said about incision; maybe the suture is sometimes more artificial.
To tax in the canals is done according to this form: and it is that you convert the eyelid and separate the figure that is divided according to what has been recounted; and then, by artful craft, make two canals or two subtle astels from which the longitude is according to the longitude of the eyelid and the latitude of theirs is less than the latitude of the spatium. And you have already incised in the extremities of some divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Then add some subtlety underneath what superfluously flows from the eyelid of the wheel, and constrict the canals of some divided parts with a strong structure, and apply it for some days, because the code for the morbid structure will be denied and will be poured in until it is seen that the flux will fall.
Maybe if it is delayed, then cut the veins with the trocars, and then take care of the wound until it is healthy.
Since it is consolidated, the eyelid is elevated and the skin does not puncture.
And this is the method of making two canals which you will do according to this form: and it has the quantity of the longitude and latitude neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
On the elevation of punctured skin on the wheel with a needle when the skin is hard.
When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough, and punctures the wheels, then the operation in it is that you take a subtle needle and pauses on each fine thread of silk and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and make some subtle movements in a subtle manner. And it is the longitude of the veins of the quantity of one palm.
And then you compose another subtle vein below it briefly, and adjust the extremities of that if you want.
And then stop the patient's head in the tissue, and it is properly done for the sun to shine on your work, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted skin which has needed to be engendered, and make it penetrate the eyelid firmly until you extract it from under the natural skin.
And then pull the skin until underneath and introduce it into the alloy, and there are one or two or three skins and no more.
And then pull your hand until the skin is pulled out of the alloy in the eyelid with the natural skin.
Maybe if the alloy is attracted and the skin is not pulled, attract the alloy to the divided parts below with the vein which you have composed in that, until it is pulled out of the alloy from the transparent straw.
And see that in the vision of the wheel, because then you will pull out the alloy and the vein, and cleanse some and close the wheel, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the skin adheres to its own place and is born on good flesh.
And if the skin is more brief, then you adjust a long skin of natural skins, and it is elevated in that, or until it is lengthened to approach another space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter 13.
On the cure of hemorrhage which one sees in the eyelid underneath.
When the veil is torn in the eyelid, and it is contracted on either side, right or left, due to bad consolidation of pustules or of scabs or of cauteries, and it is called leporina, and this tearing apart is natural or accidental, and it is caused by bad consolidation of pustules or of scabs or of cauteries, or for the appearance of their evil cure.
Maybe the manner of operation is that you make that consolidation and separate the lips from it, and pause in it what is between them a piece of cloth, and tie them together so they are healthy.
And do not cover that you use for the cure of it from the causes which exceed, constraining; because if you do so return to worse than before, at no time did you have healing.
Use in that of causes which soften thus with fenugrec, and embrocate with water in which are cooked altea and seeds of it, or enguent with dyaquilon, which is liquefied at the summit of the joints, and submerge in that, and cure it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce everything so that nothing is consolidated according to the form that you began with at the commencement.
And this operation which we have said, is not but some rectification of the dislocation that does not return the form of the place according to what was before.
Chapter 13.
On the cure of dislocation which is made in the eyelid below.
This dislocation which is made in the eyelid below, which is called vertadierament dislocation; and it is either a natural one, or an accidental one.
Moreover, accidental ones are caused by pustules or by scabs or by cauteries or by other similar things.
And the method of operation is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread pervades both extremities of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the upper parts above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into the spatium abundantly. And then if the figure of the eyelid returns to what it was, well; and if not, take the thread and pause it in the divided figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
And they are the extremities of the two fissures at two angles of the incision, which have been made so that they converge, and it is from their made angle that when they gather together, they form the figure of theirs.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then lift the flesh that much for the quantity that is the width of the lower eyelid below it, which closes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of wool; and then cure them with what we have said about the softening medicines and poultices until they are healthy.
And if the dislocation is due to a fissure or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a flat fissure above the skin of the eyelid according to what has been previously mentioned. And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the cure of dislocation when it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of dislocation, and that is in various forms of motes.
And the skilled craftsmen always prepare everything in some manner possible to return the figure to its natural form, or near to it, and that dislocation according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many homes in this way that the eyelid is solidly attached above the album of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and its natural works, then it is necessary that you introduce the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it in its place, or extend it to the nail.
And then you insert the adhesion into a subtle spatium, which is not at the point of the incisions, having obtained an obtuse little hole so that the dislocation is not disturbed during the operation, and the spatium remains that does not leave the eye in its point.
And it is your incision that excavates this adhesion in a facility so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and that the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you put in the eye salt water in which you wash; or dissolve it in water of juniper, dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of it, and pause over the eye a lane infused in the album of Huou, and then use three days of consolidative causes until it is healthy.
Chapter 16.
About the inflammation of a nail and the prominence of flesh around the eyelids.
You know that a nail is formed in two ways, either it is nervous, and resembles a subtle, dry ciphal; or it is non-nervous, resembling a white, congealed humidity, which when touched, or is forced to take hold of the onychia, and the onychia does not fix into it.
And both species do not begin except from the larger tear gland, which flows little by little to cover the vision and prohibits the light and movement of the pupil.
The manner of operating in the inflammation of the eye is that the patient holds their head back, and you operate on the whites of the eye, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail from the onychia with little duplication and extension to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert it into a horsehair or bowstring or a vein, or similar things, or strong faith, or duplicate the extremity of the small needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and tie it with faith in the nail; and extend it to the upper parts, and excoriate the skin around the nail, which closes the pupil. And thus you will follow it with the skin towards the back of the eye.
And then you will insert the rhizome into the root of the eyelid with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and lift the flesh of the eyelid naturally so that by inserting it, continuous flow of tears does not hinder.
And sometimes the nail on the sole of the foot is extended or has faith, thus we have said, and then it will be excavated with a lion's spatula, from which this is the form of it.
And beware that you do not touch the corneal tunic with the spatula and that it does not rupture in it, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then the inflammation will get into the eye a little salt water or distillate of rose petals, and let it enter another day; and then cure it with water that covers until it is healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed on the onychia, then many times this species of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as I have said and recommended in the division.
And if you want to cut into it, then you operate on the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion's spatula with a well-sharpened edge according to this form. with subtlety. And if sometimes it is rarefied and confounded and penetrates into the root, then distill from your work in the eye of rose petals or with rose oil or salt water, and apply the eye another day.
And then iterate over it with the operation until all that is of it is removed, but on the contrary, be cautious lest there be an abscess in the eye, because then you will leave it, and cure the beginning of the abscess until it is healthy.
And then iterate your operation over it with reason until it is healthy.
The prominence of the eyelid flesh, if you notice it in the eye for great annoyance, is suspended on the onychia; and insert it from that one part, and do not ultimately insert it lest continuous flow of tears does not hinder.
And then distill into the eyelid rose oil and rose petals until it is healthy.
Chapter 17.
About the inflammation of the conjunctiva and of that which is born from adjusted flesh in the eye.
Some times in the whites of the eyes are born red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the upper parts before and is assembled like a rose of balcony.
The operation on it is that the patient holds their head back; and then operate on the whites of that eye and collect all that flesh on the convenient onychia, and take hold with a forceps or a cest; and then cut into the flesh from the beginning until it is finished in the incision, and beware of the eye lest you do not deceive yourself during your operation.
And it is your incision in which you will insert those or with the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or small forceps that collect the things according to what will be seen as the form of it, and thus we come to this chapter.
Since your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salt water, or distill into it rose powder and similar things to the corrosive medicines, and apply it over the eye beforehand with a cotton pad of albumen until it is assured against abscess caution.
And if some cause of conjunctivitis is suspected and you are cautious of abscess caution, and fear abscess caution, then leave the eye and cure that abscess with water that falls on that abscess, and iterate over it with operation until it is healthy, and similarly do in the adjusted flesh which accides in the eye of this species.
Most emperors have understood that total cure of the entire freul comes either naturally or accidentally, holding in iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently subjected to that operation.
Chapter 18.
About the collection of sweat in the freul (freul likely means "flesh" or "body", so it's about the collection of sweat on the body).
Sweat comes out through the open pores which are spread over the body and prevents the proper operation, and develops the body in length of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the body in which the sweat is strong and there is no other malady than sweat, then you collect that sweat.
And it is that you command the patient to place their Sieve hat on their head, and then suspend those veins in an ounce or two according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle double distillation according to this form.
or two ounces gradually in a glass according to this form.
And then collect those veins in subtle forces, with subtlety, and abstract the blood hour by hour, until you see those veins being removed from the body and are revolved.
And beware that you do not lead the body to the extremities of the spatium; and if your operation is in the morning before the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not insert anything except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you distill in the body clear green or red liquid because it is acute corrosive water that is removed from the sweat.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all of it at that hour, then apply all of it to the place where the pain of the body resides, and leave it there for several days until the pain of the body is sedated and assuredly free from apostemeous caution.
And then repeat it over him according to the manner of the material until he is healed.
And this is the form of the prescriptions:
Chapter 19.
About the reduction of aristocratic nose.
When you treat aristocratic noses with cautery or acute burning medicine according to the preceding narration of the nose and it is not healed, then it is not engendered in the nose except that you place over the aposteme until the maturity of the nose, and that you extract all the humidity which is in the nose and the pus until the bone is discovered.
And then when the bone is discovered and you find in it corruption or blackness, then you scrape the nose with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named aspere cap, and it is made of iron indeed, and it is a reddish cap thus as you scrape the which is pointed for puncture of lime or alkali fat for subtle puncture (thus as it is in the following form).
And pause that over the corroded bone location, and then revolve it between your fingers, gently, until you know that the corrosion is reduced.
And then some evacuations are made, and then restore the location with drying and astringent causes.
Then if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and is freed from the body of the illness and remains for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not apostematous and does not fall into an accident, then you know that it is healed.
And otherwise, then it is not in the engendering but to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: it is that you discover from following bone with iron or acute medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take a triple treatment according to this form.
It is the extramation of the iron triangle, and the foundation of it is first extended until the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
And then pause that over the bone, and it is that of the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little on the body, and then revolve your hand with the triple treatment until it penetrates all of the bone, and the patient feels for so long as it attracts and comes out through the hole.
Then restore the location with astringent medicines that dry thus as you are expert in it.
Then since the flesh and the location are hardened, then the matter which was poured out to the affected parts before returns to the nose, so it is possible to ease the patient.
Chapter 20.
About the reduction of the prominence of the body.
When the body eminences in its totality and does not fall into numbness or diminution, then you know that the patient is relaxed, and then follows, and then places ventoses on the cervical scarifications and sucks for good suction; and then pauses over the body with liniment made of acatra and aloe and enses and sarcocolla, and then strengthens the emplaustre over the body in many powders.
And the manner of treating the pulse is to take drops of the strongest wine, and each drop should be duplicated in four places; and make them into motifs.
Then pause those on one over the other according to the quantity of which it has been necessary for the hue. Then strengthen them over those drops with a strong, strict structure; and afterwards apply the cupping glasses to suck out the scarifications; and then remove the cupping glasses and let the hue be straight for day and night.
Maybe if the ligament is softened, then it's necessary that it should be more relaxed.
Then remove the ligament for day and night as we have said.
And if the hue has already been reduced, good, and if not, then apply the plaster to the pulse and the structure and the cupping glasses until it is healthy.
Chapter 21.
On the inflammation of the prominence of the tunicateuvea ( likely referring to the uveal tunics, which are parts of the eye).
When you make an incision in the tunicateuvea, and it is prominent and protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of rice, and its shape is rounded for that, and you want to incise, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the uvea from below upwards, and then put the other needle in which there is a double filament of the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and let the first needle follow its disposition; and then incise the place of the double filament and lift it up to that part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen it very much.
And then extract the needle and place it on the hue of the wool infused in a white album, and let it be until the filament in the uvea becomes clear.
And then cure the hue with that which comforts it until the wound is healed.
And some vegetables gathered from the entire part in a circle of drops until the hue adjusts to a great prominence, and then it is perforated with a subtle spatula that comes to the surface of the hue, and corrects the albugineous humidity, and descends the hue and enters immediately.
And then strengthen until it is healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of gout.
This disease that is called gout is not but a similarity in the hue resembling descending water and it is not that.
Maybe the manner of operating on it is to make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straighten, and then take the dry cap in your hands more than two parts and mauve until you see the sania pervading to the lower parts, and then it is dried and does not descend, and remains in the light, and the disease sees the causes thus, as it was seen.
And if it does not descend downwards, you will know that it is water.
Maybe if it is not prepared for the descent to the sania as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a subtle spatula and spin it over the panicle circling a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva in the corneal tunic in the crown (within the locus of vision), until the sania is forgotten.
Then when it is forgotten, then you distill in the hue of warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugrec and honey.
And then it is cured with the other causes until it is healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of descending water from the hue.
We have said the species of water in the division and what is convenient to perform in the sermon declaring, then that according to sanity.
Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and lift the dry hue to him, with a very strict motif.
And then pause close to the eyelid of the dry hue with your left hand, if the hue in which there is water is on the left; or with your right hand, if the hue is on the right.
And then with your right hand take the alum, if the hue is on the left; or with your left hand, if the hue is on the right.
And then pause the extremity of the alum close to the crown for the greatness of the radius in the album of the hue from the part of the lesser lacrimal, and then wrap the alum in a circle and turn your hand on it.
And then penetrate into the album of the hue and feel that the alum has already been introduced to the cause of the vein.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the path of the alum at the surface of the space which is of the pupil within the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the hue; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the hue through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then stop the magic water within the place where it is, and you will hold the thread underneath in a single turn, and thus if the water descends so quickly, then the patient will recover his sight quickly, and the magic water in the hollow of the eyes.
And then rest for a little while; thus if the water has descended, then you will remove that other turn before the magic water is touched.
And then when it is dry and does not descend, then you will extract the magic water with ease, and revolve around that place a little by little, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemstone and with that wash the hollow of the eyes; and stop putting oil or lanolin or rose oil and albumen of goat and ligature around that eye.
Maybe we and those who are from our time put above that same eye a triple layer of goat's albumen.
And if you do not obtain your magic water within the instrument of the eye through its hardness  because it is one of the hardest things that the eye is very hard to pierce , then take the spatula which is named aluminum from which this is the form:.
And then pierce through that conjunctiva, and do not push your hand in the wound, and it is not so that you make a way to the magic water in the subtle place.
And then introduce the magic water according to what we have said.
And give completion to your work, be prepared in the patient's dark chamber decently made in which they sleep on their back in a dimly lit room, and be prohibited from all movements.
And stop in the nature of that water so that it is aligned with its nature, and do not move the head of the bed to the right or left side at all.
And be the bandage according to its disposition within three days.
And then remove it from that dark room and expose the free view, and do see some causes, and then return the bandage within seven days.
And do not think that you make this at the hour of the cures or then stop the infusion. You will find that you remove it for so long as the water can flow more easily and strongly, with great and violent regard.
Maybe you will find an abscessed aposteme, then you will remove the eye within seven days, and correct that which fell from the abscess.
Then you will absolve the sight of it and stop on the face of its orifice, for which it is ruled by the judgment of its days, it exists in the dark room.
And then you will be freed from that dark room gradually and converse about its causes.
And you will know that in the chapter it is not excused to omit some turns of vision, and then you will be hard about the operation.
And now we have arrived at some of those who are from the Artach, and some said that they made a hole in the Ayraque magic water perforated with which the water is succeeded.
Maybe the emperor did not see anything like this in our land which has perfected water, nor is it written in some of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magic water for which it is above those, and that one who ignores them:.
And they are made of iron or of iron properly, and they are the extremities of their limb with this subtle triangular shape, the sharp extremity thus as that is the form.
Chapter 24.
On the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are born diverse adjusted flesh growths from which some cause is assembled to scorpion of many weights, or to a polyp-like pes; and this illness is called polyp because it is similar to that pes represented. And of them is cancerous flesh, rough, of dark color; and of them is that it is not lion-like flesh of dark color.
Then in that which is among these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you will make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and open the nostrils of it, and pick the tone once in that flesh. And then extract it from the fore-part, and then you will inscribe that water which has comprehended of those with a subtle spatula of one part within so you know that all the flesh is removed; for if there remains some cause of which the abscess is possible, then you will return to the instrument with subtle tools facilitated within so that none of the causes remain. Maybe you will find an abscessed aposteme, then you will stop the water that flows; or it is one of the malignant apostemes, then you will touch and cauterize it within so that it is absolved from saneness and all the hollows are stopped.
And then you will be prepared in the nose, stopping the vision with agreement or water or glass. More often if the nose is opened and of its process humidity enters into the palate, then you will know that it is already healing.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that nothing is being accomplished in the pus that accumulates under the skin of the nostrils which has not received abscess.
Then it is clear that the pus is full of bad filth which has some grossness, and it goes into the new wounds, and stops between each nut the quantity of the finger or month, and aggravates the patient and puts an extremity of the filth into the nostrils by the reason or another cause which is possible.
And since it is clear that the pus will be made, which attracts the bad odor into the channels of the nostrils, and it sits on the bad gall, because too many veins seem to come together for this action, making the children in the schools, and it is the lighter cause for those who want to do it.
And then stop the two extremities of the filth, one extremity that goes over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a closure of flesh in the new wounds that are on the filth, and make it so that you know that the flesh is already in the new wounds of the filth.
And then extract the filth, and stop in the nose, extracting a blood clot with a syringe, and make it so for three days or more until all that is corroded is removed from the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, place in the nose a tube of lead for several days until it is healed.
But if there are still signs of treatment that remain, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument to make a cupping device which makes distilled oils and medicines in the nostrils:
And make it of silver or copper, which is similar to a small lamp opened, and also like a small container, and the material is similarly made.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the handle of the instrument to make a cupping device is flat, uncovered; which has a hand grip at the back of it, with which you hold it when you draw out oil or what you want from the juices and causes that are sucked in.
Chapter 25.
About the ulcers on the extremities of the nose.
Many veins come together to form an ulcer on the extremities of the nose, and it is magnificent and mentioned in several days until one looks at its condition.
And for that reason it is clear that you should insert that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and eradicate all of that. And then stop on the place where the cautery or medicine combines which is in place of it.
But if the infection is delayed until it is magnificent, then consider if it is lapified, hard, of dark color and of little sentiment, then do not touch that iron instrument because it is a cancerous aposteme; because many veins come together to infect this grand evil over that which it had.
And if the aposteme is of a lion's touch and not of dark color, and it seems that infection is possible in all of that, then evacuate the patient and infect them without fear, and cure the place with what remains and constrain until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
About the stitching of the nose and the lips and the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by similarity.
You will know that when continuity is restored in one of these cartilages, little confidence is placed in that operation unless in some cases.
Then it is clear that when you come across some cause of those, consider if it is fresh plague with bad blood, and then adjust the two lips of the plague to stitching, and then cure it until it is healed.
And if the lips of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is clear that you should excavate some part of its apparent codename until there is no bad blood. And then adjust the two lips to stitching and strengthen them, and on them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and essences, and place on the powder a piece of dialectical emplastrum, or some other of the consolidating emplasters, and let it lie there for two days or three, and then remove it and change it with another emplaster, and let it lie until the filth is absorbed, and then cure it thoroughly until it is healed.
The greater part of the suture is that you should add the solution of continuity or threads thus as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or add the solution of continuity thus with faith as you and know how to do.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the divided parts of the teeth.
Removed roots are found in the divided parts of the teeth in their lips, some having apostemic ulcers resembling fatty errors, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Then you should convert the lips and cleanse each of those hardnesses from every part, and then make an incision in the place of the wounded tissue that is to be restored, and then wash with wine and cure the place where it is stipulated, until it is sanctified.
Chapter 28.
On the incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
A great number of roots grows over the adjusted flesh in the gum, which the ancients called albules; therefore, you should suspend that hammer or have that hammer in the forces and incised, so that it deviates from its root, and let the healthy blood flow or the health.
And then stop on the place of wounded tissue or other stippled powders or excitatives.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
On the reason for teeth being iron.
When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts and of those from the mouth and between the adjusted gums, scurfy scales appear, and some roots are blackened and are made citrine or green until the gum is corrupted by that decay and the loose teeth.
And then you should make a separation between the patient's hands and stop the head of it in the tieu, and scrape the teeth on which those scurfy scales appear and cause them to resemble sand until none of their causes remain, and that makes the blackness and citrinity and other things mondified.
Then if that is what is in those of the beginning of the reason, well; and if not, then you iterate the reason over those to another day and to the second and to the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And you know that teeth have need of various roots of diverse forms and of various figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And for this reason the roots are those which the tooth is rooted in the divided part of the teeth is other than the root which is ras between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots you have prepared those which you will see soon.
Chapter 30.
On the eradication of teeth.
You should cure the tooth of its pain with all your skill and delay in total eradication of it, because there is no cause that can supply the root of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance until it is excavated in the eradication of it.
Moreover, you should be certain when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, because firmly you must certify what is the aching tooth, because many roots cause pain and deceive the patient and make it seem like it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the bad and aching tooth is eradicated, because we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Then how do you certify what is the aching tooth, and what do you know, then you should scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of the entire part, and then mau those ties that are subtle at the beginning little by little until it concudes.
And then you should place it in the strong teeth with great force for good loquaciousness or stout fortitude, and stop the head of the patient between the ties that hold them so they do not move, and then draw out the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that does not shake it, nor does the patient have major pain.
And then if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place that on the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it thus as it was done at the beginning.
Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then you should complete the drap of that trauma and strengthen it at the extremity of the subtle root so that it is not trapped in the hour of your construction over those ties.
And then you should operate extremely carefully in the scarification of the entire part of the gum and guard with great strength so that it does not shake and remains a part of it, and return to the patient for the evil that is greater than the primary pain of it.
And take heed that you do not perform what foolish and ignorant barbers do in their obstinacy and audacity about the eradication of it, lest they administer what we have not recommended; for many misguided treatments come to dominate the severely afflicted homes, which are more difficult to treat than those that are bandaged, and the roots of theirs remain altogether, or some of those, or that you extract those bones from the handle of the mandible as well, just as many misguided treatments have testified.
And then the eradication of it is to be washed with warm water or agreed upon salt solution.
And if you induce fluxes of blood for that purpose, just as many misguided treatments induce, then apply a certain quantity of vinegar and asperties upon the wound, and if it does not confer that vinegar, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps should be subtle as those that grasp the tooth at the commencement of the extraction, of a short handle and large, so that they are not doubled when you need to operate with them.
And they are also like times of large handles that enter so that when you stretch them out, they are not doubled, but rather brief extensions.
And they are made of Indian iron, expertly crafted with extended extensions, and in these extensions there are teeth which some insert into others and stretch out by strong contraction force, and some misguided extensions have the shape of a bird's beak, called cicognia, so it is guarded, and they are of strong construction.
Chapter 21.
On the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones from crushed jaws.
When you need to eradicate a tooth that is stuck due to some cause, then it is necessary that you pause over the spot with a bandage for a day or two until the spot becomes mollified; and then insert the beak-shaped forceps, which are assembled in the form of a bird's beak called cicognia or guard, like the shape of the forceps:
Their extensions are made of dentin, just like enamel or alumugia.
And if they do not obey you with these forceps or instruments, then it is necessary that you operate on the root and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument called atali, which is a small lever whose shape is this:
And it should be of short extension, thick and small, and not be bent so that it is not stuck.
So if the root is forgotten, it is thus; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extension in which there is some thickness.
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle extension.
And thus you will be helped by this instrument having two slants of which this is the shape, suitable for the following: and with other instruments which precede in the filing of teeth; for juvenile use is made with this instrument which is assembled with a large hook, and this is the shape:
of the triangular extension, curved or short, which has some thickness, and not bent so that it is not stuck.
And another thing that the instruments of the teeth move similarly and resemble the other instruments.
The skilled craftsmen are wise and subtle in their art, attentive to the material according to what it signifies, and the diverse maladies; for they are of the maladies which the ancients did not diagnose or pause with proper instruments, due to the forms of various species.
But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is stuck, or if it is rotten, then it should be cured in its place with what is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have spoken of in the extraction of roots of teeth, and helps you with the gesture of which this is the shape:
And it should be with some small thickness, little by little, and it should be held or fixed in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the whole bone is forgotten; and then restore the place with medicines conveniently adapted to it.
But if there is small rottenness in the bone, then scrape away that rottenness and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of teeth prominent above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course in shape, and more so when they protrude in females, and more so in venerable ladies; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is not attached to another tooth, and it is not possible to separate or dislocate it, then root out that one; but if it is annexed to another tooth, then you extract it with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it resembles a pig's jaw, and is made of Indian iron with a very pointed extension.
And it is your extraction with which you extract it in three days for the durability of the tooth, and that it not be joined to another of the teeth.
And if it is a prominent abscess that has burst, then take out the iron from India of which this is the form:
It is all of the iron from India and the margue in essence; it is of many small points thus with the abscess which are made by the same art, on which the tooth is burst little by little in many days at ease, so that no other abscess comes together and grows. And apply linen to the wound, and shave around it with razors.
And if it is a wound in which a part is torn and the tongue is affected, then cover that you extract the aspiration from that fracture so that it is stopped and plugged, and apply it so that the tongue does not touch nor the speech does not corrupt.
Chapter 33.
On the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver filings.
When accidents happen to the teeth in front due to concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the patient cannot hold onto what they eat, and you have treated them with medicines that stop the pain, and it has not been of value in your cure, then so that no evil is generated in those that are strengthened with gold and not with silver, because silver turns greenish and soon loses its strength, but gold at no time loses its strength.
And it is the gold in such subtlety and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reception is that you take the gold and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with two tortuosities of the gold between two decayed teeth, or one or more, until it reaches the fabric to the healthy tooth of the other part. And then iterate the treatment until the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and wisdom until it is not decayed.
And it is your tightening that strengthens the gold, which removes the roots of the teeth that do not evacuate.
And then scrape off the superfluous excess of gold with forceps or scissors, and add those to whatever place you have gestured, and convert them into occult things between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that it does not cause harm to the tongue. And then leave it thus straightened like a Roman.
But if it is dislocated or broken, strengthen it or them with other gold in the same manner at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two decayed teeth, thus as often these are joined:
And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their place, and they are restored thus as we have recounted, and they remain.
And do not do this unless you are skilled craftsmen and know how.
And some ivory tusk is adapted to some cause of the cow's bones, and it is made like their form of tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth fails, and it is strengthened thus as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
On the incision of the ligament which goes into the tongue and prohibits speech.
This ligament which goes beneath the tongue sometimes grows naturally in which men are born, or accidentally and suddenly due to a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation in him is that you open the mouth of the patient, his existing head being in the tier; and elevate the tongue, and then incise that nervous ligament according to the width until the tongue is freed from its constraint.
But if there is some hardness or denseness, and that has been for the consolidation of the wound, then you inject an oil and separate it according to the width until you have incised the ligament and the denseness is dissolved.
And beware that there is not made a fracture in the prier of the flesh and that you separate here, making arches and coming to a flow of blood.
And then wash the vestige of the incision with warm water or with vi agreement or with warm fomentation; and then pause beneath the licini tongue; so it is thus that you hold the patient beneath the tongue in whatever new night, so that no other growth is consolidated.
But if there is a flow of blood, pause over the vitriolized place thrice; but if the blood stops, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that converges to this. And then heal it in the other causes until it is healthy.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Sometimes it happens that beneath the tongue an aposteme forms, resembling a small tumor, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and for this reason it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
And the operation in him is that you open the mouth of the patient, sitting before a candle and considering the aposteme.
And if you notice that the skin is of a dark or black color, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that spot because it is cancerous.
And if it has declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onion on it, and you insert a subtle spatula underneath, and you insert the whole affected part; and if you feel that you are winning at the time of your operation, then you pause from underneath three fingers, so it is veterinarian, until the blood is restored.
And then return to your work until you have treated the entire complement of it, until it is washed with warm water and salt; and cure the other curvature as well, until it is sanctified.
Chapter 36.
On the extraction of abscesses from two kidneys and of that which is nothing in the gulf and of other abscesses.
When you find in the gulf a godat, so they are glands which are assembled together, which are called kidneys, which when you cure them as we have said in the division and it is not sanctified, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that iron with the flow of blood; beforehand let it mature until it is ripe, and then you can remove it, or it will break for itself.
And if it is of white color, radish-like, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what needs to be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, during your operation, if already the abscess of it has rested completely or if it is diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient sit down in the sun, and the head of it should be in a warm place, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between their hands before the tongue of it, holding an instrument most noble, of which this is the form:
And make it of silver or copper, and make it subtle as a scalpel.
Then as you press it against the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and you see above it the warm humor, then take an onion and place it in the amulet, and pull it towards the affected parts as much as you can. Or another thing that you remove some cause from the tunics, and then you incise it with an instrument of which this is the form:
Or another thing that you remove some cause from the tunics, and then you incise it with an instrument of which this is the form: and it is assembled into forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, thus that the orifice of each one of them is in the end of the other, very sharp, which is of iron indeed, bent inward.
But if this instrument is not at your presence, then you incise it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: It should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And since you have incised a mole, incise the other according to this measuring method of incision, and then the incision will heal quickly with abundant water.
But if there is a flow of blood, quickly heal with water of decoction of roots of milfoil or of leaves of myrtle and similarly to those of the stopping causes until the flow of blood is restored, and then cure it until it is sanctified.
And some evacuated nodes are found in the gulf other than those abscesses of the two kidneys, and incise them according to what you have said and done in the incision of two moles similarly.
And you have already medicated a woman with an abscess which was born in the gulf of it, the abscess tended to dark color, of little sensation, which had closed the gulf of it, and the woman breathed with a straight mouth, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was near death if maybe some aid would have stayed for one day or two.
And the abscess had so much putrefied that it had made two ramps until they emptied through two tubes.
Then you carefully fistulated and placed it in one of its onions, and pulled it out, and it was full of great pus, and then you incised that which you comprehend of the other troupe, and then you opened the mouth of it, and comprehended its tongue, and then you placed the onion on that abscess.
And then you absorbed great part of it, and there was no flow from it except for a little blood. Then it was absolutely the gulf of that woman, and she began to drink water, and then took some viand, so you did not cease to incise that abscess for a long time, and succeeded in incising the abscess in its place, which incised until it was prolonged.
Then you ingeniously cauterized the gulf of it, then stopped the addition; and then you walked around and did not know that God did that miracle to me.
Chapter 38.
On the incision of a hernia when it is affected by an abscess.
When the hernia descends to the groin, and it is affected by an abscess and is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and rounded part below, then it is called a bubo.
Moreover, when it is cured with the method we have described in the division, and your cure does not succeed, and sometimes the abscess is hidden beneath and is subtle, then it is necessary to incise those that are rounded and aggregated; and if it is of long duration, and is bloody, of dark blue or black color, and it is not in its natural place, then it is necessary to make an incision there, because there is fear about the patient.
And when you sometimes follow the method that I have described about its whiteness and length, which makes you press the patient's tongue with an instrument that processes its shape and fixes it in the new moon, and draws it downwards and incises with one of the two instruments, which are mentioned in the incision of two mesentery.
And it is necessary not to incise it unless it is adjusted according to its natural term and additions, because if you incise more of it, you will injure the tissue and prevent it from healing.
And then make the incision, using that which we have recommended in the incision of two mesentery, and cure it from within so that it may be healthy.
Moreover, if the patient is frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use art in the cauterization of it with fear, and the method of cauterizing it is not only with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient in a certain position, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument we have described, and then take the water which we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and make it come alive, and pause there neither spacious nor subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose form is this:.
It is the extraction of the hernia in which the medicine was placed thus as the hernia of a golden chain, and place the instrument with the medicine over the wound, and the patient will spit or blow saliva or mucus from their mouth for the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not fall into any cause on the affected part of it and that it may descend.
And then place your hand with the medicine, and express it over the uvula for a space of half an hour within which it will be digested and pacified by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and envelop it over the extremity of the hernia, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the hernia with the cotton into a canal above so that the cotton adheres to it, and do this many times until you obtain what you wish from the cauterization of the hernia, and then leave it alone for three or four days.
And if you need to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then cauterize by removing the cotton from the hernia in a circle with the medicine, and manifest what is in the circuit of the hernia with the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure beforehand with embrocation, and remove the bitterness through gargling, so that it may be healthy.
And this species of cure is more saving than incision and longer in duration without fear.
Some wounded uvulas are cured with what is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because they are cured by subfumigation in this manner: take calament, ysop, origan, ruda, Arabic scicados, camomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of them, into a bundle, and soak them in warm wine, and boil; and the bundle should be washed decently, and placed in the middle of the bundle a perforated instrument made of silver or copper according to this manner; it is made of silver or copper.
And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth so that the steam passes to the uvula through the tube, so that the uvula may be moderately fumigated.
And then repeat it on those wounded parts until they are dry, and beware that you do not make this cure at the moment of the arrival of abscesses, because it would too much adjust to the abscess, and do not think that you should do this, but rather declare the abscess of the hernia cautious.
Moreover, if the instrument is not present to you, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of the hernia in a closed space of a hull, so that the patient's mouth may be comforted, because the closed space of the hull prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of spines and of that which adheres to the affected part and other causes.
Soft tissues adhering in the spinal marrow or foot joints or some other cause.
Therefore collect what appears evident, on which the gaze falls, since you press the tongue with an instrument only, so that it may be declared what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the spinal marrow, therefore you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the strong cause annexed to the spinal marrow will be evacuated by vomiting; or that the patient eats a piece of raw meat or a radish of lettuce or a dry bread roll; or take a piece of dry marine sponge, and tie it strongly with a thread, and then pass the patient through the transgressing, because when you perceive the place where the spines are extracted, then it will be evacuated. And take a eel and bind it strongly, and let it be placed on the table and subsequently extracted; or take a porcupine and subsequently extract the joints and subsequently the entrails.
But if it does not evacuate with those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form.
And it is so gross that you remove a small part, and in the extremity of it, you will find what you have introduced into its throat with ease.
And raise the highest part of it to them, and beware that you touch the bone of the throat, so that you do not injure the body or that which pierces the bone or spine, or that the doctor places his hand on it.
But however the patient introduces himself, by his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and piercing within, and he pulls his hand to the instrument above, all according to the quantity that is prepared for him so that it may be evacuated.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of bloodletting annexed to the spinal marrow.
When bloodletting is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and not comforts, consider then the spinal marrow of the patient at the tongue, since you have comprehended the language of it with an instrument which you have recommended.
Therefore, if you perform bloodletting, extract it with a small hook or subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and introduce it into the spinal marrow of the patient, and place a pause in the concavity of the cannula a ignited iron, and do so many times (until the bloodletting is dead and separated from the spinal marrow) and abstain from giving the patient water for a whole day.
And then take a vessel full of cold water, and hold the patient's mouth under it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not transgress from that cause and give the patient water an hour later with their hand, because the bloodletting is just as sensitive to the water as it can feel.
But if it is not evacuated with what we have recommended, then suffumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida through the instrument that we have recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Do so, since it is in four quadrants.
And it is another manner of operation in the suffumigation of that, which is to take a tube in which are carbonated sparks and the tube is covered with a cover in the middle of which is a trachea; and then compose the extremity of the instrument in that trachea; and then give below the suffumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not evacuated until you know that the suffumigation has reached the bloodletting, because the bloodletting is just as quadrangular.
And if it does not work, then you iterate the suffumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient drink, and eat salty causes and herbs, and do not beg for water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be evacuated.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting of the spinal marrow is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it is in some curvature. Which is placed on the spinal marrow, and its extremity is similar to a beak of a stork, which is guarded, in which is applied a file, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not slip.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the sermon in perception of abscesses and in section of theirs.
The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to what I remember of them, from each one in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of theirs for two manners, from which one is for the species of abscesses in their metrics; and for what you comprehend of the humidity.
And the second manner is to prop up the locations in which the humors accumulate, because an abscess that forms in the head is different from an abscess that forms in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy location forms differently than an abscess in a joint; and each of them requires judgment for operation.
And more abscesses are those which do not need to be opened unless there is maturation of the pus in them, or they complete their cycle.
So other abscesses are those that need to be drained when they are crossed, and do not mature according to their cycle, like abscesses that form near joints, because an abscess that forms near a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can corrode the ligaments or nerves of that joint, thus making it a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the drainage until it matures, you will harm the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, so drain what has not matured; and do not drain crudely, with incomplete digestion, except for what is near the buttocks, so that you do not prolong the pressure of it and it becomes elongated to the inner parts of the buttocks, and becomes a fistula, or it becomes chronic in the term of it, and does not heal. You should know the time for draining an abscess, and thus it is when it has matured.
And you know it has matured when there is reduction of pain and cessation of fever, and also decrease of inflammation and pulse rate, and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And because you should know how to drain the pus that lies beneath the abscess and of the pus that comes from the prominence of the swelling.
And drainage should always be done through the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerve cords, of the arteries; and, afterwards, in all hidden places where there is no reflection; because in those that do reflect, use drainage according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to delay drainage until digestion of it is confirmed according to its cycle, as we have said; because if you drain it then, it prolongs the body of the pus and of much putrid matter, and thus the lips of the wound become hardened and its depth increases.
But some abscesses are drained according to the latitude of the flesh or body that needs it, or according to what the affected member requires.
And you know that you should administer small drainage, and in large abscesses a large and ample or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses are those in which you know that the cord should be conquered and enclosed, when it is thus done and thus in a term that already exists, like those that accumulate in drops of dublc and of bubbles.
And of those that are enclosed in a section having three angles; and of those that are in the one that is enclosed thus like a figure of a leaf of myrtle, like the abscesses of the angles.
And of theirs that are in those which receive round section and crescent-shaped section, and similar to those.
But that one which cannot be caught thus like the superficial abscesses of lions, you know that you should drain it with superficial drainage, or just a plain surface.
And you know when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, that you should drain it and do not think of extracting all the pus at once; instead, extract a part of it, and then leave the abscess to mature until another day, and then extract a larger part, and thus make the pus flow gradually according to the graduation until it is fully cleared.
And especially if the patient is of frail virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit has much vitality resolved to expel the pus, and thus the patient will die, and you will operate on them.
And keep this chapter with great caution, and thus make your drainage in the one that drains these abscesses, knowing that you will clear the ulcers and consider then if the ulcer of the abscess is small, or it is a plain section, then you administer the remedies of lyo or cotantic; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the drainage are many, then know that you pause meanwhile in whatever crossing until they pervade completely.
And if in the abscess one part of the cord has been cut off or has concaved into the circuit, then know that you should complete it with cotantic very well or with a thread of fil de li, like when you have treated pans or razizos, their humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and thus proceed and cure what you know of the enguents until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then you should administer cold water and wine in those which mix a thread of lyo, and pause it over the place of the blood flow, much diluted.
More often, one should persevere with the flow of blood, then it is convenient that you administer regulation and cure, and powder the humors which are recommended in many places of our free book and division.
Moreover, if it is in winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then it is convenient that you apply poultices in wine and oil, and pause those over the affected areas.
And if it is in summer, and the affected areas are fleshy, then it is convenient that you apply poultices wrapped in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of that should be cold until the third day, as we have said, and then it is convenient that you dissolve the abscess and clear away that which has converged there, and administer in the cure of what is convenient for him to recover.
And thus it is necessary to understand the cure of abscesses universally, more according to the way of distinction already said about all abscesses in which manner it is the way of curing them particularly by chapter.
Chapter 41.
About the section of abscesses which occur on the crown of the head.
On the crown of the small head, small abscesses, and these are species of knots which contain tunics that are their own doing; and the species of theirs are many.
And of them there are swellings, and of those it is said that they contain humidity resembling slime. And of those it is said that they contain humidity resembling pus, and resemble them; and of those it is said that they are rocky, hard.
And in the section of everything, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, since one must not make a counteraction against the extraction of those.
And the operation in the section of those is that you extract them with an instrument in the form of which you approach thus, which is called entromes, so that you know what they contain.
Since it is said that it contains humidity, then you should cut into it with an incision in the section according to the longitude per superficial section according to this form:
And begin in the section of the line B up to the line G. Then, since the humidity is evacuated, then you excavate that which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause of all, because many weakened returns, if it remains from some cause.
And then submerge it in Egyptian ink, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that with the plague and let it stand there until another day, because I think that everything corrodes so that it removes all that from that membrane.
And then iterate over that spot with Egyptian ink secondly and thirdly if it is indicated by him, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that membrane; then cure the plague with ink until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fat nodes, then you incise it according to this form: in the section having the form of a cross, and cut between the two lips of the section and scrape away everything from that part, and force your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
Moreover, if you have made a counteraction, then do so that you would first be recounted primarily.
And similarly do in the abscessed section of cure according to what you have said; and the section about the abscessed cure is more leisurely, because it is of little blood and little humidity.
And some veins are like some of these abscesses which are in the head in some men whose whole body has no humidity; the cause is because you have incised into an abscess on the head of an old woman and touched the abscess thus as a hard, rough, white, which could not be touched, and if someone had made a percussion on that, it would plague.
Moreover, in other abscesses accidentally on the head, this is not about this chapter, thus as the abscesses that occur on the heads of children and one must examine the roots of the aurelia, more so the section of all these should be a superficial section.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of theirs for thus that it alleviates the pain of the sanity at the lower parts.
And then cure them with what is convenient for that of cure.
Chapter 42.
About the section of scrofulas which occur on the neck.
Many weakened occur in these abscesses on the neck and in the axillae and in the angles; and some weakened occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur on the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all of that scrofula is within its own proper tunic, and thus as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, thus as we have recommended.
And the species of these scrofulas are many, because some of them are rocky, and some contain humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Here is the translation:
And it is more cautious not to incise the vein or nerve.
And it is better to avoid cutting too much, so that you do not adjust your hand to the incision, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut; because if you cut a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then stop in the virtuous plague treated with three trissat powders or other fluxes of blood, and strengthen the plague, and thus enter into rest the acuteness of the aposteme and soften the plague, and it begins to be purged. When the blood is evacuated.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then investigate if there is any other cause of the small scrophulous tumors, so incise them and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrophulous vein, then beware that you do not incise that scrophulous root. Be careful lest you make a faulty double fold and let it fall so that it does not cause harm.
And then fill the wound with a lot of cotton which you have already submerged in Egyptian unguent, and then cure it.
And if you incise the whole scrophulous tumor, then beware that you adjust the two lips of the wound and sew them up so well that there is no remaining superfluity.
But if you see that there has remained superfluity due to the greatness of the scrophulous tumor, beware that you intend to incise the root of it, and separate it and administer suture and what is said.
And in those scrophulous tumors that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation here where it appears to you the place of maturation, and stop making a perforation of what is dried below the body, as we have said.
And then administer perforation, with calves' unguent and similar things, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And then when you see the wound is already clean, then cure it with unguent of generated flesh until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
On the section of the pill of the aposteme that has accidentally touched the gullet.
The ancient doctors wrote this section in the epilhot, and we do not see anyone in our land who has made it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those ones.
But in the men who have acquaintance, beware that the extraction of the epilhot is avoided, because it is not made for the sake of juice, so that all the veins and major parts of the patient are here.
But in those who have apostemes caught in the mouth or gullet or two ears, when the illness is not in the cane, beware of using the section of epilhot to flee the loss which is made by perforation.
Then beware when you want to evacuate it, that you incise the epilhot below three circles of the circles of the epilhot, or four with a small section for the latitude in what is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in cipher, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the veins of blood which are near.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, beware then that you extend the codena of the gullet onto eleven, and then divide the codena until it reaches the canal, but avoid the veins of blood if you see any other cause.
And then incise the ciplach according to what we have recommended; and it is significant regarding the section of the canal for the flux which is from that exit into what is of the disorder and for the evacuation of the intestine.
And thus the wound will be open for some time.
Then when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add two lips of the codena of the wound, and sew them together with the sole of the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
And thus Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposition is not but that you see that some of these apostemes have already operated on the gullet of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and the oil of it is interjected, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound for some respiration, and is saved from death.
And because of this, I command that the ulcerated plague be consumed within, so that the evil of the disease is digested for three days; and then I command thus to consume the plague, and cure it within so that it becomes healthy.
And because I have seen through my medicines, it is that a servant holds a candle and lights the ulcerous gland in the patient's armpit, and I have been called to cure it, and I have touched the pulse of the lung, and I discovered the plague and touched the vein which was affected by the small plague.
Then I had to confess that the vein had not been touched nor guided, and the wind was coming out of the plague, and I cured it within so that it became healthy.
And do not hasten the servant if it does not arrive at the wound, and then return to the mildness of their own dispositions for some days.
And now I say that in the section of the epilepsy there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
On the section about abscesses that occur in the armpit beforehand, and it is called hernia of the armpit.
This abscess named hernia of the armpit is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
And it is according to two manners, because either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, it is not necessary to cure.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is made by obstruction of an artery, and in that there is fear. And it does not seem that it makes a presumption about the iron cum ferrum except in the one that is small. And you probe that and investigate with the said, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes, and it is not suspended in any of the veins, then you inject it thus as the nodes, and extract what contains the skin and burst; and otherwise, then the whole essence is scrutinized, and then cure the place within so that it becomes healthy.
Chapter 45.
On the section of the species of nodes.
There are many species of nodes and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And it seems that I recommend thus the difference between node and exit wound, as if making a doubt.
Then I say that an exit wound is heat and fever and vehement pains within so that the ebullition of the superflewity is sedated; and it is a complete putrefaction that then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
But an node does not have heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that cyphic lion which is in its own proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a ceze and it is made thus as a vacuum, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, because either they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Then it is clear, when you approach the cure of a node, that you expound upon it and inquire into its beginning with an instrument called introflex, according to what will be seen in its form in the chapter which is about to come.
And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the place where you find humidity which you found in the abscess, and you rotate the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the code.
And then finally you measure according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the introflex and consider what is left in its vestige.
And if the humidity has flowed forth, of whatever color it may be, then you inject it in a superficial section according to what I said about the other abscesses.
And if from the vestige of the introflex there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
And it cuts around it in a section having the form of a cross according to this form: Thus as I have shown you, and suspends that in onions, and excavates the code of all parts facilitated, and guards the skin or sac, if possible, over that and extracts that sanity from the node.
But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that sanity, and many times it happens that then you extract it by pieces until none of it remains for any cause.
Because if none of it remains for any cause, little or too much, the node returns according to the majority.
And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the plague with some corrosive and sharp powders, and strengthen the plague, and pause over that which sits as a cautious abscess, and cure it by another cure until it is healthy.
And if it is a great swelling, then kiss the two labial lips of it and take care that which incarnates there.
Perhaps the pulse comes to the contrary, or is non-pulsating, then touch and feel the place of the third rib where it is vertebrae and lay that straight bandage for two days or three until the plague and the inflammation of the blood are reduced; and then return to cut open what is rotten from the node.
Chapter 46.
About the forms of necessary instruments in section and perforation.
Of those are the forms of the introducers, and they are of three species, which of those is large, and of them is medium, and of them is small.
The form of the large introducer is this:
The form of the small introducer is this:
Made of iron, of alloys, of carefully crafted extremities, so that they fasten the instrument in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are named sharpened, and one of those is called pointed.
And they are of three species, because one of them is large, medium, and small.
The form of the large experiment, its shape:
The form of the medium experiment, its shape:
The form of the small experiment, its shape:
It is convenient that they are for those abscesses and exits and fistulas and buboes, so that among them there are those of the bones and other causes.
And they are made of roots, thick ones, lions, thus with large needles in which the threads are sewn, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, And the best ones are those made of copper.
And they are made of black lead experiments, which ones are adapted so that by them the fistulas are opened in the cavity of those which are reflected, and are reflected with their levity in those reflections.
And they are of three species, because some of them are long, and others are medium, and others are short, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and of its structure.
Form of the large experiment of lead:
Form of the medium experiment of lead:
Form of the small experiment of lead:
The forms of the hooks are of many species, because some of them are simple, which ones have a single curvature only, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium.
And of them there are unciform hooks, and they are of three species.
And of those there are unciform hooks having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And of them there are hooks having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple hook, its form:
Form of a large hook having two curvatures: Form of a medium hook having two curvatures: Form of a small hook having two curvatures:
Form of a large hook having three curvatures:
Form of a medium hook having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels which are used to cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and they are of three species, because some of them are large, medium, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of a medium scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those which are made for sectioning so are pointed and the other extremities are not-pointed, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather are made to be used gently in the excision of the nodes, fearing the incision of a vein or nerve, and for them to be healthy and to bring tranquility to a patient for a little while, which brings relief from the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of forceps, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, thus with varied shapes.
They are made of copper and similar to a razor, which one is made with a curve.
And it is in the extremity of the pointed instrument with a hidden space and in that curve to the divided parts, and beforehand, when you wish, thus with veils.
The forms of spasm, which are often confused between the fingers due to the perforation of the abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and there are three species: great, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those.
The forms of hemorrhages are those which obstruct the flow of blood, and there are three species: great, medium, and small; the forms of it.
There are bitter forms of sharp citrine, round and having some length, and there are subtle ones.
And it is necessary that these species of hemorrhages are great, medium, and small, so that for those obstructing the flow of blood with velocity, and then when your primary treatment is not medicine.
However, they do not use those to obstruct blood in every part of the body, and they only use them in fleshy locations, such as in the muscles of the arms and thighs, and in the muscles of the legs, and in the breasts, and belly, and groin, and similarly in the fleshy muscles that are humid.
And some veins are forms of those other small instruments similar to thread-like fibers according to this form; for which the blood is obstructed when it is made by phlebotomy, or by incision of a vein or artery.
And some veins are round forms according to this form:
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of the breasts of men which are similar to those of women.
Some veins are swollen in the breasts of some men who take on the habit of sleeping with full bellies, and then their breasts are swollen, and similar to those of women, and they become feminine-like, and effeminate.
And to the one who has this, it is necessary to make an incision in those with a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then to remove all grossness, and then to fill the wound with incarnated medicinal powder, and then to adjust the two lips of the wound with cosidura, and cure the one who is inside so that he may be healthy.
Moreover, if the breast declines to the lower parts and is softened by its magnitude just like in women, then it is divided into two flat surfaces plus four bulges, with two sections similar to a lunar figure, each of which is contained in the other, so that one ends where the other begins, until it is seen that the major line contains the minor according to this form from line B to line G. And then remove the cord that is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the bleeding, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure, so that it may be healthy.
And if you do not complete the incision of what is necessary to be cut for the quieting of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil and let it corrode what is rough from the grayness, and then cure the one who is inside so that he may be healthy.
Chapter 48.
On the perforation of abscesses that come from below the nipple.
These abscesses that come from below the nipple are of the species of scrophulae, hard, which contain a skin that is sacred.
And of those, some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity need to be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when everything is evacuated that is in the abscess of the sanity, then you complete it with much cotton and let it dry for another day.
And then the cotton should be removed and it should be cured with a convenient ointment according to what is necessary, until it is healthy.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodules and scrophulae, then you should section above it just as we have said in the section about scrophulae, regarding their incision.
Moreover, if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes putrid, then administer to it a cautery according to what we have previously said about that.
Chapter 49.
On the incision of abscesses that occur through an artery or a vein.
When an artery is ruptured, and the cord that is above it is consolidated, then many veins occur in abscesses, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein: because when an abscess is through an artery, it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and when you touch the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor in the veins.
And that which is through a vein is round at the surface of the body.
And the incision about this abscess is erroneous, and it is worse in those who are below the ribs, and in the groin, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore it is necessary that its cure be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be evaded.
Most above the one who is of their part for inflammation of the orrific artery, it is customary to make an incision in the outer thigh; and then remove the outer layer with scissors and uncover the artery, and dissect the tunics until it is exposed.
And then place a thread above that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the artery with a double fold in two places,  which causes you to have a greater mastery in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples.
And then puncture the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until you reach the whole blood that is in it, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer cure to the one that is generating pus until the ligaments collapse; and then heal the one that is conveniently joined to the water inside, so it may be healthy.
And if it is an abscess due to a rupture of a vein, then be careful that you hold your hand in the water that is possible for the abscess in the outer thigh, and then insert the needle below the place where you held your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double fold until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with good ligaments according to what you have been told about the ligament of a grape, regarding the two parts at the extremities of the thread.
Mostly if you fear that the thread will come out, then insert the thread into that needle below the entire abscess, from the incision of the primary needle, and stretch the tied threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle place of it until you find what is inside, then you incise the excess flesh of the outer thigh, and leave what is attached to it.
And then place a poultice on the wound that has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with hot baths and conveniently joined until it may be healthy.
Chapter on the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Thus it occurs that abscesses occur in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses occur in nerves when they occur from their percussion or occur from superfluous effort, and from similar things.
And it is customary to make the most of it in the places of the joints or of the ankle, or in any place where the joints are weakened.
And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is among the greatest of its dispositions, those of their evil and when it is straitened with vehemence, it feels in the patient a similar stupor.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the chest of the body, and therefore it is below the outer thigh, and it has weakened the entire side and does not go to the front or back parts.
Then water of those that are in the joints does not flow that it may be inflamed with iron, because strong is their contraction.
Mostly the one that is on the head or on the forehead falls to the outer thigh with a spatula. Mostly if it is a small abscess, then you have the strength and cut off that root.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with an onion, and scrape off that, and then remove that; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it may be healthy.
Chapter 50.
About the section of abscess that occurs from the swelling that occurs in the stomach.
It is customary to find some homes with many wounds in the stomachs of those and in other parts of the body of those whose illnesses are called fungal due to similarity with fungi, from which the root is subtle and the head of that is large; and already the lips of those are converted, and it is about those who are small, and it is about those who are very magnificent.
And I have already seen one, and in the stomach of it there were two illnesses that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white things, with small roots.
And already the lips of those were turned inwards and were swollen, and humidity flowed from that entire time.
Then I incised those and extracted it from one of the XVIII ulcers on the skin. and the other was six ulcers.
And the operation on the incision of theirs is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the wound is white, humid, with subtle roots; then you incise with a broad spatula, and you are in your presence with cauteries on the focus, because many wounds of it expel much blood; and if you want to stop the blood, cauterize that.
And if the patient is pale and trembles, beware of incising with iron; mostly then take a recent hot bath, and stretch on that wound, in the manner that is what we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust on the structure of the thread of lead; therefore, do not cease to stretch the large lead grain deeply into the wound, until it may be cut off and fall through its effort.
Mostly if it is a thick disease, then at its onset there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in one who has it in the stomach.
Maybe it is possible that you are inflaming the worst of it, and then you should cauterize that so it does not return.
And then heal what is inside so that the wound may be healthy.
And beware that you do not presume to incise the one that is of dark color, with little sensation, of weak regard, because that is almost cancerous.
And I will find it in the memory of a crab and then I will remove it.
Chapter 52.
About the treatment of a prominent navel.
Prominence of the navel is caused by many reasons; or by fissures of the diaphragm which is above the stomach, and from it the intestine or budgel protrudes according to other ruptures; or by a flow of blood or of artery according to what is said there, or by constricted ventilation in it.
Maybe it is by fissure of the diaphragm and by movement of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it has a lion's pain, and then appears in diverse situations. And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then the situation of that which we have recounted, of maybe vehement diversity, and as you press on that which is hidden, and then returns; and far it is in that, and it is magnified much by the introduction of a bath and vehement treatment.
Maybe it is due to humidity, then it is a lion and it is not hidden when you press on your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it created.
And if it is due to blood, then at that time the signs appear showing the abscess turning black.
Maybe it is due to bad flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity.
Maybe it is due to ventilation, then the touch of it is a lion.
And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of artery, or of vein, or by ventilation; then be careful not to prohibit the treatment of it, because in that there is fear and pain also as I have shown you in the chapter where I said about abscesses by artery and by vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or bowel, then be careful to command the patient who holds the sieve, and it should be standing extended; and then place a tent in the circle of the entire navel, and then command him to stand inverted between his hands above the sieve, and then encircle the space around the navel on the spot where you have placed the tent; and then extend the worst part of the abscess to the separated parts underneath a big hook; and then place it in the circle with a strong faith or with a decent manner of the liar.
And then you will find the middle of the extended abscess above the ligament and introduce the said tieu into that indication and where it meets the intestine; and if you have not touched or guarded by the ligament, then you extract the obstructed and impel the intestine to the separated parts inside the stomach.
And if it has touched the bowel, then take that out of the way; and remove the excesses of it.
Maybe it is contrary to your artery or vein, then encircle that much, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two strong veins and insert the two needles into the circle which you have made around the abscess in a way of crossing, which makes them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts above the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the spot where the extended flesh will collapse and fall by itself; or remove that which is subtle and it falls, and then heal what is inside so that it may be healthy.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to bad flesh in it or humidity, then be careful that you conquer the abscess thus as I have said and remove the blood or humidity, which touches it, and then heal what is inside so that it may be healthy and consolidate the spot.
Chapter 53.
About the treatment of cancer.
I have said, in the division, of a species of cancer and in what manner it is via the treatment of it with medicines, and that it is necessary to be careful in the treatment so that it does not ulcerate; and I have said that cancer is engendered in the marrow and caution of the treatment of it.
And I will show you the ancient authorities who say that some veiled cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, thus like cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and its similarity to the allocated members is to extract all of that, and especially when it begins small.
Maybe when it is ancient and grave, I do not think that you should approach it, because I have not seen anyone who could heal from that ulcer nor have I seen another, nor has it been overcome to this.
And the operation on it is when it has been allocated thus as we have said, it is that you should precede and lay the patient down and purge with black bile remedies some evacuated, and then know that if it is a manifest repeated relapse.
And then prepare the patient in preparation for the operation, and then prohibit the trunks of those veins that cover it; and then concave the entire part around the good codena for a thorough perforation so that none of the roots of it remain. And let the blood flow, and do not absorb it in any way, and express the locations, and evacuate the large amount of blood entirely with your hand or with an instrument which is possible among the instruments.
But if you find opposition to the large amount of blood in the incision of the vein or artery, then cauterize it until the flow of blood ceases, and then take care of that with another cure so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have recommended, in the division, of the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, of the treatment of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not except the species of alta sole, and it does not approach with iron to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypsochara, because that is mortal.
And when you have medicated this species of dropsy tympanites with medicines and do not combine your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already been debilitated, or is afflicted with another disease dropsy, thus as it is in the whole body or belly and seems like those, then beware that you do not give iron medicine, because there is fear about that.
But if you find the patient with an exuberant vertue, and in him there is no other disease but only dropsy, and not in infancy nor old age, then the manner of operation on him is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister holds his belly with his hand, pouring water at the partition below the navel, and then takes a spiny spatula according to this form:
It should be of two sharp parts long, with a sharp extremity thus as a spatula; but meanwhile it should be in some brief littleness little by little, so that in the operation nothing enters into the intestine, and that leads to its cure.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from parts of the intestines, because then it is necessary that you cut in section at three fingers' breadth below the navel, on the right side of the belly above the navel.
But if the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel at three fingers' breadth.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary that your section be on the ribs above which you want to cure the patient so that the superfluities do not flow back to that free place.
And then perforate with the instrument the entire code, and then enter into that section, and elevate your hand with the spatula between the code and the siphac, and you excavate it; and if there is a quantity of one ounce or around.
And then perforate the siphac until you reach the spatula to the place you want, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or gold lion, at which in the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it is fashioned with an extremity like a feather, thus as often.
And in the upper extremity of it there is a little handle, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it draws upon the instrument, thus evacuating the water at the same moment in the proper quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it does not correspond to the hour, and the patient's spirit animal will be resolved, or it will approach the fifth crisis, which is near death.
But evacuate that according to the quantity of his vertue and according to what the symptoms of the patient's vertue indicate to you, concerning the disposition of the patient's vertue in his pulse and his goodness.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because it is retained for the code which retains the hole that is above the siphac, of which I recommended to you that you perforate it according to that manner.
And then iterate with the instrument another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do that for several days over fear, and beware of error so that none remains of the water except a little.
If you fear the patient is dying, and you give them a large quantity of water, then bury them in hot sand, and put them in a warm bath, and keep them in the sun for a long time; and cure them with desiccative medicines until they are healthy.
And cauterize on the stomach, and mix and prepare for the extraction of water, according to what you have recounted in that which precedes.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of children who are born with non-perforated urinary holes.
Some birthmarks on some children are from the womb of their mother and the mixture in their head is not perforated (or is strangled or not in its place).
Then one must try to make a perforation of it as soon as it is born, with a very subtle spatula, according to this form.
And place a pause in the strangled area with a subtle key of lead and tie it up, and you will see for three days or for four.
And when one wants to urinate, it is retained and held back; and then return it.
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the area will not leave this closure.
However, that one whose strangled area is narrow should be treated with a lead key, as we have said, for many days until it is enlarged.
However, those in whom the strangled area is not in its place, are misled, which causes them to be born with the end of the head of the penis turned downwards so that they cannot urinate properly, until they lift their penis with their hand to the upper parts; and it is not natural generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad malady.
And the manner of operation is that the patient should be placed on their back, and then extend the head of their penis with your left hand in a vehement extraction, and insert the head of the penis into the area of the perineum with a subtle spatula, as if it were an insertion of a feather, or you do not touch any part, so that the meatus of their penis appears like the head of the penis and the strangled area falls into its proper place according to what is necessary.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, many times it will happen accidentally; and stop yourself at the moment when you are about to cut off the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment of those who have ulcers on the prepuce at the head of the penis, and of corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce at the head of the penis.
Many birthmarks happen with this ulcer on the penis, and it is a sign of bad flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, it is necessary to suspend it with a subtle hook and cut off that until it becomes completely clean; and then pause on the underlying skin, which is submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then cure the wound with daily applications of diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color, then it is necessary to administer cauterization at the insertion of it and its root.
However, if the ulcer is on the prepuce of the head of the penis uncircumcised, and one part of the ulcer is inside the prepuce and another part is outside, then it is necessary to remove the ulcer which is inside from the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer one, because when you cure the inner one, it is not assured that it will not be torn.
And also it happens in the genitals and on the prepuce with blackness and corrosion, therefore it is necessary to conquer all that which is already denigrated and which wants to corrupt or which is corrupted; and then place lines upon that with good milk, which is contaminated with flour of scorched wheat and of bitter roots and crumbles.
And then cure it with another treatment until it is healthy.
However, if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cauterization according to this form:
because juvenile cauterization is in two dispositions at the same time, thus it is a flow of blood and a wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and is totally destroyed at that hour, then it is necessary to introduce into the meat of the prepuce a lead tube so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in that one whose prepuce is so, and on which circumcision has not been performed; and when adhesion happens due to a wound or an abscess) it is necessary to scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
And if it is difficult to discern those exquisite things, then it is necessary that you extract with a spatula some cause of the head of the bladder and of the prepuce, and thus it is quarried because the prepuce, when it is subtle, is strongly perforated by its subtlety gradually.
And then separate the prepuce from the head of the bladder with a delicate touch, which has already been softened in warm water so that they do not adhere to each other again.
And then it is cured with a strong stipetic treatment within so that it may be consolidated.
Chapter 47.
On the purification of children and the cure of what happens to those who are afflicted with circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity, but rather like the other plagues: we have empirically seen that it is by our operation and our will, and those who are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and way, so they may more easily recover their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use them in their writings, and it is not so because we have acquired through experimentation, which causes the majority of artisans and barbarians to use circumcision and purification with novacula and torches; and they use lamentation with faith and incision on the nail.
And you have already prohibited all these manners and did not find better purification with forceps, with lamentation with faith that in purification with the nail, because many times the codes escape downwards, because the code of the prepuce has two tunics, and one tunes downwards, and strongly it is forced to another incision and secure pain. And in purification which is done by alphabetic, and is digital, which the Sabatiers use, the incision of the extremity of the virile member is not secured, because strongly it enters into its tract.
More in the operation on the nail, strongly it obstructs iron and corrupts your operation. And the code of the child is brief by nature, and many times it is so well-ordered that there is no need for purification, and you have seen that.
More about the purification that is done with forceps and lamentation with faith, goodness, experiment discovered to me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, for which the acuteness that is downwards is like the acuteness that is above; and thus as you press your hand so proportionally on both sides, and incise accordingly in a single time; and it is done with compression of the faith in a figure containing the code of the bladder of the entire part, in which there can be no error at all.
And the manner of the primary operation is that you make the child stay still if it is one of those who understand a little, so you do not do anything but place the faith in its bladder only simply, and let it enter into another day.
And then rejoice in all that manner which is possible for you to receive its intelligence. And then make it be between your hands, well prepared and steady; and do not let it slip; and hide the forceps in your hand or above the thigh, so that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into its bladder and blow on the code, and pull it out so that the head of the bladder is seen, and then purify that which has been added to it from filth.
The shape of the forceps for purification, this is the shape:
Some of the extremities are not-taloned and some are taloned, so that it is not seen the branch of the claw, and its length is like the length of two acute incisions thus like the length of two manubles in a circle.
The mistake in purification is because strongly it escapes the internal code entirely, or part of it deviates from the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary that you extend it from your time at your nail before the apostema of the place and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it in an inch and incise it.
More, if three days have passed, and meanwhile it is inflamed below the apostematized bladder, then let it be until the cautious apostema is calmed, and extract that with facilitation, and incise it according to your preparation.
And beware of the top of the vertebrae, for it will not reach that water.
So cure that water which the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is injected into the codename above measure, and you observe the divided parts below, water does not reach it.
And more cure that water which we have said enters so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 58.
About the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction caused by stone or by congealed blood, or by poultice or by flesh, and similarly to those of water which we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the water which we have said is vehemently made the cause of the disease, then it is necessary that administration of extractions of that water be made with an instrument called syringe, of which this is the form: It is of silver and its edge is subtly curved, just as a canal of a subtle needle in similarity to a palm and a half, at which the subtle channel is in the head of it.
And the manner of injection of the urine for that is to take the doubled thread and place it in the extremity of the wool or cotton for good ligature; and you insert the extremities of the thread into the part below the syringe, and inject with a flow if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, more introduce it into the canal with vehemence. And then empty the syringe with its border and album of water.
And make the patient sit on a chair, and apply the bladder of it to the vertebrae with oil of olive and agarics.
And then introduce the syringe to facilitate its entry into the root of the vertebrae; and then double the vertebrae above the part of the umbilicus; and then fill the syringe with that water; and then fill it until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will be freed from the vain cause, and it is not done thus according to this order, but rather in the manner in which it goes to tortuousness.
And then extend the thread with the wool little by little, because the urine dries the wool.
Then extract that and do for the cure of urine, and use a syringe, do not cease to make water and use a syringe until the bladder is evacuated and the patient obtains great alleviation.
Chapter 59.
About the quality of cleansing of the vein with a clamp and similar instruments which are suitable for that.
When there is ulceration or aposteme in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or it is coarcted by poultice, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is done with an instrument called clampcedra, and this is its form:
but in the extremity of it is a hole, so it is closed. And in it there are three channels: two from one part, and sometimes more.
In the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is water that is impelled, and it is according to the quantity that oppresses that, it adds, until when some cause is drawn away from the humidities, it is drawn away, and when it is expelled, with water it is drawn away, and when it is expelled long, according to what the clampcedra does in which there is phicated naptha in the battles of the sea.
Then when you want to draw away humidities from the bladder, introduce the extremity of clampcedra into the humidity, and draw with that water which is impelled from the parts above, because the humidity is drawn away in the cavity of clampcedra.
And then introduce the extremity of clampcedra into the vertebrae according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then fill the humidity with that water which fills, because that humidity reaches the bladder at once, and the patient feels it.
Form of the subtle crystal in which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its form:
And it is made of silver or of gold, of which the head and above are similar to a small feather, and below there is a canal with a delicate thread.
And then take the bladder in motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and scatter that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the crystal extremity into the verge.
And then stretch your hand over the bladder with humidity and structure, going inside so that the patient feels that the humidity has already penetrated the bladder.
But if you do not feel the presence of the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that entire circumference; and then insert a strong thread through those tracts, so that they are revolved; and then add the circle, so that it is also added to the surface, because you pause in that water that you want from the humidities, and observe and examine.
And then you link that to the instrument and make it so that it is done as it was done in the bladder, and express with your hand inside so that the humidity penetrates into the bladder.
Chapter 60.
About the extraction of stone.
We have already spoken in the division about the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and its signs.
And we have spoken of the stone in which a surgical operation is performed with a knife, and sectioning.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that one which is fixed in the bladder.
And I will now narrate that in a clear and brief exposition.
Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine which is expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient's groin is cold, and their penis is numb, and it is dressed; and in this way they are forced to sit on their buttocks.
And it is rare for children under 14 years old to recover from that, and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. But in the young it is mitigated because it is among those.
And about that of which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary to begin with the modification of the patient with crystal, which extracts all the filth from the sieves, because that filth sometimes prevents the eviction of the stone and hinders its removal.
And then be near the patient with the sieves on their feet and be consistent and massage them below so that the stone descends to the mouth of the bladder, or jumps from its place sometimes.
And then make that circle between your prepared hands, and the hands of the patient are beneath, so that the whole bladder is inclined downwards towards the lower parts.
And then seek that and entirely expel it forth.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you will touch it immediately with a section above it.
And if you do not catch it from the entire lower area, then it is necessary that you anoint the same oil with the index finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or the ring finger if they are a young adult, and insert it into the sieve of the buttocks. And seek to expel the stone until it is below the index finger. And guide it little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press above it with your index finger, and expel it to the outer parts before it reaches the place where you make the section.
And command the minister to press the bladder with their hand; and command another minister to extend their right hand to the outer parts above, and their other hand to remain holding the codena which is below the genitals, on the part of the place where the section is made.
And then insert a spatula beneath the incident of which this is the form of it: and divide in the water that is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle place, above the left hip; and make a section over that stone and the index finger is in the buttocks, and make a transverse section, so that the section beforehand is wide and straight according to the quantity that you extract from the stone as much as possible, and no more, because the force of the compression of the index finger which is on the buttocks pushes out the stone, and it is forgotten, its difficulties are alleviated.
And know that some stones have an edge and margins, because the removal of it is made difficult by that.
And from that water it is like a globe, and it is round, and its removal is made easier.
Therefore, if it is the stone with edges and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus forgotten, then it is necessary that you generate above it, or that you strengthen above it with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is thus like a file on which you strengthen over the stone, and do not evacuate from it; or that you insert below it the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
If you cannot stand on that, then amplify the traction a little, and if you see a flow of blood, separate it with strength into a glass container already vitrified.
If the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you insert your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and insert it inside; and then insert a little instrument as well; and similarly, if they are many hard stones.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance is that you insert it into the great section, which accelerates to the patient one of two causes: either death or it prevents the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not completely consolidated.
Administer an expulsion of it from the inside that is forgotten, or inject into the fracture of the limb with the forceps inside to extract it in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And apply a dressing infused with oil and wine, or oil rosated and fresh water, so that the post operative swelling may be calmed.
And then reset the patient onto his usual bed, and do not disturb the limb for three days.
And when that is disturbed, bathe the area with water and much oil, and then treat it with daily finicon icon and daily dibasilicon until it is healthy.
If in the wound apostema causes corrosion and ulcers, and it seems as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and therefore the urine is prohibited (and that is known through the egress of the blood in the urine), then insert a new tube into the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it will provoke the corrosion of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply opposition to all species, with that which is convenient for the cure until it is healthy.
And take care during all the hours of the entire cure that you read the passages and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the bladder, and is fixed inside, and the emission of urine is prohibited, then cure it with that which you recommended beforehand, so that you may arrive at a section; because many times this cure has been accused of being a section; and already you have experienced it, and it is that you take a perforator of iron alloy, of which this is the shape:
of triangular extrication, pointed, fixed on a handle.
And then take a thread, and tie it to the bladder below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating with facility until the perforator reaches that stone. And turn the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you perform the perforation of it until you make it pass from one side to the other; because the urine is then absorbed.
And then put your hand on that which remains of the stone from the partition before the bladder, because it is crushed, and it is forgotten in the urine, and the patient is healthy.
If this cure does not work for you because of some cause that prohibits it, then tie a thread below the stone, and another thread above the stone. And then bind it above the stone in that bladder between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then disturb the ligature and mollify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to ligate with a thread below the stone, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when you disturb the thread then the weight of the stone returns to its place and closes the wound.
And therefore it is necessary for you to ligate with a thread above, that you elevate the weight to the upper parts, or that it returns to its complete complement, and closes the wound as we have said.
Chapter 16.
On the extraction of stone from women.
Stone in women is rarely generated.
If you see a stone in one of those, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is because the woman's strength is weak.
And the second is because you do not find a woman who knows how to describe her own measurements when it is cast, or it is of women who have husbands.
The third is because you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation with her hand.
And the fourth is that the place of section on stone in women is longer than the place of the stone, because it requires a prolonged section, and in that there is fear.
It seems necessary to provoke you to drink, then take care that you receive a moderate female measure, and few are absorbed.
Perhaps you are deprived of that, then seek a subtle and refined measure, or present a mature female nurse who is skilled in the art of healing, or a woman who has been separated from her art.
Then make that present, and command him to do everything that you order, from the inquiry about the pain at the commencement; which cause is that it appears if the woman is virgin, then take care that you insert your finger in his rear and touch the pain.
Then if you find it, extract it from the rear finger, and then command him to insert it over that.
Perhaps it is not virgin, then command the mature nurse to insert her finger in the vagina of the patient and inquire about the pain, since she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehend that in good understanding.
Then if you find it, then take care that you gradually move away from the orifice of the bladder to the lower parts beneath the summit of its virtue until you perceive it in the direction of the thigh.
And then insert it into the aforementioned position of the majority of the vagina towards the direction of the thigh of whichever part is paralyzed and feel the pain in that area, and his finger does not remain removed from the pain, extracting it beneath him.
And the section is few at the commencement; and then insert the radius over that section, and if you feel the pain, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know that the pain will be alleviated from that.
And you know that the species of pain are many: some of them are few and great, and lean and rough, and long and round, and have ramps.
Then you know how many species are on him for that which you signify over that which you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust on the vitreous triangle and keep it there for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
And make sure that you prepare among the instruments those which are used in the extraction of pain in men, so that they may be helped by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is inserted, then you stop powder on the area and strengthen those pulvils and strict descent, and do not iterate that; and release the pain and do not extract it, because for a strong death the patient will die. And then cure the wound.
Then when the sharpness of the blood is calmed down, then some joints are relieved, and the area is purified, then you return to your operation until the pain is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On the section about hernia and ulcer.
Hernia is not but an accumulation of humidity in the white cyst which is beneath the codena of the genitals containing the humor, and it is named cyst.
And some evacuations are in the proper panniculus which prepares nature in the area of the humor, until it is believed that it is another humor; and it is the codena of the genital between the white cyst which we have said, and it is not that but bitter.
And the generation of this hernia is due to debility which affects the genitals, because to those it is fundamental that this matter is founded, and some veins affect by percussion or cauterization on the genitals.
And this humidity has many colors, because the color of it is declining to citrine or sanguineous, or red, or it is black and feculent, or it is whitish, and that is what is most.
And the signs for which it is known are these aggregations of water so thus: because if it is in the white cyst which we have said, then the apostema is red and declining a little in length, thus like the figure of a humor, and it appears in the genitals, because the humidity contains all that part.
And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the apostema is red in the area of the humor and thus it is estimated that it is another humor.
And if the humidity is between the codena of the genitals and the white cyst, then it catches beneath the sentiment.
And as you want the cognition of the color of the humidity, then you spread the color of the humidity in the apostema with an inserted carrat of which the form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the vestige of the inserted, judge that it is deduced from that.
Then when we come to the cure of the iron, then take care that you command the patient to be phlebotomized if it is possible for you, and sometimes touch the side of the pleura.
And then be suspended over the two fingers about some cause a little higher, and stop beneath him many drops.
And then you place yourself on the left side of them, and command the assistant to stand on their right, who extends their arm from two lines to the codo of the genital area and to the division of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a flat spatula and separate the codo of the genital area from the soft part for the length within, close to the perineum.
And make a section according to the straight line of distant engagement from the line that divides the skin of the genital area, until you reach the white cicatrix comprising.
And extract that, and observe, and beware lest you do not incise that; and your extraction is the one which extracts for partitioning thus, so that it may be suspended in the hollow of the most subtle and subtly scrutinized extraction according to the quantity as much as possible.
And then pierce the white cicatrix full of water in a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with uncias, and extend the cicatrix to the upper parts; and do not touch the codo of the genital area comprising, and incise the cicatrix in such a manner that is possible for you. And incise that in its totality or in pieces, and enlarge the soft subtle layer, because if you do not examine the incision of it with exquisite care, it is not made secure that the water does not return.
Moreover, if the hollow of that defect of its codo is in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cicatrix, return to it, and adjust the two lips of the genital area with a suture, and cure it thus with the other wounds, until it be healed.
And if you find the hollow corrupted by another malady, then it is necessary that you lift the vessels which are above the suspensors, and extract the hollow, and then cure it in the way that we have said.
Moreover, if the water is added in two parts simultaneously, then you know that the two are the hernias; therefore incise that part according to what you have done in the other engagement; and if it seems to you that it is a work, then do it.
And then you purify the wound, and enter into the sections of the submerged lane with oil or rose oil; and stop before another lane which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand it over both genital areas and the miracle of the belly; and stop above double drapes and powders, and bind them above with a ligament according to this form.
And then press two drapes and fill the lane of carmenated structure according to this likeness; and make the extremities with those that are premured with cotton or humid lane, and add them to the structure in the breech of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes hold of the buttock up to the two, and the second takes hold of the part of the perineum, and two extremities above two thighs below and two other extremities above two angles, and all the structure is adjusted in the breech of the breeches.
And some hernias of this type are artificially medicated with cauteries in place of sections with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutting cautery and incise on the codo of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form. And it is assembled into a Greek letter.
And then pierce that cicatrix, and ignite until all the humidity is evaporated.
And then extend the cicatrix with uncias, and extract with uncias, and extract with subtle ignited cautery; and incise that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the hollow that the fire does not touch.
And you know that this operation is more salvatory and more remote from the flow of blood, and better than an operation with a section.
Moreover, if you find opposition to the aposteme in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or flow of blood, then it is necessary that you cure which opposition makes to you for that, with a curative action that is convenient to him according to what has been said.
Moreover, if the patient is weak, and does not expect a second operation due to its horribility, then administer perforation according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified that you, for that which we have said about the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Then it is necessary that you seat the patient on some elevated chair, and pierce the aposteme in the lower part of them with a flat spatula, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
And make a wide aperture until all the water flows out.
And then stop above the cotton place and bind it with a ligature, so that the remainder of the water flows out. And then heal the wound so that the plague may be healthy.
Perhaps it is contrary to the flow of water at that hour you perforate it: and it is not done except to extract the white pus from the orifice of the wound, which makes a contrariety and prohibits the exit of water, then you should put in the wound a painful instrument or tool by which the water is extracted from the drops, the form of which is previously prepared; or adjust on the surface of the wound a small cup.
And you know that the water returns, and it is helped by itself within six months or in those environments; and when it is aggregated, then it should be perforated according to that method and manner, because the patient will also pass the six days.
Chapter 63.
On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
You know that in the section about this hernia, fear is lost through perseverance in the major dispositions; because to me it has been seen that its dismissal and being saved by that better method.
And you should remember the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, it is said that abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and it is done for many causes: either from acute sharp inflammation, which is poured into the genitals, or from percussion.
And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not detected in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And often it is a putrid abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel anything in it.
And some abscesses are made by inflammation of the roots, and by swelling of those veins also which have already been perceived, or by swelling of the veins.
Perhaps it is by inflammation of the roots that it is known by the dispersion of the abscess when it compresses them among the tight bands; and it does not feel that it touches.
Perhaps that which is made by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed from it for any cause, unless there is compression among the bands.
And it is possible that on this species a section was made and on the other carnal parts; and it is that you incised the codename of the genitals, and then stretched the skin towards the upper parts, and extracted that from the white membrane, and freed the suspenders of the veins, and tied them, and incised the suspenders so that you freed all the parts of the skin.
Therefore if the skin is already consolidated on those carnal parts, then it is necessary that you extract the skin and incise it.
And if there is adhesion within some cause of the membrane, or between that which is between the veins, then it is necessary that you free all that adhesion and incise it by a round incision.
Perhaps it is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it is necessary that you incise all that which is of it, and extract the skin also as we have said.
Therefore when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin ointment and rose oil; and then heal that with another cure until it is healthy.
Chapter 64.
On the cure of hernia that is of vitiligo.
Vit is an abscess enveloped by some envelope similar to a bruise with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult to exercise movement and walking on the patient.
And in the cure of this disease it is by fear for that which is previously remembered.
However, it is necessary to make an opposite operation on that according to what the first ones did.
And it is said that you should sit the patient on a high chair; and then apply the suspenders of the testicles to the lower parts; and then apply the codename of the genitals among the tight bands among the veins that are probable towards the rod; and hold those other ministers that you have, and extend them with vehement extension.
And then incise at the flat space widely gutted by transverse section in the right of the veins until they are discovered.
And then excavate all parts thus as you have said in the extraction of roots which are in the temples.
And then place in those a needle in which there is double faith, and tie that in the first of the places where you find vit, and tie another vein in the back of them. And then incise those in the middle place for a right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the foul and corrupt humors.
And then heal the wound with a cure of the other wounds in which you want to be healthy and born again so that the veins fall, which are not nourished by one of two genitals, because it is not bad for that.
If it happens that the veins are closed to all the bayssels, then it is necessary that the testicles are extracted or that they are pushed through for them to be cleared of all nutrients in the introduction of the bayssels, and that they are strengthened, or that it is done so that there is no nourishment in those.
Chapter 15.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a constriction that occurs when the diaphragm extends over the belly from the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that the intestines of that rupture adhere to the other intestines.
And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excision, and it happens to these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by a fall, or by shouting, or by lifting some heavy object, or by resemblance.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the diaphragm, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is a hidden apostema that enters through the belly to compress the intestine so that the diaphragm holds back the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a constriction of the diaphragm, because at the beginning it causes a vehement pain suddenly; and it is a diverse apparent apostema that appears below the belly, and this is due to the swelling of the intestine, and the condition of it is in the parts above the diaphragm.
And some weakened areas are outside the intestine's fabric, and this is called an intestinal hernia with a twisted circle.
And some weakened areas are made in the ventosity, and some corrupted areas run into the intestine's end, and here it is retained, and it is a great annoyance of the patient, and some weakened areas cause bad pain and increase when it is premature.
And in the cure of the species of this disease, iron is used, because it is believed that it helps to evacuate the congestion from there.
And the manner of operating on this is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine by hand at the parts behind its cavity if it obeys your return, and then place yourself seated above the seam between the two thighs, and lift their legs.
And then stop the belly where it touches the belly of the testicles at the parts below, and you insert the belly of the testicles totally for the length; and then fix two lips of the section together according to how they need to be joined to close the section in those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that you can possibly make of it, then it may be outside the fabric.
And then scrape that membrane which is below the belly of the testicles, until the white hard diaphragm is discovered from any part.
Then you enter the finger into that which touches the testicle, in that which is between the white diaphragm, which is below the belly of the intestine, and between the diaphragm again, and absolve with that adhesion which is in the part behind the intestine.
And then place the hand on the belly of the testicles at the front parts, and also extend the white diaphragm with your left hand, and lift the intestine to the diaphragm at the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the intestine downwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind in a complete solution.
And search with your fingers to see if there is any cause of the intestine wrapped in the white hard diaphragm. If you find any cause of it, then you envelop that to the belly below.
And then you insert into the part below the belly of the testicles for sectioning which flows pure and sane blood, thus as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then you administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the ligament which we have recommended (and some weakened areas of the white diaphragm are cauterized, which we have said then to introduce the theme of flux of pure blood, because many weakened areas happen to those) and release the ligament until it falls by itself.
If the treatment of it is delayed, then warm water should be poured over, and pause on that inner area which falls according to what we have said.
And you will heal the wound with another cure of internal wounds so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 66.
About windy hernia.
In this hernia, nothing is seen that has been hardened under its cure with iron on the aforementioned part.
And the first doctors said that it is made thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with you; which is to place your veins close to the section over the aforementioned part that has been weakened by it; and to cut in the middle of the environment around the abscess, so that the veins fall.
And heal the wound according to what we have said, so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 67.
About the disruption that occurs in the ankle joints.
Some swollen veins break rupture in the ankle joints thus as we have said, and empty the place.
And they do not indicate any cause of the intestine to the genitals; and if they do, it is little; and it returns in a few hours.
If time is prolonged in this way, an adjusted fissure is made in the hip joint so that the intestine descends into the hip joint; and it happens for the extension of the hip joint which is in the ankle joints thus as we have said, which causes the hip joint to be extended, and then it becomes softened and the place becomes abscessed and empties.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery thus as it was preceded by the narration of it.
And some swollen veins are treated with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on their back between their two arms, and then cut the place of the rupture of the abscesses emptying in section according to the quantity of three digits.
And then strengthen the white hip joint that is next to the knee, so that it may be discovered.
And then take the stick and pause it over the prominent place of the hip joint, and press it to the belly button.
And then kiss the two prominent places on the extremity of the stick of the hip joint, and adjust one to the suture of the other.
And then extract the extremity of the stick, and do not insert it into the hip joint at all, nor extend the haw, nor any other cause thus as you will be able to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then heal that with the cure of wounds, and as you insert the veins, purify it and restore the wound so that it may be consolidated; because the hip joint is constricted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more likely to bring health.
Chapter 68.
About the softening of the tendon of the testicles.
Many swollen veins in the tendon of the testicles are softened by this means because the flesh that is between them is softened, and it is necessary to observe its treatment.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is engaged in the treatment of it to make the patient lie on their back, and insert the entire tendon which is softened over the natural tendon; and then adjust both lips to the suture.
And if you wish, then in the beginning, remove the excess of the softened tendon with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
And then insert between the sutures; and then heal by healing of the other wounds so that it may be healthy and the veins fall.
Chapter 69.
About castration.
You know that castration in our law is forbidden, but I am led to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is so that it may be in the science of the doctor when he is expert in that, who knows its treatment and happens; and the other reason is that we sometimes need castration of other animals for our youth, like mules, and goats, and pigs, and similar to those animals.
And therefore I say that castration is made in two ways: either by attrition or by sectioning the fissure.
If it is made by attrition, the method of the operation is that we make the animal drink warm water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang down. And then take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear below the touch.
If castration is made by sectioning and cutting, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the tendon of its testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspensors, and insert them over each testicle in one section so that two testicles proceed.
And then insert those poultices that you will find have already extracted the corrupted humor. Do not place them on the areas of the body where some cause is, but rather the subtle body where it is above the veins.
And in this manner of cauterization it is better which is done by attraction, because strong attraction draws out some cause from the testicles so that the beast desires to couple.
Then heal the wound from the inside so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 20.
On the cure of hermaphrodism.
Hermaphrodism in men is according to two ways: one is when it appears that the space in the cord of testicles is occupied, in which case it forms a figure as if a woman's flesh were there.
And some veins emerge from that cord which is in the cord of the testicles.
In women it is a species: and it is that the flesh of the woman on the perineum is also as if two testicles of a man were there, a little smaller in all dimensions, similar to the protuberance of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three species: of two from men and of one species from women. And it is necessary that you insert those adjusted carnals inside so that it flees from the impression of that, and then you will cure them with the cure of the other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which urine is formed in the cord of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter 21.
On sterility and prominent flesh due to causes from women.
Sterility is adjusted over natural causes inside so that it is restrained and it is done with regard; and some veins are magnified in some women to the extent that it spreads as if in men and they conceive inside the coitus.
Then you need to hold the superfluity of sterility with your hand or with a uncle and insert it.
And do not push too far in the insertion, mainly in the region of the root, so that there is no excessive flow of blood.
And then heal it with the cure of the wounds so that it may be healthy.
A born flesh is a flesh that grows in the horrific womb of the mother so that it fills it, and for this reason it is situated at the lower parts according to the similarity of a snake (and for this reason the first physicians called it "caudal malady"); therefore you need to insert it thus as we insert sterility, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of gout.
Gout is when the flesh of the woman is not perforated, or it is the small passage. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to bad humor which has preceded, and that is done either by flesh not adjusted or by subtle body or vapors.
And it is done either in the region of the mother, or in its sides, or in its upper pus, or in its lower pus, and it prohibits coitus and conception and pregnancy, and for this reason it prohibits menstruation.
And the cognition of that is done through observation of the uterus, if the obstruction is apparent, it is clear; but if it is not apparent, then you seek it with the ties of the finger or with the radius.
But if the obstruction is due to subtle body, and it is fixed to both labia, then you touch and disrupt that.
And it stops over both labial pules, and then you stop with the fingers indicating from both hands to the most inward places.
And the woman is on her back, her extended legs spread apart, and then you extend both labia with force inside so that the subtle body is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take lanolin and anoint the 4 holes with oil and stop that on the spot, and let a man do it daily so that the spot is not consolidated.
But if the subtle body is thick and vaporous, then you need to insert it with a spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to fleshiness, then you suspend it with an uncle, and insert it.
And here are the medicines that make cease the flow of blood, such as haematostatic, and dragon's blood, and gum, adjusted with the white of egg.
And then administer a wide poultice of ample lead so that the wound is not consolidated lightly.
And hold it for several days and administer lukewarm water of milk.
And then it is cured with another cure of consolidation so that it may be healthy.
And some veins are born in the native birth of other flesh, and then you need to insert them according to this manner. More is it so for post-crisis cancer, at the crisis point of cancer which is in the worse part not to be made contradictory effort in any manner.
Chapter 23.
About the treatment of hemorrhoids and of tailbone and red buttocks that occur in the groin area of women.
Hemorrhoids are an appreciation of the orifices of many veins that enter there, where those corroding blood flows continuously; and how ancient hemorrhoids are and they are made thus.
And already I have said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say thus which ones receive cure and which ones do not receive cure.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tailbone when they are in the womb of the worse part and do not appear to the feeling, then in those there is no made cure effort.
More of those which are in the orifice of the worse part above those which feel sensation, so those that are cured.
And it is fitting that you place the woman in a warm bath and then extend the thigh to the forks, or apply a rough cloth, and insert those into the roots.
And then powder over those from which the blood flows of one of the powdery medications that are inserted with a biting sensation, thus as it seems to resemble those.
And then soak the patient's feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
And if the blood flow persists, then make that into a decoction of herbs and of scorched millet and of walnuts and of similar things.
And then take flour of barley and mix that with honey and wine and make an emplaster over the back of it.
And if the blood is abscessed, it is good; and if not, make adhere to two ventouses, and to the nipples their scarification.
And then take wool and submerge it in juice of colander or juice of arnaglaza or juice of guarrievier with wine and make adhere to the place; and then heal the place with an ointment that enters so it is sanitized.
And heal it until it is sanitized.
Chapter 74.
About the perforation of accidental hernia in the worse part.
Many species of crisis points that occur in the worse part, thus as cancer and post-crisis point and ulcers and hernia and eruptive sores and hemorrhoids and redness and other crisis points. And already I have said about these evils and the species of those and their signs, and their cures in the division.
And it is fitting that I guide you in this treatise on post-crisis point where the worse part is of the crisis points that collect sanity, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done effort.
Then it is fitting that you consider if the pain of the post-crisis point in the beginning is acute with percussion and flaccidity and fever, and sometimes it inflates and if it feels on that the sentiment, then do not touch it with perforation, and heal it with water that helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then it is fitting that you make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on the back of the chair and adjust the feet to the partition below the belly, and the thighs are expanded, and place the arms below the elbows, and tie them with a convenient ligament.
And then the midwife follows the straight path and administers the instrument to the orifice of the worse part, in the form of which will be seen in those causes that will be done then.
And it is fitting when you want to administer this instrument that you place it in the womb of the worse part of the woman, and what of the instrument enters into the worse part does not exceed the womb of the worse part and leads to the evil. More if the instrument is larger than the womb of the worse part, then it is fitting that you place powders on the texture of the womb of the worse part so that it is prohibited to introduce all of the instrument into the womb of the worse part.
And it is fitting that you pause the vertebrate that runs in the instrument of the straight path from above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebrate until it is opened into the orifice of the worse part.
And when the excavation appears, and it is touched on the hand and it is smooth and soft, then it is fitting that you separate that from the head of it with a spatula.
And when the sanity is evacuated, then it is fitting that you place in the wound a submerged instrument soaked in rose oil or green oil where there is some stipulation; and place the calcium in the section of the worse part.
And stop beforehand the mother and over the tender nail, a submerged wound in water in which evil humors are accumulated.
Then it should be treated for two days before the patient is ready to receive the water treatment that brings healing within.
And some vegetables are washed with the mother and the plague in this way that they are crystallized in water and honey, and then in the water where evil humors of the liver or long arthritis are dissolved, and then return to the patient.
And if the plague is deeply rooted in the affected mother, then it becomes necessary that you be prohibited from treating him with iron, because of having no cure for what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what manner they should help pregnant women who are badly treated according to an unnatural figure.
The necessary cause is that the midwife should know the figure of the natural childbirth from its beginning for signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman expelling wind from below and desires to smell the air, and about this she is deceived because of what is above her part, and hastens the movement of the fetus, then you will know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the movement of it upon the womb's seat, and the second sign is whether it is suspended or hanging from the navel.
Then, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the womb of it should be compressed so that the fetus descends lightly, as if it were being pushed from above its seat, and gives it the second sign, and it is freed from those superfluous excesses with good moderation.
Moreover, that which is an unnatural and unlaughable part, because when the fetus is placed on its feet and the body of it is placed before its head and its feet, and the hand of it is one, or at its foot. or it is placed the head of it and the hand of it, or at its belly, and forcefully it is converted upon its womb's neck, and resembling the unnatural figures of it.
It is a necessary cause that the midwife should be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she should guard against error and deception.
And I will show you the entire figure of those, and what ingenuity is in those so that it may be signified by that and established upon that.
When the fetus is placed upon its head by natural inclination, and it is vehement against the woman and makes her part difficult, and sees the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that seizure, or that women have it, and evacuates the conjunction of it with fenugrec oil and olive humectant.
And then introduce the measure between the small spaces of the womb's finger and find it in that second sign, or extract that with its own nail into what corrodes what is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly inward so that the fetus descends.
Moreover, if it does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be crystallized with a poultice of thyme and a poultice of fenugrec with cezami.
And then command it to her, and make the crystallizer, that it should be compressed and make that stirring with condition; and close its mouth and nose for one hour, because the fetus will be forced out soon.
And if the two parts of the fetus are already forced out at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce them little by little with facility. Moreover, if it does not obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then settle the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the parts are not deeply turned and the fetus dies, then insert them and extract the remainder of the fetus or tie the body to its hand with a cloth and extract that with equality, because it will be forced out.
When the fetus is upon its feet, then it is necessary that you impel them upwards, and then turn the fetus little by little, and then take hold of that, and then take one foot of it and extend them little by little.
Moreover, when they are placed within the thighs, then you command it to come out, and make that exterior stirring with condition, because it will be forced out if God wills it.
And if it is not forced out in what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little until it pauses according to its natural figure, because it will then be forced out with a lighter movement.
And if it is prohibited from all that we have recommended, then take a poultice of altea and dissolved gum, and percussion everything in the mortar for good percussion, and then line up with that the conjunction of the woman's womb, at the bottom of her belly. And then make that mixture into a warm bath, until you obtain the hypogastries.
And when the separated parts are numb, then make subtle fumigation underneath and pause there for a while. And when you have done the fumigation for an hour, then make a slight scratch on a celery stalk, and place it there to stir and expel the bad air from their mouth, and lift it up, and press the lower part of their belly with a gentle compression, because the fetid humor will be easily expelled.
Remove the fetid humor totally while holding one of their hands. It is introduced in the reduction of their hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her walk.
And if walking is not possible, then make them lie on the bed, and shake their thighs with a vigorous concussion, and administer gentle massages to the affected areas and recommend remedies for bruises.
And if the inflammation has come, then make them scratch on celery, and study the reduction of their hand, and evacuate the fetid humor according to its natural figure, and stir the woman and command her to compress herself until it is expelled.
Remove the fetid humor from the expanded column with their hands and the surface of their feet, which are at the back of their mother. Because the midwife has the hand of the fetid humor and gradually revolves it little by little, and thus it is facilitated.
And when it is and how much has been evacuated, then pause on their joint where we have recommended remedies of oil and bruises.
And command them to massage little by little, and when you have felt it, then make them scratch on a celery stalk and command that they be inclined over the right side, and command that they be compressed; and make them stir in condition. The prepared fetus is turned onto its side.
When the horror of the mother is thus, consider it, and then you will insert the second finger into your nail until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the fetid humor is suspended on their face and column, then you will insert that of the nave, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then you will drive out the fetid humor to the innermost parts until it pauses according to what is fitting, and command the woman to compress herself with some gentle movements, and it will be expelled in evacuation of the bad humor, if God wills it.
The exit of twins or a multitude of fetuses. You know that twins are rarely born naturally, and some births occur three or four, but that is strange and unusual; but I know the causes are not natural, and do not live.
And count them, yes it is that they are multiplied, a second time, and are separated by a cipher, distinguishing those that enter the ligament of each one of them. Some gentle movements are expelled thus as a natural fetid humor, and some are expelled for unnatural evacuations thus as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to deliver because of their birth and they come to what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you cure them thus as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what facilitates and subtlety, and delays, and is introduced according to the whole figure as it is prepared for health and salvation.
Remembering that which is formed in the womb from embryos and Abortions.
Some women are formed in the womb one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and I have often verified that a woman aborts in the seventh month, and another one is completely formed, which causes the fetus to be measured by the glorious wise men.
And thus it is known that it is in the science of the midwife because they strongly hold to that small appearance of it, and therefore stop themselves from it as I know.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat a dead fetus in a way that we have discussed in the division of medicine and it is not foreseen, and you still want to use operative means on it, then you should consider whether the woman is of sane virtue and not afflicted by accidents for which she has suffered harm.
Then it is necessary for the woman to be placed on a soft mattress or bed, with her head inclined downwards and her thighs elevated.
And the midwife should hold that part of the body or be positioned on the bed so that the body does not stretch out during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you should humidify the mouth of the womb with oil and honey and apply a poultice made from fenugreek, sesame, and other things.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and poultices, and then insert her hand into the womb, and carefully feel in that place where the fingers meet the fetus.
And it is convenient in this: then you consider if the fetus is positioned to be delivered over the pubic bone, and then you place your fingers on its heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or on the beard, or in the armpit, or in the proper places of the ribs, or in the hypochondriac region.
But if the delivery is over its feet, then in the perineum, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the finger with the right hand, and pause at the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and then insert the hand facilitatedly and place the finger in some of those places which we have mentioned, until you reach the underlying cause.
And then pause and place another finger in opposition to it, or the third if necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its own rectitude alone.
And thus you should maneuver the entire partition, so that its delivery is facilitated, just as it is done in teeth, before the eradication of it.
And it is necessary in this that the extension be mollified; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and turn around that which is retained.
So if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the fingers are permitted to enter the place where it was put again; and do it thus until the entire fetus is delivered.
But if the hand is exhausted before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the contraction of it, then it is necessary for a cloth to be wrapped around that; and then extract that until everything is delivered, and insert it either in the joint of the hand or in the curve.
And thus it is necessary to do the same with the other hand and in both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or it is stuck in the delivery, or it is in the water-adjusted head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers spatula-like tools and break the head and extract the water, or that you use an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will be seen in the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows next.
And similarly it is done if the fetus has a large head by nature: and then it is necessary to cut that with a scalpel, or to take that with an "alundat" as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is delivered and contracted towards the armpit, then it should be opened until the humidity which is in the chest is emptied.
But if it is not complicated, nor obstructs delivery, then you should cut the head as soon as possible according to your skill.
And if the residues of the womb are apostemated or are in a hydropic state, then it is necessary to perforate that until the humidity that is in it is drained.
But if the fetus is over its own feet, then its attraction is lighter and the direction of it towards the mouth of the womb is lighter.
But if it is contracted towards the womb and chest, then it is necessary to extract that with a cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and to open the womb and chest until what is in them flows out.
But if the other members are stationed and turned towards the head, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the womb is open, then she inserts her hand into the perineum, and seeks out that which is in the fingers until it reaches the mouth of the womb, and then inserts one finger, or two fingers, and turns them towards that.
And if the mouth of the womb is contracted due to an apostemated cause which sticks to it, then it is necessary not to trouble it overmuch; instead it is necessary to administer an effusion of humid and greasy causes. And apply plaster; then follow the patient to baths that soften and moisten.
And if the foot is above the side of the bed, then if possible, it should be elevated: and apply what we have said in the preceding foot.
And if that is not possible, then insert poultices, and extract.
And be careful that you do not leave any secondary cause of the disease untouched.
And when you have completed all your operation, then apply what we have said about the cure of apostemes caused by the mother.
And if there is a flow of blood, then apply styptic baths and administer the other cure.
And you have seen a woman in the belly of whom a dead fetus was, and then place above that womb another pregnant one, and then place a dead fetus in another womb. It happens that for a long time an abscess was in the umbilical region; and it swelled inward where the intestine had burst, and began to gather pus.
And you have been called to cure him, and treated him for a long time, but the plague is not consolidated.
Then you have paused over him concerning some hidden causes of strong attraction, and taken out an bone from him, and placed a splint for some days, and taken out another bone; and you have been too marvelous, as if there were no bones in the belly.
And then you have thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
So you have understood the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in the milky dispositions of her womb, and you had seen it in such a manner for a long time, correcting one small abscess.
And you do not find it strange, but rather that in this there is science and help to the artificial hand for administering cure.
About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a vertex in which the mother is burst open:
This is the form of a stretcher on which the books are placed, to which two vertices are joined at the two extremities of two feet. You should make this vertex cap that is put subtly on the stretcher, and do it of ebony or of boxwood.
And the width of each wood is two inches and a margin of each one is an inch and a half, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two woods are two adjustments of that same wood which were already fixed, of which the length is a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two inches, or a little more.
And these two additions are introduced into the mother's womb so that it is opened among those whom you revolve with the two prescribed vertices.
Another form similar to that one, subtly and lightly:
Make it of ebony or boxwood according to the similarity of forceps. You should make it at the extremity of him with two additions thus sometimes, and the length of those additions is a palm, and the width of each is two inches.
And when you want to open the mother, then you make the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging, opening what is between her thighs. And then place your hand on the instrument thus as you make a forceps-like grip according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the mother's womb until the midwife does it as you want.
The form of a vertex which the ancients described:
Form of an impeller on which the fetus is impelled:
Form of a midwife on which the great head is contained:
And it is assembled to a forceps on which the teeth are fixed at the extremity, thus sometimes, and some visions are made long thus as forceps according to this form, thus sometimes, on which the teeth are fixed thus as retaining teeth in which it is inserted and contained. Form of a midwife's little hand:
Form of a hook having a spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities on which the head is separated:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All those instruments are excellent, and when they are multiplied in the species of that one and prepared by the artisans, it is made lighter for its operation and also for the men according to their quantity.
And you do not have those instruments yet, it is as if they should be prepared by you, because the necessity of those is inexcusable.
About the extraction of the afterbirth.
When the second stage is retained by the infant's development, then it is necessary that you command the patient to retain their urine, and make them take that stormy drink in condition, and strengthen your hand over their mouth and nostrils, and if for a long time it has been defective, good is.
And then, you take a cloth and perforate the covering with a tube and pause in that herb to open the mouth of the mother, also with calm and rough and nettle and chamomile and scammony and Arabic and cassia lignea and santal. All these herbs or some of their kind that are submerged in water in the cloth, and pause that over the flame.
And then pause a tube of cane root in the mouth of the mother, and hold that inside until the vapor goes into the cavity of the mother.
And then make that stormy drink also as I have said, and the second stage will be quickly forgotten in velocity.
Perhaps it is Roman, and then this cure is not useless, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of other oils, and then insert that into the womb and massage it with the intention of finding the second stage, and when that aurora is found, then take it out and extend it little by little. Perhaps it is annexed in the womb of the mother, then insert her hand following what has been recommended, and when you have found the second stage, extract it little by little, following the rectified method so that the mother does not fall into vehement attraction. Beforehand, make sure that the right and left ribs are loosened and facilitated.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with sternutation and medication of the cloth with herbs.
Perhaps it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful that you do not fatigue over that in iteration of abstraction, perhaps however it is clear that what is useless to him from the mouth of the mother lies in the space of the woman, and then crystallize that with gum and tetrafarmalcon; because that will make it purge for some days and will be dissolved and forgotten.
Perhaps when it is purged, it is of the elevated bad odor at the head, and at the stomach, and that leads to the illness; and then it is clear that they have been administered with sub-fumigations and conveniences according to that.
Perhaps some of the Ancients already used sub-fumigation of nitrite and dry figs.
Form of instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menses and of the second stage:
It should be made of iron or of copper.
And the subtle extremity should be placed in the womb and the broad extremity over the flame, and the sub-fumigation should be placed over the arms of the flame.
And hold that inside until that sub-fumigation is consumed and another is prepared afterwards.
On the cure of the birth of an unperforated infant.
Many infants are born and their births are not perforated, which have a subtle cipher and are hidden. Then it is clear that the midwife should perforate with the aforementioned cipher; and then, perforate that with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the ligament.
And then pause over that woolen cloth infused with wine and oil; and then cure that with gum until it is healed.
Perhaps you fear that it is hidden, then pause in the tube a cane root for many days, and wait until the infant wants to be delivered.
And then the hidden delivery of the birth occurs for consolidation of plague or of abscess; then it is clear that this consolidation should be incised, and then it should be cured with what we have said about the cure and the poultice.
On the cure of the fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part below come from a deep node and gross tumor, which ones occur near the birth beforehand or in the space of one part.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that node is ancient and corroded by the moist white or subtle putridity, and some of these fistulas some penetrate.
And those penetrating ones are recognized by what is useless to them for the egression and for ventilation; and some of them use the evil of egression, and forcefully they are useless to those worms.
And some of those fistulas are embedded in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the meat of the verge; and some of those penetrate into the joint of the hip and into the node of the coccyx.
And that in which the penetrating fistula is recognized into the birth and non-penetrating, it is that you put the aforementioned endic in the birth, and you insert a subtle tent of iron or copper in the fistula when it is not tortured.
If the patient has become tortured, then introduce a subtle thread of lead or horsehair into the tender skin so that you feel the tension or the skin on the entire back.
And if you do not feel that at all and there is no progress in the treatment of any cause of evacuation or worm or wind, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then you will be hindered from the cure.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, then the sign of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it to the place, so that the location in medicine may be consolidated.
If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the tension penetrates here if there is no torture in the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that it becomes inflamed at times; and that it does not benefit from this medication, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the cure of them is troublesome and vain effort by doctors who claim to have mastered it.
If in that case it does not penetrate and is not chronic, health will be ferried with iron and spread according to what you have recommended, and this is what I have already said and proposed.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands above his back and lifts his legs towards him, his thighs are inclined towards his belly, and then introduce a subtle thread of lead or iron, if it is in the fistula tortured, so that you feel the tension.
And if the patient feels it around his neck, then cover how you introduce the entire back into the neck.
And if you feel in the entire back the tension already discovered to penetrate, or what you feel between the entire back and that siphac or flesh, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not struggle with it, because it is not health, as we have said.
However, I will describe some remedies that are healthy in some households that are bitter.
And of the medication for which you have hoped for juvenation in it, is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as has been mentioned, and introduce that ignited thing into the fistula until you feel it around the neck; and then apply two or three times until you know that all those adjusted, fistulated flesh areas are similar to a feather of a bird's wing.
And then cure that with calves enveloped in bandages until you can see all those adjusted flesh areas, and then cure that with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
And if the tension is internal, and does not penetrate into the entire back where it is in the bowel, and between that and the tension that is only a few inches of flesh or siphac, and sometimes the fistula is in what sieves the surface of the codena, then dry the codena from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see the drying of the tension, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where you feel the extremity of the tension, and through the tension it is liberated and purged.
And then cleanse those fistulated flesh areas which are assembled like a bird's wing and do not remove any of those causes.
If it flows sometimes that it comes between you and your operation when you insulate those flesh areas, then the thousand times it is and of the pus less grievous instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cautery with fire adjusts good habits: so it is adjustment of those adjusted flesh areas, and removal of the blood's excessive humidity.
And then cure that with calves enveloped in bandages or in causes triated until the place gets strong, and then cure the wound with a hard, engendering, and consolidating flesh.
And these medicines are those which are stipulated and excessive; when then it is restored, it is already healed and does not fear relapse.
If the fistula has already penetrated into the groin of the bowel and is elongated from the surface of the body, then introduce the entire back into the bowel and inquire about that.
And so if you feel the tension and it is only a few inches of siphac or flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation in that case, but rather a path of confidence and hope.
The cause is to administer in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to dry it until you achieve the conquest of the bowel so that it is possible for you to introduce the fistula and the propounded cure; and do not process more with the drying so that you do not insert the contained bowel, and it agrees on the patient's consent; and then cure it with what we have said because it will be strong health; or to elongate the few inches and remove the pus that dries it until near the bowel, as we have said, either with a pointed instrument or another instrument of acute extremity, and then cleanse those fistulated flesh areas which are in the drying until one can make a crust; and then strive to make the restoration of all the wounds in the drying, and if the grievous pus above is not consolidated, and removes the ulcerated fistula from the affected part, and it will be less grievous for the patient. And the fistula is finally closed in this manner: it is when you insert the thread into the fistula, and it is on the outer surface of the body at the navel and on the margin of the buttocks, then take the perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the hollow organs according to this method.
You insert into that vein enveloped by five veins or around those; and then you insert the thread into the fistula until it reaches the cavity of the intestine.
Perhaps it penetrates into the margin of the buttocks properly beneath the dent, then you extract the vein from that tract in the same way that you insert the thread into the buttocks; and you remove the extremity of the vein and adjust the two extremities together, and tighten each one, and leave it like that for a day or for two, and when you have inserted the vein into the flesh, tighten it until those fleshes are inserted which are between the two extremities of the vein and which fall.
And then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Perhaps the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in some way you have prepared, but not too much in the press, because it is not for you to do that so the laceration does not occur; and then make it enter until it is healed.
The form of the pointed instrument is such that it is bent to make a fistula: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not acute, so that it does not insert anything that is not necessary, just like sometimes.
About stitching of hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are treated in two ways, either they are between the buttocks resembling a carbuncle, or those that are like a fatty tumor. And of those that are small and large, and the blood flows from them at all times and is one, and they are many, and they are outside the buttocks, and in their extremities.
Perhaps those that are outside the buttocks are treated according to the measure of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood with continuous flow, and it is according to the color of the body.
And the cure of that which is beneath the buttocks is that you command the patient to sit and to exert themselves until the buttocks are evacuated and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take them and suspend them in an uncus or hold them with your fingernail, and then insert them into their roots.
Perhaps if the uncus is not held by them due to their humidity and mollification, then take them with a rough cloth or with a cotton pad or with a woollen cloth, and extract them into the tender threads, and then insert them and powder over them with certain powdered caustics as is customary for the incision; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization. And then heal them with another cure until they are healed.
And if the buttocks do not obey the exit, then create a small crucible for the patient in which there is a little bit of mildness, and wash it with that water that is in the buttocks and that obeys the exit more lightly when the patient exerts themselves.
Perhaps if the hemorrhoids are in front of the buttocks, then the cause of them is light, and it is that you take them with your fingernail, or that you take them with an uncus, and insert them, and then heal them with water that we have said until they are healed.
And that which has an incision, it is necessary to administer stitching of them according to this method: take the enveloped thread and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the upper parts, and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and enfold the two extremities of the thread around the part below the needle, and thus latitudinally; and tighten the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then loosen the thread and extract the needle.
And make it whole, and leave one of them open and do not close it, so that the superflewous blood flows from it.
And then stop on the buttocks, wrapped in olive oil or in wax; and stop that on the buttocks and command the patient to rest. And then leave it until it falls; and when it is fallen, heal them with ointment or with another cure until they are healed.
And since they are antiquated and not valid in that medicine, then it is necessary to root them out with the point of the instrument or with your fingernail until they are made humid and held back by the scab that is above, which prohibits their consolidation; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
When you observe that those parts are severely affected by violent reasoning, so that the first injury enters and is not sanctified, and then take care to heal them so they become healthy.
You know that gout is a key, and it's not so if you don't notice the redness according to the color of the body resembling a head of garlic, and it's done throughout the whole body and mainly in the parts below the feet and toes, and it ends for those pains that come with the anguish.
And then it is necessary to understand that which is in the circle of the key, and it has taken hold with its forks or with a claw, and it has been eradicated from its root; and then take care of that.
And if you want, cauterize the following that is written in the seventh chapter.
More than a true eminence is a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and many veins come out from the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is to extend and insert that, or to stretch it with a file or a pellet inside so that it settles. And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
More than a formica is a small, fetid or grossly fistulous eminence on the surface of the body, like a sore in the groin, and when it touches that it settles in the likeness of gangrene of formica, and it is done around the body.
And the treatment of it is to take a canal of peacock's feather or of vulture's feather, and make it strong, and place that over the formica until it contains the circle of the canal with the parts of it; and then revolve your hand in the canal until you insert what is in the circuit of the formica, and place that in the groin of the flesh, and eradicate the formica from its root.
And if you want, do it with a canal of iron or of steel according to this form:
The part below the canal must be treated with subtlety, dull (it's not perforated), enveloped so that on the aforementioned the apprehension of it is alleviated and the revolution of that.
And if you want to cauterize the formica according to what has been said before in the cauterization of atheyl in the chapter of cauteries.
About the shape of the instruments that are administered to give crusts.
Some crusts are made of silver or gold or iron fondue or molten; and some crusts are made from those small and large instruments according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and of those whose culs are freulent or dolorous, the crusts of those are small.
The shape of large and small crusts:
The head of the canal below which is tied the pouch should be wide according to this manner; and it should be distinguished at the point where the pouch is tied, thus sometimes.
And the extremity of it below, which is inserted into the cul, should be dull (it's not open) like a lion, with subtlety; and on one side of the latz there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel is according to the size of the roots and thus a small one is bigger.
And the pouch in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheep's skin, and the root of it is a palm.
And it should be perforated for many channels thus as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the channels is very large.
And then insert into those channels a strong thread of crude fiber which is of ten fibers, or environs them; and adjust it to the pouch; and when it is placed in it the pouch, it should be stretched at the head of the crust between two distinct and strong constrictions, and then crustify on each channel: More, the quality of crustifying on that is that you fill the pouch with medicine, which should be scaled according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be resupinated on the seventh day, and elevate their legs in a sling and place below it a body on which already are men or a lantern; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or album of water or mucilage of fenugrec or of similar things; and then insert that into the cul to facilitate, and then the minister takes the pouch and extracts it in two masses and seven times with vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine all that is in the crust; and then extract the crust and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that out of the sediment, it holds as much as it can; and if it sleeps on that for a whole night, it is more direct in its effectiveness.
More if you have crystallized urine in the affected parts of the belly and intestines, then you should insert a cautery to cleanse them.
And if there are bloody fluxes or apostemes in the intestine, then a very subtle and gentle crystallization should be made with the stones that children are accustomed to being treated with.
About the treatment of wounds.
You have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that which is convenient to the book, and you have thus said the treatment of those with me and my medicines according to the complement.
So it is said that wounds are diversified according to what and where they are made, and according to the place on which they occur.
And the causes why many wounds are made thus, such as treatment with pumice stone, or incision of the skin, or percussion with a lancet, or with a fistula, or with a scalpel, or similar to those of many causes.
Maybe the wounds that are on the parts of the body thus, such as a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the thighs, and similar to those of the limbs.
And you have recommended the treatment of some wounds because they pause that reasoning and rule about the other wounds.
And you have begun with simple head wounds, for the remembrance of the compound will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
So it is said that when simple head wounds occur and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is due to treatment with pumice stone or similar, and you have already cleaned the wound as much as possible and it is a great wound and you fear about that patient having an aposteme caught, then you should quickly cauterize the cephalic vein, and do not delay; and extract according to the quantity of the virtue of the blood if there is no prohibitive cause for phlebotomy, especially if the blood that comes out of the wound is little.
And it is phlebotomy of the contrary part of the wounded area; and beware of the patient's relapse and of vicious and gross vices.
Maybe if from the minute you prohibited some cause, then it is diminished of the vice and does not approach flesh nor vice.
And stop on the wound, if an aposteme is caught, cut off the infected part with a razor or in wine where it is stippled.
Maybe if it is certain of an aposteme caught, then stop on the wound, if it is recently with the healthy blood and the air has not changed that powder which you recommended to apply little by little.
And if the air has already changed that, then stop on the ulcers and poultices until it is healed.
Maybe if the wound is large or is due to incision of the skin and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pustules, then adjust them with a suture according to what you recommended about the suture of those.
Maybe if the wound has already been discovered on the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by it except for a small suspensor, then incise that and apply careful cure to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of the codena, and command the patient to be purged of vices in which there is grossness: caps and forms of coyting and similar to them, until it is composed.
And if you find putrefaction in the codena and it does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all that rottenness and remove it, and apply careful cure to it.
Maybe if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows that can come out, and it is not abscessed by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find it not incised, then you should incise it with a spatula, or lance it; and if necessary, provoke what we have said does not conflict, then you should cauterize until the blood is abscessed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is lighter; in this way you powder over those with that powder, because consolidated that dentin before the air changes them.
And the preparation of the powder is this: take one part of oil of sesame seeds, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of non-extinct ash; let it all be well-tritrurated and crushed, and of that let the wound be filled, and let it be constricted by good constriction until it be above the adhesion, and let it be coagulated with the blood.
And apply strength to that beneath with pustules and lift it up, and do not dislodge it while it is thus that it does not become apostematous, because it is not eradicated from the medicine until it is healed.
And some wounds make only solitary cauterization, when there is not present essence and dragon's blood.
And you make this mediocre operation on the great wounds when it is convenient that they be stopped over them and strengthened, and these recent wounds with their own blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and it is worse when it's summer time, then it's not convenient to maintain this powder, but rather we should take care of those that have been said, in order to pause on those bitter gums that digest, or pause on those pores of the farina of the ordinary water and honey entering together so that they get purification; and then take care of those with another cure until they are healthy.
Maybe it happens to you to have a fracture in the bone, and it's small, then you extract what you have done.
And I will direct the cure of fractures of the head in that which is coming.
Of the afflictions of the neck.
Maybe the affliction happens in the neck, then it's not different in medicine, and between the affliction of the head when it's simple.
Maybe the nerve of the neck is cut or torn, then if it's a nerve, it's not in the genus but rather to be avoided with a cure of the one that makes vehement stipulation, thus like zinc and zealous that it seems vertigo and similar to their quarrel not otherwise than the nerves and contrast that. And don't pause on the affliction for any total cause of all coldness, because the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is in the brain, which is the worst of all the members.
And if it's what is cured by gentle medicines, thus like it's caused by washing with warm water, some infused vegetable oil or non-roasted, and then when it's washed with warm water and the other minor wounds are treated according to this manner, and humectant.
Maybe the affliction is great, then administer suture, or stitch the lips of it, and then take care to heal with powders until it's healthy.
Maybe the affliction is deep or happens in the worst lower part of the purification, then perforate that at the place most prejudiced.
Maybe in the affliction there is a torn artery and a consequent flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessary to provoke up to that.
Maybe you have cut into the vertebrae of the spine or all, and so saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the codena with suture on the cane of the spine and don't touch that; afterwards equalize that and return it to its natural figure, and then strengthen that with decent structure, and leave it for some days; and then take care of that with humectant in which there is stipulation and excitement until it's healthy.
Maybe the affliction has formed an abscess in the bone, then pierce that, and then if there are fragments of bones, extract all those that you can from it; and what you don't remove, leave it until the affliction is purified, and let it separate and the edge of the bone be alleviated.
And if the affliction is recent then powder over that powder which I have recommended to you. Maybe in the affliction there is formed a fistula, then cure that with water of which the reminiscence will come to you properly in the seventh chapter.
If it's a percussion of a lance or a cuttle, and sometimes of it the depth, then consider maybe if the affliction has been ventilated when the patient was healthy; then you know that the affliction is mortal.
And if it's not deep and the affliction is recent with seven blood, then you pause on it from the first hour powder, and don't strengthen that because the blood isn't retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and revives the patient, maybe pause on it with humectant attraction, and dissolve those two veiled things a day.
And if the humectant is not present to you, then pause on the orrifici of the affliction as much as possible because it sucks what is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps over the affliction so that it runs what is in it adjusted.
Maybe if the affliction has passed three days or more and doesn't affect the patient with spasm or tremor of bad heart or constriction of wings, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then you know that the affliction is saved; and then take care of that with warm waters and another cure until it's healthy.
Maybe if the healing of it is excused, and already all time has been opened, then you know that a fistula has been formed; cure therefore that according to the seventh chapter.
And if the affliction is from a cut of a span or a cuttle, and it's simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure that with water that precedes suture, if it's large, or with powder, if it's small.
Maybe if it has formed an abscess in the bone, and then you cut into the bone, then you twist the affliction and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated. More they are not separated, then let them be introduced into the entry point of the plague, which is alleviated by their extraction.
And from other accidental injuries in the other members, the youthful movement in healing is the youthful movement of what we have said.
From the diseases of the stomach.
The indisposition which occurs in the stomach is either great, or small, or moderate.
And the small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and thus it is that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of their introduction to the right place at once, because it swells and becomes engrossed, for which the instrument of it is made difficult.
And thus the moderate disruption is better, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned above.
And it is known that the suture of the stomach is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that converge in sutures of the other diseases of the body.
And two other specific sutures communicate with the other diseases, but however they are more proper in the suture of the stomach.
And I recommend to each one an exposition and declaration.
Then it is said that when the disease is small and some cause of the intestine appears for that, and it is made difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is come to inflammation through the coldness of the air.
And then when it is so, then you should scald that in this way that you submerge a humid sponge in hot water alone, or that you cook in water squinant, and cyperum, and spic, and embroques, until the inflammation of the intestine is resolved.
And some swollen veins make it visible in which it has been stipulated, and it is better than hot water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And then when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you should humidify the intestine with water in which there are caught altaea and malvas, because by that the instrument of it is alleviated with little cause.
But if it is excused the instrument of it near this cure, then you should divide the disruption into a small instrument in which you have inserted emollients.
And the primary cure is better, when it is proper that there is no section, and there is no occupation to section near necessity and defeat.
Of the instrument, thus you see its shape:
One part of it is sharp-edged, and the other part is not acute, and the extremity is subtle, and not in the subtlety of a spatula, but rather is obtuse a little.
And then when the disease is amplified and goes beyond the intestine, then you should make its reduction according to the natural form of it, in its own proper place, if it is possible about that, because better is.
But when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the stomach, then you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the stomach, then you should raise the head of it and the feet higher than the lower parts.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the stomach, then you should pause your attention and consideration at all times in this way so that the part where the disease is may be higher than the other.
And thus you should administer it in great diseases and in moderate diseases.
And in small diseases, pause what is to be prepared, and make it so that the minister is among your most prepared hands, which holds the entire disruption in its own hand and adjusts the lips of it, and thus discovers from that to whom they know the suture of some cause to another.
And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or counts of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the disease; and thus releases the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthens the needle once, or you do not put faith in the two extremities of the code, with two extremities of the ciphac which is below the code of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have added two extremities of the code and two extremities of the ciphac, and thus makes four orders.
And thus strengthens with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some swollen veins of two parts together, and thus adds the two lips to the disease for decent addition; and thus releases the grossness of the finger and fixes another needle there, and thus links it with faith as it was with the first needle; and you do not cease from doing that if it is necessary among the needles until you have completed all the constriction of the disease.
And the thin needles are between subtlety and coarseness, because the subtle ones barely pierce the flesh; and the coarse ones are of difficult entry into the channel, and therefore it is necessary to use both subtlety and coarseness.
It is not good to have the needle fixed in both extreme parts of the channel near the body, so that the flesh is not barely pierced and the wound heals before its consolidation.
And they should not be prolonged with a suture so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not touch the patient's blood which is still dormant; and place poultices expanded from all parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and thus you will know that the wound has already consolidated.
And in these species of suture with needles, it is more convenient to use them in small wounds, because they have need of a single needle or two around those.
The second suture is common: and it is that you administer the four ends of the channel, of the body and two ends of the scaphoid bone, at once, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped in subtlety and coarseness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, return the needle to that same part from which it started, so that the thread withdraws from the most subtle part of the wound, so that the suture is according to the suture of the cloth in which the cloths are tightly stretched.
And stop between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the smallest finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And in such a suture I have sewn the wound which was inflicted on a man in his own belly, which had been wounded by a blow, and it was a disruption of a major wound of one palm, and it was situated around two palms from the intestine of the middle part, and it was a disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have reduced that swelling which the intestine had been outside the wound for 23 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in a space of 15 days or around, and I cured him and he was healed; and then I visited him for many years, and he was converted into his own dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle it was done, because I did not cure him with an ointment, because it was in a place where ointment was not effective nor any medicine, but I placed a compress on the wound for 20 days and ablution with assiduous water of honey until he was healed.
Moreover, I describe two proper species of suture according to the narration of Pareula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the body, and you insert the needle from the part in front to the part within.
And thus when the needle penetrates into the body and in that same moment it straightens according to the rectitude and length of the whole body, and thus the end of the scaphoid bone is where you inserted the needle; and make it penetrate from one end to the other end of the body, from the part within to the part in front on the other side of the mihac.
And then when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another way in the same end of the mihac from the part in front to the part within; and thus the extremity of the scaphoid bone which is in this layer, and make the needle penetrate from one end to the other end of the body from the part within to the part in front.
And make it penetrate thus your penetration, in which you make it penetrate into the scaphoid bone at the extremity of the mirror, which is in the part within, until all that penetrates.
And then begins this same cost, and sews that end which is of the scaphoid bone on the other side, and extracts the needle from the body which penetrated, and then returns it to the body and thus the extremity of the scaphoid bone which is on the other side in this extremity of the mirror; and extracts it from the body which is part of it.
And make it one way and another, and make it one way then another way until you collect all that is in front according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you collect the suture of pellicles in which you collect the skins, so that you collect the scaphoid bone one way from the part of the extremity of the body, and thus you collect another way until it is complete.
Moreover, the second proper species of suture which is said by Gualia, and this is about the sermo of it and for its recommendation, it is that you collect it according to similarity in which the medical collectors collect it, so that they add all part to its corresponding part to what is convenient by nature; and they apply the extremity of one to the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to what I have recommended to you.
When you place the needle in the extremity of the mirror-like limb at your own discretion before the partition, and make it penetrate into the partition within that sole, and let the two extremities of the scaphoid bone; then return the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the partition within the two extremities of the scaphoid bone.
Then return those little tubes, and make them penetrate some of the partition within the partition before reaching the two extremities of the mirror-like limb on the other side that is in the opposite layer.
And this manner of sewing is better than the common ligature, and it is a sewing that precedes memorable recovery.
This is the serum of Gualia
And the most skilled surgeon, the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you introduce into these a few threads, and begin with the introduction of a needle from what it is that you need, and make it penetrate into the other layer according to the suture of those who sew up the hollow places.
And you know that when disruption is in a delicate place of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of medication for plague is a judgment different from the other plagues.
Which cause is because when you recently contracted the plague with bad blood in your veins, then the air alters that, and reduces the intestine and disturbs it decently, then stops over that incarnative powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then stop over those skilled fingers that are at your presence within so they make hard and rough skin, and thus consolidate scaphoid bone and mirror-like limb; and then cure it in this way as is the curing of other plagues until it is healthy.
But if you are not present with the medications, then stop over that much, because it begins to get worse, a lot of pain, and permutates those two veins during the day, thus as you and teach, until it is healthy, because you do not need another medication in many dispositional cases when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague will spread to the principal members, then place the lanolin in oil of tremulous quality, or in rose oil, and stop it in the circuit of the places that are between the joints and the little wings.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the hollow intestines, because many veins are affected by it, then crystallize that in six stipptic black remedies, and majorly if the perverting is spread in the intestine and makes penetrating exit into its cavity.
And you know that what is of the large intestine is of less ligature sanity than what is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult sanity because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive sanity from plague that falls into it entirely; and that is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of it that is in those, and the subtlety of its body, and the proximity of it to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is the fabric, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your rectitude with which you reduce the hollow intestines.
But if it has passed to the space and already is green or black, then strengthen that with a few threads over the place that is denigrated of it, so that healthy fluxes come, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And then you inscribe that which is another ligament, and stop the two extremities of the thread pending from the partition below the plague before it, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it that needs the cauterization of the fabric and emission of the pain of the plague.
Remembrance of plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some homes, because thus you saw that which was afflicted in the hollow belly with percussion of the lancet and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus of its management and digestion.
Therefore you began to cure it since it was not confused in its sanity, but rather continued to subtily heal it until it is healthy and the place is consolidated.
And you then saw that the place was consolidated, and you looked over the patient who had overcome the bad accident in the hollow belly; and you did not find any evil accident and remained in their many dispositional manners mangling and venting, and then entered in bath and exercised in their own digits.
And already experienced surgeons who when they encounter plague in the intestine, and it is small, then place that it is tied according to this manner: and it is that you take threads from large heads; and then adjust the two labial lips of the plague and stop one thread of those that has the open mouth over the two labial lips of the plague; therefore when you take hold of those and strengthen their mouth, remove the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then you should pause another figuration for the first attack, and do not cease to make figures according to the quantity of all the plague.
And then you should reduce that and cook the plague; and round about those adjacent caps in the intestine until the intestine is healthy; and do not hasten to remove the patient's dressing.
It is possible that the intestine is connected by a subtle thread which is made from the intestine of adjacent beasts, since it is mixed in a knot; and it is necessary to take the extremity of these threads of intestine, and make them not too carnous, and then bind the extremity of them around the thread, enveloping it, and then insert that thread into knots and cook it until the intestine is reduced in the disruption.
And this manner of suturing with figures is not based on anything but trust and hope.
But if the plague is great and widespread, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not only a subtle action, and it is not a healing of the entire thing.
About the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
You know that every plague and abscess when they become swollen and old, it is an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and taken care of for a long time and it is not cut off, then, in whatever member it may be, universally it is named fistula and we call it a chronic ulcer.
And fistula, according to truth, is a nodulous, hard, white tumor which does not hurt and in which there is a conquest as if it were a conquest of pain; and therefore it is named a penetrating ulcer, that is, pain.
And it is in a humid tumor which takes care of itself; and for this reason the humidity is cut off at certain hours. And some of these humidities are moved, and they are few, and they are large, and they are subtle.
Now I have shown all those causes, and the signs of those and their treatment with medicines in the division.
And thus I have made you know how to cure a fistula, which is done by way of operation with hand.
And you know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; because among those are fistulas that penetrate to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the diaphragm, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and among those that give proximity to the principal member and similarity.
And thus among those fistulas that are according to this manner, they are of the evils of difficult healing, and do not receive a cure, and occupation with them is trouble and ignorance.
And if it is of the fistulas some depth that does not penetrate to those places that I have said, and you hope and confide in the cure of them, and want to come to knowledge of them, then take hold with iron or with a file, and if the fistula goes according to rectitude, and you will acquire it with hand.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle probe of lead, because lead in the levity of the entire body is alleviated and curved, removing the twisting.
And if the fistula has very horrible consequences, it is not possible for you to signify about them with a probe.
Then crystallize the horrific thing for its horrific things, because the humidity through which you crystallize that will remove the other horrific things and correct their course.
And then inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves, and it is the conquest of the long-standing fistula or propinquity, or it is a fistula that has very horrific things and this is about all your strength, in your entire fortification, in which you fortify the evil, and the invention of the pain removes your compression on the hand over the location, and similarly of the significations and accidental causes of the abscess.
And since you have stood over all those causes in a true station, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty location, long-standing from a joint, or of nerves, or of arteries, or of veins, or of one of the places which you have mentioned.
When you examine the fistula according to what is said about the narrative of it, and see that it is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born from the orifice of the flesh, or of the heel and of similar things, and cure that entry so that it may be healed.
Maybe the fistula is of long-standing profundity, and it is according to rectitude, then it is necessary that you cut into the surrounding area as much as possible, and thoroughly clean that from all its corrupted flesh; and administer enveloped medicines acutely, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which has comprehended with bitter effort.
And do so that some evacuated channels are introduced so that the acute medicine corrodes all that which is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it by applying the qualities that generate healthy flesh so that it may be healed.
Maybe if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Maybe the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to certify that, then you should inquire into that and examine it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member thus as we have said.
Maybe the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and decay, then you should scrape that away so that the corruption may be stopped entirely; and then take care to encarnate it with what will heal it.
And if it is not healthy and throws away the arm thus as it was done, then you will know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again with second thoughts and exquisitely make the reason of it and the purification of it with the last strong fortification, and then restore it.
And so if it is healthy, good; and if not, then you will know that the corruption is in the deep profundity of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you do nothing but leave it there.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible to extract it, then you extract it with subtle forceps that are suitable for that.
And if there are many corrupted bones, then you exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and of those that do not leave any cause in your strength.
Maybe if you have countered some cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then you incise those ligaments or flesh that are here, and extract the bones.
Maybe if you have not prepared to remove the bones from your hour, then pause over the plague that wounds the plague that, and leave it until it is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the plague that is not consolidated, and the section that you have incised in your operation is constrained.
However, if you are afraid, pause over the submerged bone that is hidden above the trussed olive, or submerged bone in Egyptian anguished vertebrae, because when you will pierce those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their ablation, and of those attracted alleujada.
Maybe it is a large bone like the bone of the leg or thigh or similar to those, and what is corrupted in it is only the surface of it, then scrape that away with resolute determination until it is stopped, and remove that decay and corruption, and then restore the plague.
Maybe what is corrupted in it is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and totally incise into the place where the corruption has spread, and then take care to consolidate it.
And I recommend that you undertake at home in its own thigh so that you pause on it and assist yourself with your operation.
A young man of about xxx years, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and from the affected parts it is evident that the matter is spread through the body until it reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of great abscess, and I do not find an external cause.
And then I extend the time for that error of the physicians until the abscess is opened, and I correct the putrid matter, and its cure is then paused until the leg becomes fistulaed, and it is said that in the rotten orifices all those which had caused putrefaction and the humidities of the body.
And then many physicians were consulted for about two years, and I did not find any wisdom in them except in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the leg of it and the matters that were corroding from it, those orifices for a great body; and already the body of that man was entirely stabilised and the colour of it was citrine.
And then I introduced the probe into one of those orifices and penetrated the probe to the bone.
And you have carefully examined the orifices and thoroughly cleansed those that come out of all parts of the leg.
Then you have touched and inserted into one of the orifices that enters to discover a part of the bone, and you have felt that corruption, and it was already corroded and corrupted and denigrated; and it was already corrupting a part of the leg until it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then you have surgically removed what was discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And you have judged that it was not in the bone but that corruption which you had cut away and surgically removed, and you had already destroyed.
And then you halted the restoration of the wound with medicine that consolidates for a long time, but it is not consolidated.
And then you have iterated and uncovered the bone secondarily over the primary discovery, and you have felt continuous corruption in the bone.
And you have surgically removed what appeared to be that corruption, and then you have made an effort to make a cure and restoration, but it has not been restored.
And then you have discovered about the other side and did not cease to incise the small bone little by little particularly and made an effort to restore it, but it has not been restored until you incised around a palm of it, and that extracted marrow from it, and then you have restored it with medicines, and it is consolidated strongly and healed.
And it is not necessary to iterate in the operation of it and sectioning of it, except for the disposition of its fragility and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it hastens in all hours by superfluity of evacuation, bad syncope.
And therefore it is healthy through entire healing, and nothing is in the place of hard flesh; and it has been well disposed in its own body and returned its virtue; and it has been converted into its own dispositions and did not oppose ambulation nor nuance in any cause.
Moreover, if it is an eminent bone in the body already troubled, then you will see that you should section according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone; and command another to extend it to its own; and pause that ligament of wool which is thicker than the first ligament; and then you lay it over the flesh that is beneath the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts beneath, and you discover the flesh on the spot where you want to serrate so that the serration does not harm the flesh.
And pause to fasten the table beneath the bone decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to serrate without cutting the corrupted flesh.
And it is seen that the serration is above the corrupted spot little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces a serration on the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, although it is one continued part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts totally; and then pause to fasten beneath, and then serrate that from the first part where the corruption is until the serration of the other part is continued.
And the serration is according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, you incise that corrupted joint, and serrate the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in its ingenuity.
And if the corruption is in the pectoral area of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, I believe that you inquire about the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and that you grasp it, and mend it according to whichever disposition is possible for you, and with great care so that it is rectified for you, when it does not cause you opposition or nervousness.
And you know that the incisors and serrations are suited to incise these bones according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so I believe that you prepare for all species of operation and instrument convenient for that operation.
And you know that this operation means to you about the species of instrument for which you need; when I am great study and long and knowledgeable of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of maladies, because then you have them for your measurements that are convenient to the entire malady.
And you are formed at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with as simples as those which proceed to your prohibition which you have experimented on the others. Form of serration:
Form of other serousness:
Form of other great serousness:
Form of crisis: It is the head of this crisis according to the form of head of star-shaped nail, and the points of it are according to the form of the points of the same.
And it does not converge unless one crushes those heads with the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a great wide mouth.
Form of lesser razor:
Form of broad razor:
Form of another decently made saw: it is made with a curved edge of iron and the sharpness of its iron, and the member of its handle is decently made. Form of it:
Form of razor in which it has been concave:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with curved extremity:
Form of small razor resembling a probe:
Form of another minor incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a crisis, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Form of crisis which converges to a ratio of that which is perforated through the bones:
And the extremity of it is triangular and of sharp point.
And it is made of iron from India, and similarly all the causes that we have mentioned about razors and incisors and saws.
Of incision extremities and of the sawing of the bones.
The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with a cure of those medicines and the cure does not concur, or sometimes the corruption becomes so severe that it devours the member which is not perceived by any cause, then it is fitting that you incise that member within that honor, to accelerate the corruption, so that the evil may escape through death or malice that is a greater defilement of the member.
And the sign of that one to whom it happens, is that the member becomes black within until it is judged that fire has already consumed it, or it is weakened near the blackness until the weakening reaches that year in that member which is his and which takes all the body; and thus you understand the incision of that one.
And similarly if it is a cause of corruption by percussion of some venomous causes, such as scorpion sting or viper bite or rue and similar things.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter into the hand.
And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you incise that from the root of the finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the finger of the arm.
And if you surround that, then incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for cure is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly if corruption surrounds the foot, then you incise it up to one of the toes.
And if it takes hold in the skin of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. Moreover if it reaches into the thigh, then you incise the leg up to the joint of the thigh.
And if the corruption has already spread over the thigh, then in that case it is not possible to cure it except by dismissal, and leaving the patient to die.
And the manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you stretch one ligament in the part below, then you will incise where you want to, and stretch another ligament over the area; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament in its own; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments until it is entirely discovered, and then it is incised or sawed.
And it is fitting that you place a cloth of linen over all the parts so that you do not touch the area itself, and that the patient comes with the lesion adjusted and aposteme cautious.
Moreover if there is a flow of blood when you operate, then you cauterize the affected area cautiously, or stop it with some powders that staunch the bleeding; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
And then bind the affected member with a ligament at a convenient place, and cure it until it is healthy.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his old age, this meets with an accident which I and you have recommended, which is so accidental to the blackness in the old foot with adjustment that was assembled to combustion of fire.
And that corruption occurs primarily in the sciatic nerve where it reaches the entire foot.
And then that man prepares himself to put his foot in a position for healing to come to the affected member with the vehemence of it, and to diminish pain and discomfort, and he inserts that foot into the joint, and cleanses it thoroughly.
Long time ago, that corruption occurred in the sciatic nerve of the hand indicated.
And then I came to myself, and I thoroughly perforated the superficial corruption that I found on the hand of the medicines, and I applied the purification of his body; and it is not a superficial thing and began to come into the other digit until it begins in the hand.
And I began to insert my hand into his, and you did not want to do anything that would prevent the reaction of that superficial corruption, and more than that I feared the insertion of his dead hand, because the virtue of the medicine was on the point of being lost.
And since he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it happened to me that the man prepared and inserted his whole hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except to be helpful regarding what is said about this disease, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
About the care of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When abscesses occur in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and it is drained of its pus, and one removes the place where it was, as if it had been washed, and the codena that is above it like subtle drapery, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
But if the space is prolonged until the corruption begins in certain members, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the care of it is that one inserts the entire codena as if it were revolving, and mainly when it is subtly introduced and made like a drap, and one ensures that it does not adhere to the place for its corruption.
But if you fear that the codena will adhere and that corruption will not have been achieved by further consequence, and in the codena has passed of a certain way, then you cure him with aclyster.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm that you have of fetid odor, then you clisterize him with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and wine and zinc and receiving equal parts, and they are adjusted in a vase, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine is red-hot and penetrates to the specific place of honey.
And then you take of it what is necessary and dissolves the honey in water and honey; and you clisterize him with that sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that honey with precision; and do it for so many days until the sinus is purified and the pus is removed.
And some vegetables are clisterized with water of ash, when it is not present to you this medicine; and it is that you take the cinder of vitriol, and mix it over the water; and then you strain that and clisterize him in it until you confirm that the sinus then is stopped.
And if the patient does not have tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of ash, then you clisterize him with honey and water and which is mixed zinc triplex, and you clisterize him with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleans, and the wine makes adhere to the sinus, and mainly when in the wine there has been superfluity of stickiness and dryness.
And when you do this with some vegetables and you confirm that the sinus is already removed, then you clisterize him with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take of dyafinicon unguent and dissolve it in oil rosated and wine stipitic; or that you clisterize him with some medicines and other unguents that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on unguents.
And if the orifice of the sinus is strait in which the cannula of the clisteri is not received, then you amplify it with iron little by little, and pause in the caldron enveloped in Egyptian unguent or in basilicon unguent until it is amplified.
And similarly if the orifice is ample, then you add the lips of it to the suture and leave the quantity in which the clisteri is introduced.
And if the orifice of it from which the arm flows is elevated to the upper parts, then you dry it in the pus below the place that is in it so that the arm flows until below, because when the arm is constricted at the prominence of the sinus the flesh is engendered in it.
And if it is not possible for you to extract the sinus from inside the patient's os pubs, then perforate in preparation for the member that is being prepared for the corridor of the lung, and adjust the arm gently according to how it appears to you and make sure that nothing remains retained in the arm.
Moreover, that which is on the orifice of the sinus, which remains for a whole hour so that it adjusts to what is just in the arm. And so you will know if what flows from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested, or not digested.
And thus you should consider the place of that sinus, if the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the matter that is poured over the orifice of the sinus already adhering, or it adheres properly, then wait three days, and when you remove the plague, then change the cloth for another and renew the bandage.
Moreover, if the sinus is open to a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, because the healing of it will take place, because some homes are in those which delay the generation of flesh in those wounds, and of those that are in those which make the opposite of it.
And if the sinus is open for many days and the arm is indigested, then you will know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and it is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus with a dyafinicon bandage, when there is an excessive abundance of additions to the zeal.
And the last thing in the one that is cured, is that you take from the dyafinicon bandage and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it on the Vojat via Antic, in its substance, and thus comfort the one with it, and use it for that.
And thus it seems similar in that action, when there is no arm, dyafinicon bandage, but rather a coating inside so that it becomes thickened, and use it for that; or take mirra and aloen and grind them, and sprinkle all over the mel that is on the focus, and thus line it above the cloth and strengthen it above the sinus; and thus line it with the mel that has been coated inside so that it becomes thickened, and sprinkle over the cloth and strengthen it.
And some times they administer it with aristology long and roots of celestial lilies (and those are celestial lilies) and ferns of errors and centaurea, and use those simple or adjusted, sprinkle them and crush and powder over the mel that has been recommended; and thus use it for that.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you will know that the corruption is in the prone part of it, and thus it makes an inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you should cure it with a fistular cure, as has been said before.
Of the cure of gouty and worn-out nails and toe incisions added to the section.
Gouty is an abscess that forms beneath the nail of the toe or foot, and it forms in other toes as well, and when it is prolonged and its cure is less prcised, either it becomes an abscess from a hot abscess, or it becomes corrupted, and it throws the arm inside so that it corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all, and it perceives its corruption to the bone inside so that it has a foul odor, and it makes the extremity of the toe lame, and its color is made dark.
And so when you will have that which we have said in the division and do not confirm your cure, then it is necessary that you insert iron into all the excess that has remained from the nail and thus cauterize the plague thus, because cauterizing with fire is not suitable for that.
Moreover, if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, and the additions of the nail are already comprehending the flesh in the divided parts, and it begins to puncture and leads thus, then it is necessary that you pause a subtle ray beneath the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and impels it above and inserts it into the flesh to facilitate, and places it above what remains of the flesh of the corrosive medicines that burn within so that it is completely removed; and thus cures it with an ointment that enters so that it is healed.
When corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary to dig into the bone and extract it, for there is no time when a corrupted bone can heal itself.
And if corrosion and corruption have entered the finger, then you should insert it into one of the nostrils according to the prescribed remedy, and take care that it is healed from within.
But if the nail is suffering from percussion or injury, and suffers from that vehement pain, then it is necessary to begin fleubotomizing the patient, and to section the nail with a spatula-like instrument in a transverse direction from below upwards, and be careful not to penetrate too far into the flesh beneath the nail, lest you aggravate the patient's vehement pain, and cause superfluous generation of adjusted tissue at that location; and then take care to heal that place so that it ceases to hurt.
But the adjusted digit, which is born in the hands of some men, is entirely fleshy, and entirely so in the bones, or entirely in the nail.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the birthplace of them in some nodes of the fingers. But that which is born in the nodes of the fingers does not become evil, and this which is born in the joints is entirely swollen.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is necessary to insert it into its root with a broad spatula.
But of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its abscession.
But in that which is born in the fingers from the nodes, it is necessary to insert at the beginning the flesh of them with a round incision into the bone, and then to close with one of those convenient sutures, and to take care to heal that within so that it is healthy.
But consolidation occurs when it happens to the fingers between the mobile joints or by birth of the man who is thus born, or by consolidation of plague or by combustion of fire, or by resemblance; therefore it is necessary to make that consolidation within so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And then pause between the layers of the swollen veins in oil roasted so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them from each other, or pause between them with a thin layer of lead so that it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the fingers of the palm, then you section that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient to the shape of the limb.
Of incision of veins, they are variable.
Veins are variable, and they are gross, full of superfluous melancholic fluids which come into the muscles of the body, and the greatest advent occurs in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and porters.
Therefore it is necessary to administer purging of the body from black bile with some evacuating remedies strongly, and then to bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
But the cure of their iron fermament is in two ways: one is that it be incised and the black blood be attracted, and the other way is that the vein be elevated and all be extracted.
The section of it is according to this way: at the beginning, apply hot water to the leg until the gross blood is resolved, which is filthy in the leg, and then stretch the patient's leg towards the upper part of the thigh above the knee, and then section the vein in one place, or two, or three with a broad incision, and then elevate the black blood in the manner of a bandage above the knee, and from there downwards, until the desired quantity of blood is released, which will tolerate the virtue of the patient.
And then leave that, and command him to abstain from black bile-inducing foods.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that does not harm the patient.
But the elevation of them is according to this way: you raise the patient's leg, if it has many joints, and then put it in a bath and apply hot water to the leg until it becomes warm and the veins are abundant; or that it be exercised with strong exercise, if a bath is not present at your location, until the limb is scaled.
And then section the cord in the right of the vein for incision in the loin or in the back of it near the knee, or at the lowest part of it towards the ankle.
And then uncover the cord with an uncision and excavate the vein from every part until it appears to the sense, and it is necessary for the appearance of that which sometimes declines into blackness.
And then you will find the vein and from the cord you will sometimes see that white thread which is a cord.
And then you put below that vein until it is elevated and freed from the cord, and suspend it with an iron instrument or a golden one.
And then you will dry another section, and then you will dry that section for three days, and then you will remove the crust from the top of the wound beneath which it appears.
And then you will raise that and insert it into the rear section of the talon, and then you will extract that and raise it until it is seen for the second section, and then you will extract that from the section that is above that.
And make it so that you extract it from the section that is above or below all the sections, until everything is seen; and then you will insert it.
And if you cannot extract and elevate, then introduce a strong double-threaded needle and tie it and extract it, or introduce the same through the radius and revolve your hand to every part until it is freed. And beware that it is not inserted; because if it is torn, it will be difficult for you to elevate that member and it will come back over the patient through that injury.
And when that entire area is freed, then pause over the place of the wound, anoint it with olive oil and rose oil, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the life is constricted having twisted to the one that is enveloped in the parts, and it is not according to the rectitude according to what we have said, then you should confess about that to the entire twisted part of it and to the places of its envelopment, and then you will suspend it in uncircumcised areas until it elevates the entire thing.
And beware of your section that you do not insert the vein and that it does not plague that, because it will be difficult for you to elevate that; and preserve your prudence in that.
Method of incidentally wounded life:
It is not to be done on the circumcised thus with the uncircumcised nor of sharp extremity so that it does not plague the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would insert the vein by its subtlety; having excess in superfluous grossness thus as we have said.
On the extraction of varicose veins of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs in cold and moist lands, just as in the land of the Arabs and in the lands of India, which are dry and arid with little fertility, and in those where there is neither herb nor tree.
And often it is generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
And the nature of it is of putrefaction that comes from beneath the crust, just as venomous things penetrate the body through serpents and worms and scorpions and worms generating between the crust and the flesh.
And the sign of the suspicion of the advent of it is of this vein that causes inflammation in the leg with vehement swelling; and then the place becomes vesicated; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that vesication, which seems to be a root-like plant.
And then it appears from there to the extremity, then you should wrap around that one piece of lead whose weight is that of a drachm, inside two drachms, and take that away and let the lead hang suspended from the leg.
And as many times as the causes of that ailment are in the parts beforehand, envelop it in lead and apply it. And if the motion is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and envelop the remainder; and do not insert it by root until it is fully seen, because if you insert it, it will be constricted and enter into the flesh and cause abscess and pus in the place and bad ulceration.
Because you should treat it gently and extract it little by little, until it is freed from the back of it and no remainder of any cause remains in the body.
And of this vein, it is said that some men are in their length of 5 palms and of 10, and already it has reached me that one of 20 palms.
And if it is inserted at the time of its medication, then introduce the radius into the channel of it and perforate it with a long channel in the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medications; and then cure it by the curing of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has many roots, and it increases especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to its many horrific roots, and it is said to be a certain horrific root.
And then cure it thus as we have said in the division and with that which has been said above.
On the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called cattle disease.
This disease is named in some land as our cattle disease because it puts many wounds on the skin and it is a worm that is born between the crust and the flesh, and it goes throughout the whole body, paining and weakening, and it shows the sentiment of those who have the limb by limb until it disintegrates the crust and it is finished.
And the generation of it is from the putrefaction of certain humors, thus accumulated worms and serpents and parasites in the stomach.
It is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the veins, then it strengthens the ulcer in it and destroys the veins, and thus it generates many putrid matters.
And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then it cannot be done unless you have the suitable walking and preparation of the sentiment, and then you will understand what is above it and what is beneath it in terms of ligament and constriction, and thus you will make a cut above it and extract it.
And if it is deeply embedded in the flesh and does not protrude, then you apply a cautery iron to the area within where it hurts, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the limb, which corrupts the area thus as we have said.
Perhaps sometimes it reaches the head near the vein, then you will make a strong constriction on the eyebrow above, and thus you will cut above it, and extract it; and you will see that the patient uses a remedy of purification of their whole body with medicines evacuating bad putrid humors, and beware of foods generating putrefaction.
On the treatment of sudden fever.
This disease is called "nafir" in our land, and it is the pain which goes into certain members, and thus it spreads from member to member.
And you have already seen that according to what I recommend to you. You were called to a sick woman in a village, and you discovered her arm swollen and saw a small inflammation in the funis vein of the arm, and after it had been warm for an hour, you saw that inflammation go away as if it were vermilion paint, more quickly than it should be, as if it were argentum, you saw how it corroded from place to place.
And then the pain remained in that place and settled into the muscle, and thus it stayed there for an hour.
And thus it ran to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
And thus I recommend to you that it revolves throughout the whole body according to what you have seen; and it was too marvelous for the permutation of it and the velocity from member to member. And you had already seen beforehand that in my wheels according to that manner, however you have seen many things which cause pain to be transferred from member to member. But I did not see that in the wheels as it was in the woman.
And you did not think it was that except that it was because the woman was old, with dry body and discovered veins, and in this way it appears to the sentiment that that putridity was transferred.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retrograde action in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with weak veins.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then it does not appear to you at the wheel as we have said, then you will make a strong constriction on that and let it be for a while, and thus you will cut above it until that putridity is driven out, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not have the wheels, then you will cure it with excavations of the body and with that which expels putridity, and burn those foul pills and those of serpent's skin and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the locations of the body in which they fall, because their diversity is that some have large points, and small ones, and concave, and straight, so it is solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have astellas.
And of the signs of the brain is when you cut into the arrow, and it passes through the bone, and it reaches the ciphalic point which is above the brain, because it accumulates vehemently through the soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the wheels, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and the voice is abolished and the speech is destroyed, and it reaches the place of the wound with humid white matter resembling polyps, and it appears similar to that which is affected by the flesh.
And then if you seem to have symptoms of sciatica, then you abstain from treatment and extraction of the sagittal, if it is not outside.
Maybe the symptoms of the sagittal when it affects the heart, so that it is close to the mamilla on the left side, and I feel that it is fixed in a hard cause, and it is not a veiled cause; and for a long time the movement of the sagittal seems like a movement of the pulse, and it corrodes the black plague sanicle, and this friability, and syncopation; and therefore you know that death descends with all its doings.
And the symptoms when the sagittal has infected the lung, then it is a sign of frothy sputum of the plague, and the veins that are near the collarbone, and the color of the patient's skin changes, and they exhale great spirit away, and demand attraction of air frequently.
And if you feel the sagittal in the wrapping which is on the chest, and the pain then is near the small ribs, and it makes a great cry with vehement pain and sighing, and it does not move all the members of the muscles.
And if you feel the sagittal in the stomach, then it is a strong sign of the plague that comes with some indigestion.
And if you feel the sagittal in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, it is a sign of some rupture of the plague, or the mesh, or intestine which is dislocated, and there is no hope in the treatment of its extraction of the sagittal.
And if the sagittal is felt in the bladder, and it is blocking the urine, and it progresses to some cause in the previous parts, and for a long time there is pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Maybe the other members also, such as the face, the neck, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the adjuncts, and the vertebrae of the back, and the fork, and the hip, and the leg, and their similar parts, are saved according to the major dispositions when the sagittal does not obstruct a vein or artery and it is not a poisonous sagittal.
And I recommend to you that you have seen the essence of these sagittals, so that you may signify for it above your treatment.
Which cause is, because in one case the sagittal falls into the lacrimal duct of the eye of the patient, and you extract it from the other part, leaving the grayness of the aurelia of the eye, and it is healthy, and does not affect the eye of the document.
And you extract another sagittal from a Jew who had it in his gray eye, leaving the eyelid still, and the sagittal was already occulted and could not be reached except by a small extremity that adhered to the wooden stick, and it was a great sagittal of the sharp sagittals of the Turks, with iron leon on which there were no aurelias.
And he is a Jew, and it does not affect his eye badly in that bad accident.
And you extract another sagittal from a Christian who had it in the gullet, and it was an Arabic sagittal, and that is the one with aurelias; and then you inserted above that between two guiding rules, and it was already submerged in the gullet of his; and then you subtly manipulated it, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian is healthy.
And you extract another sagittal from a man who had it in his abdominal cavity, and you thought he would die from that; and therefore, since he passed xxx days and did not change regarding any of his dispositions, you inserted above the sagittal and operated on it, and he is healthy, and it does not affect him badly in that bad accident.
And I saw a man in whom a sagittal fell on his back, and the plague was consolidated over him, and since he received proper care for seven years, the sagittal was removed from the cavity of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom a sagittal fell into her abdominal cavity, and the plague is consolidated inside him, and it does not change in his dispositions in anything, and the woman does not obstruct document in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man in whom a sagittal fell on his face and the plague was consolidated, and they removed the sagittal, not feeling much pain, and it seemed similar to this one.
And you extracted the sagittal from the man of the princes of the king who had it in the middle of his nose and eye, and it had already declined to the right side a little, and the entire sagittal was occulted.
And you were called for the treatment of his sagittal extraction within three days.
And then you touched the plague of the sagittal very strongly; and then you inquired about it with a subtle touch, and did not feel it; but I felt it a little below the right aurelia, and then I suspected that the puncture was due to the extremity of the sagittal.
And I applied a plaster to the place where it was attractively and digestively conjoined, convincing myself that the place would be apostemized so that it appears to me as the place of the sagittal, so that it succeeds over it.
And if the accident did not occur in a significant place; and you continued to apply the plaster on it for many days without an accident occurring; and the wound consolidated meanwhile, and removed the patient from the extreme extension of it for many days until one day I felt the sageta within the blood and recognized that it was mine.
And then I applied the acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and I gently felt that, and carefully removed the subtle extremity of the sageta, which adhered to the skin.
And then I adjusted in the opening of the wound for that acute medicine until it appeared to me visibly the extremity of the sageta, and I passed the time meanwhile for the space of four months.
And then because the wound was amplified, and it was possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I remained there, and did not obey the urge to remove it, until I no longer subtly felt and engineered over it in many ways of artifice, until one day I began to use the forceps with gentle descent, according to the form of those at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it and the wound is consolidated, and it is healthy for complete sanitation, and nothing bad remains in it for any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some sagetas so that they pause on this rule and significance about what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not understood in narration nor do they comprehend them freely.
And the skilled artisans know how to compare a few about many; and I know what is present about what is absent; and I find new operation and new instrument given by the descent of external causes of the art when they are accelerated.
And therefore I say that sagetas are not forgotten from the members in which they are fixed, but rather according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where they enter; or by contrast with the other part.
And that which is forgotten by the place where it enters, or is a sageta proceeding from a carnous location, and it is attracted and forgotten.
And if you do not obey the urge to remove it at the hour when it hurts, then cover that you leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes soft, and its attraction and exit are alleviated.
And similarly if it is fixed in the bone and you do not obey the urge to remove it, then leave that for some days and repeat that with attraction and movement every day, and already it is forgotten.
And if you do not obey the urge to remove it for some days, then cover that you perforate in the circuit of the sageta in that bone of the entire part with subtle travel until the place is amplified by the sageta, and then extract it.
Moreover if the sageta is already embedded in the place of the body, and it is embedded with sentiment, then you inquire about that in tenths, and if you feel that, then you attract it with some instruments which are convenient for its attraction.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the instrument, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you feel over the wound until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the sageta.
And if you have the golden rules which are held, then you deliver the flesh in which it is fixed from the entire part with all the art that you can do; and engineer over that, if you cannot operate on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in torsion of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the sageta in whatever place it is, then you use your hand with forceps on all parts until it makes that obey; and subtly engineer the subtle subtlety that the sageta is not broken and that it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
And if you cannot stand on that hour of your time, then you will lie down for some days until the parts that are in its circle can be purified, and then return that quarter when it is alleviated. Perhaps you have made a contrary flow of blood, then you will administer what we have said about the cure in the seventh chapter.
And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer ingeniously in every manner possible to avoid the evasion of the arrow; and make that you facilitate and tranquilize and delay and strengthen also as you are recommended.
And thus you will make a counter-arrow against the arrow so that the malady is according to the figure according to which you have received the indication of the arrow in it, because it is more juvenile. Perhaps that is not possible for you, then you will administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Perhaps the arrows that are forgotten by the counter of the other party, or that already proceeds from some party to the external parts, or has made the extremity of the arrow globose by sentiment of the party plus above the codena propenda and times that eminent; then you section about that; and it is the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then return that, because it is made lighter to the judgment.
Perhaps it is retained in the bone, then you will twist the lame according to counter-action until the arrow penetrates into the bone, and amplify its measurements, and then extract that.
And so, you will lie down with that for some days, and then return it until when you are well again.
And if the thrust of the arrow is in that, then you will impel that into the body.
Perhaps the thrust has fallen and you want to administer impulse, then you will introduce and that, if it is dull, stir with caution so that it enters the cavity of the body in the hollow of the arrow and then impel that into the body.
Perhaps the arrow is concave, then you will impel that into the body with strong stirring entering into that, because the arrow is alleviated by that.
And if the arrow is intoxicated, then it is necessary that you concave all the flesh in which it is the true, if it is possible for you, and then cure that with what is convenient.
And if the arrow falls in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is near so that you touch that with the tent, and it is possible for you to section about that, then section about that and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract that, and then dress the wound if it is indigent, and cure that until it is healed.
The way to use forceps is those which are adapted to remove the arrows:
Thus the extremities of their ends are like the beak of a bird which are made with a serrated edge when they take hold of the arrow so that it does not slip.
And of those are made various special moities, large, small, and moderate, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and of its slight weakness, and of the amplitude of the wound, and of the constriction of it.
also like a ray so that it alleviates the introjection of it into the arrow's concave and it is impelled into that.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of those which usually customarily phlebotomize thus... of those which are in chapter 16. they are two pulsatile veins which are near the aurelians, it is said by Galen; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guide-grooves that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and  these are the veins that are called algelic ; and so they are two veins that are beneath the tongue. Perhaps the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are thus. because among them is a cephalic vein, and it is of the wild basilica; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is dull, and it is a moderate vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and of another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that "vein of all the body", and the basilica is the vein which is paused in the domestic artery, and is named "citillar", and the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and funis of the arm, and it is paused over the focus, and it is that which appears over the pulse for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein which is between the said auricular and the small digit, and so in both ramps.
There are three veins in the leg and thigh; one of them is beneath the curvature of the wild goat's knee; and the second is subtle, and its place is beneath the domestic goat's thigh; and the sciatic vein, and its place is beneath the wild goat's thigh; and in the thigh there are other similar veins to those.
The youthful vigor of the veins that are near the ears is against ancient and migrating catarrhal and ulcerous evils of the bad old head.
And the quality of blood that they have is according to what you recommend to yourself: it should be scraped from the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on the occiput in the place where the two veins meet with a good friction; then strengthen the patient's seat with a bandage between the two ears so that they appear near the ears in two places of premature aging of the head; and if you feel the pulse of those in the said vein, and if you sense the flow of blood in the said vein, here it will be held.
Then take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then introduce it beneath the vein in the hollow so that the flow of blood comes out through the opening. And then lift your hand on the vein and the hollow to the upper parts and insert the incident vein into the cutting incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make a gentle flow of blood as much as you want.
And then strengthen the pulse with poultices, and let it be so until it is healed.
And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
More of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the youthful vigor of the flow is against ancient and evil migraines and chronic and persistent eye troubles and bodies with acute overflowing effusions to the wheels.
And the quality of flowing blood from those is according to what you recommend to yourself: constrict the patient's seat with a motive that they appear to have the two veins in sentimental and manifest perception, and then demonstrate the pulse of those in the said vein; and then it will be held.
And then lift the hollow above the vein to the upper parts of the said vein, and introduce the flow of blood incidentally beneath, and lift the vein in its own; and insert it thus as you have done in the two other veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then release the constriction of the patient, and stop the said vein for an hour, and then stop on that joint and poultices and strengthen it from above with a strong constriction, and let it be so until it is healed.
And now I have preceded the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
And thus the youthful vigor of the flow of blood from the vein of the forehead is against the ancient evils of the face, and migraines and rough and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the flow of blood from it is according to what you recommend to yourself; it is that the patient strengthens their seat with a bandage between the two ears so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named fossor, of which this is the form of it.
Stop at the prominent point which is at the head of the fossor above that vein and percuss on it with a finger or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it until it is healed.
And some veins are opened in the flow of blood, however it is not seen that the flow of blood is from an acute extremity thus as the other flows of blood, unless it is from a lazy extremity, and the flow of blood is according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and very strongly pierces into the flow of blood when it is subtle.
More of the youthful vigor of the two veins that are as lacrimal of two wheels for scabs on the wheels from roughness and foulness in the wheels, and against the evils of the face.
And the quality of the flow of blood is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage, and then flows of blood occur, and you stand still above its head.
And let the flow of blood be made according to the transverse length, a little in the flow of blood, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the flow of blood is subtle, very strongly does the extremity of it pierce.
And then make the blood flow as much as you need, and stop on that joint, and strengthen it for one night, and then release it.
More of the flow of blood from the vein of the nose is conducive to acute fever and violent sweat, and against the evils of the face and migraines and roughness that occur in the face, and worsen when it is ancient.
And the quality of the patient's fleubotomia is that the patient strongly holds the sieve and approaches it with their left hand, and takes the subtle fleubotomy instrument and places it in the correct location on the bridge of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear at this sentiment, and because the blood starts to flow abundantly.
Collect your last drop of blood with the small fleubotomy instrument little by little and let it flow according to your need; and place it there for a new use, because that is restored sufficiently.
The juice of the fleubotomy instrument guides to a constriction of the veins and commencement of leprosy, and it extinguishes evil ulcers and corrosive sores, also with herpes and other skin diseases.
And the quality of the fleubotomy instrument is that the patient strongly holds under each sieve with a ligament; and it is fixed on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then fleubotomy is performed on the vein at a length with the small fleubotomy instrument little by little; and then extract blood according to the tempered quantity or according to what is needed at the time; and then make it resemble the other vein.
And then release the ligament and tighten the two veins with a mild stricture so that the patient is not suffocated, and lay him down in bed because the plague is healed.
And the juice of the fleubotomy instrument on the Algerich veins comforts little apostemes and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and evil ulcers and fissures, and evil ulcers that are in the nose and in their circuit.
And the quality of the fleubotomy instrument is that it makes the patient cease to, and tightens the neck with a bandage, and then revolves the lips and regards the two veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of both, and this is because in the circuit of those small black veins; and then inserts each one for an incidental insertion.
If you have doubt about this, and do not know which one is, then you should make an incision on the larger of those, and of the most manifest part of those.
And make them resemble the two veins that are in the lips above.
It is customary for the two veins that are below the tongue, the juice is to approach the fleubotomy of the cephalic vein to suffocations that are in the throat, to the disease of the uvula, and to diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of fleubotomizing those is that it follows the patient between their hands in front of the sun, and elevates their tongue, and regards below the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And then fleubotomy is performed on each one; and beware that you do not ultimately perform fleubotomy with your hand on those, because below those are arteries.
And the two veins that are fleubotomized in the waist are those which customarily correct in all homes, and the fleubotomy of them is done according to two methods, or they put on the fleubotomy instrument mirror-like or olive-shaped at subtlety declining; or they dissect with a fleubotomy instrument cutting edge, and call it "alnessil", and this is their form.
It is the side of it also with times, and converges to open the concave full veins proceeding to appear gross, and at those that contain gross turbid blood.
And this fleubotomy is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and converges to fleubotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle citrine blood.
The juice of the fleubotomy instrument on the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the blood of the diseases that are below the throat and the neck, and of what sieves the chest and the belly.
And it converges to the fleubotomy doctor, when he performs fleubotomy on that one, that he beware of that and be in supreme fear of that, because below it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the fleubotomy instrument, he will incise that artery and cause fluxes of blood, so that he knows not to perform fleubotomy with a pungent fleubotomy instrument, unless he is expert with "alnessil".
And if the basilica does not appear for manifest appearance, then it is known that you leave that one and move to another, or seek some other branch; or that you perform fleubotomy at the end of the arm, because that is manifest; and dissect with a fleubotomy instrument "alnessil" as we have said.
If you want to perform phlebotomy on the thigh, then cover the area around the arm that touches the inner area so that you know the area of the pulses, and place a strap above them with a taut hand; and place the arm in a way that the concave vein is exposed at the curved part of the phlebotomy, as we have previously mentioned; and be careful not to cause percussion on the surrounding space of the artery.
And when you bleed, as the ligament stretches, it swells in the area that you have touched with your hand, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if the blood flows in phlebotomy as with the urine of an infant, and the blood is subtle red, then you know that it's from the artery's blood; and then you touch and pause the thread mentioned above for a long space; and place the thread mentioned above, and if the blood is absorbed, because many evacuated bloods are absorbed, then you stretch the arm and let that flow.
And beware of the patient's mood, and be above fear of them and don't let that happen for several days until they are healthy.
If the blood does not absorb, and it seems that you do not have present medicine for this, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of them is constricted, and the blood is absorbed; or take a thread of fistic, and finish that, and take one vein and stretch it over the area of the concave vein with structured descent along the ligament and pulvils until another day.
And then if the blood is absorbed, it's good; and otherwise, then cure that with water from which it was preceded to the remembrance of the area of the pulverized absorbent flux of blood.
And the absorption of their blood is difficult in many dispositions for the small area of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Moreover, the dark vein in phlebotomy is a youth that extracts the blood from the superior part of the head and the inferior part of the body; therefore, because it is composed of branches from the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have previously mentioned.
And beware the phlebotomist who is above-fear in the phlebotomy of them, because below that is a nerve; and then if you adjust at the puncture of the phlebotomy and touch the nerve, it will happen to their stupor, and it is difficult their healing, and far from being fully healthy. And this nerve appears many times to the sentiment; and if it is hidden for several hours and is subtle and does not show, then beware that you pause the phlebotomy at the one where you phlebotomize in a curved part, and avoid the nerve with your forcelessness.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you find the vein in length.
The youth of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and comforts the diseases of the eyes.
And beware in this property, if you want the phlebotomies to burst on the olive or myrtle phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all the veins, because it is not below the artery nor nerve.
Moreover, it is strongly recommended to avoid being punctured in several places, when not phlebotomized in the primary percussion, and do not touch again in that apostema.
The first of them is that you beware to know that phlebotomy is not administered unless in conservation of health and for the hope of their recovery and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that it be done phlebotomy on one of the veins that are in the body, namely: cephalic, dark, and basilica; and that it be done phlebotomy at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter near digestion, when apparent signs of replenishment.
And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or at first light after three hours have passed since the sun rose.
Moreover phlebotomy that is administered, moreover when it provokes convenience and necessity at any time, or of night or of day, in all hours and in all seasons.
And beware that a child should not be phlebotomized until they have fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except for the fourth month until the seventh, and the old people who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
And as some people want to be phlebotomized for whatever reason, beware that you Mondifique the six veins within the phlebotomy with a clear lens, if in those there is much retained fluid, so that the veins do not attract superfluities in the phlebotomy of the veins, which are pure, and do not numb the principal members.
And there is no such thing as a patient who does not experience nausea and stomach cramps, nor do they escape from malaise or inward turmoil until that which was previously bothering them has been removed, nor is it dropsy, and perhaps the removal of colic passion and vomiting, and the removal of belly ache, and the multiplication of coughing and trembling and exercise of fasting or vigils or total cause that dissolves virtue, either in a corporate body or an animal one.
And then consider in subtlety of humor diagnosis that if the blood is thick, it will be seen through veins and arteries, and it will be medicines if it is possible to them at their best.
And then enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or be excited by some exercise so that the blood is subtled.
And stop the flux of it in the flat of the day, so it is around the hour of tierce, thus as we have said.
And beware that the flat of that one is guarded on that day from all bad accidents of animals, thus as it is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, thus as it is trembling and useless pain and coughing and similar to theirs.
And at its session, the surface must be present with the causes in the use of which correct custom of men is aromatized and odorized and balmed and similar to those according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the flux-remover on a cushion that was put above the cushion of that one who must be flux-removed.
And then extract the dry arm, and scrub that with its hand the flux-remover two or three times; and then strengthen the ligament in the correct way and involve that two times.
And it is the tempered structure, because the structure when it is not engorged, or the structure is overly full, then it prohibits blood fluxes; or it is mollified, and then it prohibits the body of the blood's essence.
And then the structure, because that one who must be flux-removed scrubbed his hands together between them so that the veins are inflated and declared to the feeling.
And then the flux-remover anointed the dry flux-removed area with a little anti-inflammatory oil properly; and then stopped the dry finger of the left hand over that vein, below the place where the flux-removal wants to go, so that the vein would be a little, and the percussion would be seated because the veins are the ones that obstruct thus like a fleeing cord gives the flux-removal, and from those it is full of windiness and when stops the flux-removed area over that, it is constricted against the flux-removed area; and the flux-removed area does not touch the vein, and if it touches, that is stretched.
And thus, because of this, the flux-remover must be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
And then pause the flux-removed area, maybe if the vein is opened in one way, then it is good; and if not, you iterate another way below that place a little, or above the fasting, if the place is not affected.
And if the place is affected, or the malaise spreads, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strengthen the ligament, because a strong apostemic caution would be needed, nor does one enter into a bath.
And then iterate the flux-removal if it loves.
And if the perception is small and corrects the blood subtly, and fears that it will not have the quantity that you want, then you iterate the flux-removed area in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the perception a little, and do so with fasting beforehand because the place is affected, since the place is affected in many homes for few perceptions.
Maybe sometimes that one is affected, then you do not iterate over it, because it does not excuse any cause to you; and stop on that certain part of the wound of oil, because it alleviates the body of the blood. And it is better in this place with oil and that other oils.
And similarly administer wound of oil in all flux-removals with which flux-remove the veins from the prohibition of body of blood, and do so with Tyriacal and Sagzenial when it is stopped on one of those above the place, because the blood is subtled and is revolved when it is thick.
And if in the place of flux-removal a great apostema is engendered, because many ways are accumulated, and majorly to that one who has not been blooded except for that way, or in the perception of the little vein, and then you touch, and stop on the place spongy infused with water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And because of this, the flux-removal does that accordingly to the sentiment of the blood of that vein in complement with it or another vein.
And if it remains in the place for some days with some blackness or viridity, do not note that; and if you want, stop on that certain cause of aloen and mirra dissolved, or some cause of juice of mentastry or calmment or similar to it.
Excessively fatty tissues are affected by apostemes and eminences of flea-borne disease in the basilica.
And then stop your hand over that, and if then you find softness due to compression on that, then that eminence is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you stop for some reason that we have said, because the flow of blood in the artery is strong.
And make an implant in that place where it is stipulated, so that the area becomes hardened, and then take care to cure the other side of the wound until it is healthy.
And take out from the blood all the bad humor that one can according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears over the blood, as it seems.
Because if the blood is black, then you extract it until it becomes red; and similarly if you find it thick, then you extract it until it becomes subtle; and similarly if it is bitter, until the acidity of it is removed.
And take care to the one who is full and strong and needs blood extraction at once, that the flea-borne disease of the vein be amplified and the fleas be wide.
And in the one who is weak, make the contrary of that, and take care to extract it in several fat places, and that the channel be straight.
And the best administration for flea-borne disease of the vein is that it should be cross-section, not puncture.
And this method of flea-borne disease is free from blood flow and nerve inflammation, and it is more praiseworthy and more healthy than flea-borne disease according to width and length.
And at the one that is accustomed to overcome syncope from flea-borne disease, and take care that you cure it by applying the flea-borne disease with a small piece of bread infused in wine of honey or simple oximel, scalped; and extract the blood in three fat places or four.
And if it is complicated by complexity, then take beforehand the flea-borne disease to infuse in essence of myrrh or essence of aromatic melissa, with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in aromatic essence and very fragrant.
And if it is caused by syncope from flea-borne disease, and it is the cause of much blood issuing, then take care to drink water of carnation and essence very fragrant and subtle; and use aromaticity with some galen, and let the sweat on the chest be in that.
And use other causes that we have said in the division of syncope for evacuation.
And whoever wants to evacuate the bad blood and dissolve the bad humor for the second time, take care of the one where the flea-borne disease is for much evacuation, and the virtue of it is weak, that evacuates the little blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of virtue in the continuous days.
But whoever wants to evacuate the bad blood, and throw out the bad humor for the second time, and the bad body is strong, then do it approximately eight hours or nine of the first flea-borne disease.
But whoever wants to attract the blood of the bad body to the contrary of the party where it declines, take care that it is evacuated on the second day or the third.
But that body in which there is much blood already scalped and it is acidic and makes fever, take care that it is thrown out of the blood at once and it is of great quantity and the perception is amplified until it causes syncope, because you have conserved all the conditions of flea-borne disease; and stop your hand over the pulse of the body's blood, so that no one dies in place of syncope, because many times it happens when the flea-borne doctor is ignorant and negligent.
And don't take care when you want to unload the arm and evacuate the blood for the second time, as already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult to issue the blood, that you press underneath with vehemence and incurvate, because that is too bad.
Having stopped the flow until it is flea-borne disease for the second time; or remove that with acidity of the flea-borne doctor which coagulates the blood in the orifice of the vein; or stop on that of tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress it with gentle pressure until the blood is outside and flowing.
And if the vein is apostematous, then stop that and do not touch it until the apostema is seated.
And if it is necessary to provoke evacuation of the blood for the second time, and there is no excuse, then you will bleed that on that place or in another arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is flea-borne in place of the fuse or basilica, when they are not entwined or hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the flea-borne disease is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the focus is enraged and the vein appears manifestly.
And apply a strengthening application on that limb with a constricted structure; and apply a flebotomy according to the transverse incision, not lateral or longitudinal.
It is a broad perception and it is your flebotomy in which you perform that on the joint of the hand, a small one.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you direct the hand into hot water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
But if you were in the summer days, then you are exempt from directing the hand into hot water, and it is customary to pause the body of blood in hot water during winter time.
And the flebotomy of this vein is more saving than all the other veins, because it does not have a pulsating vein, nor nerves.
And the flebotomy of the little vein of the right hand is convenient for the ailments of the liver.
And the quality of the flebotomy is that you strengthen the hand with a constricted limb or with your own hand, because you have put it in hot water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated at the moment; and then apply a transverse flebotomy; and if you cut all of it, you will not feel anything in return.
And be careful not to ultimately harm your hand with the flebotomy, because then it will be deprived of the nerves of the fingers, stripped of their covering of flesh.
And then direct the hand into hot water and let the blood flow in it, because if you do not direct it into hot water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
And when you extract the blood according to the quantity of necessity, then you pause over the vein with oil or salt, so that it is not consolidated abruptly; and similarly, be careful that you do not make a rough incision.
But the benefit of the flebotomy on that of the left hand is that it is convenient for the ailments of the spleen.
And do similarly in the flebotomy of this one as you did in the other.
And the benefit of the cephalic vein in flebotomy is for the ailments that are below the body, as well as for the mother's ailments, and for retention of menses, and for the ailments of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and legs, and for their similar semblance of ailments.
And the quality of the flebotomy is that the patient inserts his foot in hot water and makes friction on that spot until the veins appear; and he places it on the joint of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein is apparent beneath the toes, and from there it ramifies into the face of the foot, which has many ramifications.
And then flebotomize the most ample branch or below the leg beneath the toe, because it is better and more healthy.
And if you flebotomize on the face of the foot, then you beware of the nerves that are below there on the face of the foot, and pause your flebotomy in which you flebotomize through the transverse, lest you wish to cut them.
And it is a useless flebotomy.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you direct the foot into hot water and let the blood flow in it until it is evacuated.
And if the flebotomizer errs in the first vein, then direct it to the flebotomy in its own small place, because the place is healthy; and do not fear the evil spirit, but rather beware of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same with the cephalic vein of the other foot, in accordance.
And of the sciatic vein, the place is beneath the toe below the hollow of the wild or rustic part.
And the benefit of the flebotomy is for pain in the ankle when it is due to bad blood.
And the quality of the flebotomy is that the patient enters into a bath, and fastens and strengthens the vein of the ankle from the side of the thigh to beneath the toe beneath four fingers in a long, subtle band, because it does not appear except for that.
And then when it appears, then you flebotomize that according to each engine that is possible for you and according to the transverse, and it is better; or you cut that for incision or you section that for sectioning, because the place of it is healthy.
And it is in many homes very ameliorated; and if you atrophied that, and it does not appear to the sentiment of all, then flebotomize some branch of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot towards the auricular toe and the anular.
And beware of the nerves, and make flow the blood in the quantity that you wish.
And then release the structure and pause over the place of the flebotomy, because it strengthens the place, for the ligament is healthy.
From the excessive use of evacuations and the quality of urine of those.
Either from corns, or from herbs, or from glass.
And evacuation is done according to two methods: one of them is with scarification and blood extraction, and the other is without scarification.
And this evacuation without scarification is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the evacuations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 14 places on the body, of which one is where the veins are opened at the ankle; and the middle place is on both sides of the neck; and evacuations behind the jawbone below the mouth; and evacuations of two spatulas; and evacuations of the alohoster, and it is above the end of the coccyx; and evacuations of two focal points, and they are of two arms; and evacuations of two cavities; and evacuations of two hips.
And evacuation does not extract blood but rather from the small, sparse veins in the flesh, and for this reason it does not catch virtue through them, thus it is as if it were a remedy by phlebotomy; nor do they believe that evacuation can be done with fire or without fire in any disease made by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
Sometimes it is necessary to provoke evacuation for disease or for continuation, administering it at every hour from the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle place of it and at some time.
And therefore when it happens in any of those causes, and especially if it is on the third or middle day of the month, then they command evacuation to be done because two or three hours have passed since dawn.
And the benefit of evacuation from the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and therefore it is founded on the eyes; sometimes they believe that it is near total body evacuation.
And this evacuation is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it is not lawful to use evacuation on him who has a full completion, or in whom there is catarrh, because it gives great nuisance.
And for this reason they do not believe that the use of evacuation is suitable for the old people, and in the heads of those who have frequent diseases.
Sometimes to the one who continues over it is done forgetfulness; and for this reason they believe that you command the evacuator to place his hand a little above the opening at the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Sometimes evacuation of the spleen is in the place of phlebotomy of the dark vein and of the basilica: and for this reason it confers asthma, and constriction of the wings, and scission of the instrument of the wings, and to those, and repletion.
And they believe that the evacuation of the spleen is hindered a little, because if it is stopped below, it generates debilitation in the body and in the stomach.
And the evacuation of the liver confers accidental pains in the head and opthalmia, and migraine, and forehead pain, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilisque.
And they believe that you command the evacuator not to press his hand on the scarification so as not to cut the artery and allow flows of blood.
And evacuation below the chin confers acidity in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similarity to those diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the arteries that are in both lips.
Sometimes the evacuation that is done on the two spatulas confers a captivation, which is done for repletion of heat.
And the evacuation of the two parts behind the focal points confers benefit of phlebotomy from three veins, namely the basilica, dark, and cephalic, because it attracts blood from all those veins plus many that are in the flesh, and those small veins of the other large veins until they converge to attract to the three veins.
And command the evacuator not to proceed in scarification, because the place is stripped of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
It is a wind that is blown upon the hips and contributes to the emaciation of the buttocks and the ulcerous sores that follow.
And take care that the blower commands a great blowing wind, and it is of iron, because the place indicates a strong dryness; and strongly blows subtle winds and it is scarified in scarification.
Maybe the smallest winds of the legs are manifested by minimal movement, because they attract the blood from all over the body, and contribute to ancient pains of the joints and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and they provoke menstruations, and contribute to bothor and ademil; and they stand in place of fleubotomia of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two cavities.
However, I do not want to weaken the entire body and cause syncopes in many places.
And from the winds of alahorcoben, the juice is propelled to the juice towards the winds of both legs.
And the quality of the position of the winds is that it stops the wind at the beginning of the vein and sucks for succor in temperate season, and does not prolong the position of the winds, but rather pauses those lightly, and remains quietly, and that the humors come to the place for a favorable event. And do not cease to iterate this and continue until you see the place already reddened and inflated, and that the rigor of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who is of tender flesh and rare pores, take care that you scarify him gently and not excessively, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the blower to amplify the scarification and deepen a little, and temper the suction in order to facilitate.
And if the blood is gross, then take care that you scarify two gentle blows, because in the first blow the path of subtle evacuation to the blood and its aquosity is opened. Maybe in the second one the perscrutation acquires the extraction of the gross blood.
And if the blood is very feculent, then make a third scarification blow to conclude the rear.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a small amount, it is enough for us to make a single scarification.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we make many scarifications; and if we do not know that the blood is gross, then take care that you scarify by deep scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the profundity of the codena only so much.
And if that of which the codena is gross, hard, dark, and the sieve pores are very straight, take care that the places of the winds are anointed with lenitive, resolving oils; if it is in summer time, thus as it is oil of aloen or oil of violet, or oil of tender shoots, or oil of gentle coitus; and if it is in winter time, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or of blood, and to those that seem similar.
And if the superfluity is gross, cold, then the oil should be of marjoram, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloen, or oil of anetum, and to those that seem similar.
Maybe if the blower is of ample pores of tender flesh, then take care that it is prohibited from oil, and take care that to those places of winds of their own proper windings are washed with warm waters or cold waters of solatrum, or waters of coitus, or waters of bordolaguas, and similar to those.
And that of which the blood is of much humidity, wash its winds with very agreeable water, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And that of which the superfluities are gross, wash its winds with very antique water, or water of sansuc, which is majorana, or of decoction of anetum, or of camomile, and to those that seem similar.
And take care that the windings are guarded from in front of the bath; having taken care that it is administered properly at the same moment of the bath for an hour or for two, and take care that you sleep properly with the windings.
What is it that ought to be regulated so that the windy one is treated by phlebotomy before windings.
Take care that you consider at the beginning: then if the blower or he who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and windy above the blood agitated and inflamed, then take care that you take causes of infrigidation, thus as milgranas acetosas, and endivia in a very agreeable way and laytuguas, and secanabin, and julep, and to those that seem similar.
And pause their winds thus as poletz, and flesh of golden serbiges, and winds condensed with agar, and to those that seem similar.
And if the complexion is fresh, it is good to take in drink of elderberry or scammony, and sumac, and we find that there is no odor between the vein and the nail; and it is commanded that one use the purification of drinking and eating, and pause the wandering of the pouch and canal and small veins and little pillars.
And it is good that on the day of ventosity and of bloating, the drink should be more than the food.
And it is good that there be given in drink at certain hours to certain men tyriacal alpharac, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or alciletina during ventosity or during bloating, or afterwards, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtled; and it is not good that they take that scalping.
Maybe the ventoses that are scarified are ventoses that are paused on the feet, and on the mess and gout, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the pixida of the hip, because these members do not suffer scarification on themselves.
And it is not desired for those but attraction of blood from member, thus as we pause ventose on the mamilha in bad flux of blood from the veins; and we use that to dissolve fresh ventosity invaded by the member, thus as we pause over the belly and the navel; because that rarefies the member and scalds it and removes the pain since it resolves ventosity.
And then it is paused over the kidneys when they accumulate in their opilation or pore, because for virtue of strong attraction the humble opilation and eradicates the pore from its place.
And similarly it is done when it is paused over the feet and the mess, so that ventosity is driven out of those enclosed areas.
And these ventoses are administered with gentle suction only; and some veins are administered at the fire.
And some veins are administered full of warm water in the bad fluxes of the mess.
And that is why the ventose should be filled and should be bigger, so it is hot water alone or water in which certain herbs are cooked for that convenience.
Form of ventose administered at the fire: let the amplitude of the orifice be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon be the measure of a palm; and let it be in the width of it, in the place that is in the circuit, its measure, the tube being small according to the quantity that enters into it with a needle.
Let it be made of iron rod or citrine, with thick margins, lion, engines and tiers so that it does not let the member deviate from its position on it.
And let it be in the middle of the transverse rod of iron or of iron, where a candle is paused at the fire.
And then this ventose is much larger than the one we have recommended; and the smallness of that one according to the bad fluxes and the state of the one who uses it.
And the ventoses of the elderly and thin people are different from the ventoses of the young and those with thick corpulence.
And the quality of pausing this ventose at the fire over the member is that it extends the metal at the fire decently within a small candle of wax, and pauses that over the middle of the transverse rod in the middle place of the ventose, so that the fire is kindled around the part below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
And then it is paused over the member of the patient, and the finger is over the tube that we have said, until when we hold the ventoses and do not indicate that the finger opens and the vapor is released over that tube, then the ventose will be dissolved at once.
And put the metal according to its manner, and remove that if you indicate that it is not suitable for that.
Maybe in ventose that is administered in the bad flux of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse rod nor tube, and it is not administered but rather filled with water, and paused over the member only gently.
And this is its form: And this ventose the more it is large, the better, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter 98.
Blood-lettings are not administered on many members except on the members in which it is not possible to position ventoses, due to their smallness, thus as the pot and gum and similar to them; or on a denuded member of flesh, thus as the finger and nose and similarly.
And the quality of using those that have found blood-lettings which are in the watery parts of worldly putrefactions.
And then they are laid down during the day and night in watery parts until they are famished, and that no remaining cause is in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with bloating and ventoses; and then the member of the patient is cooled until it becomes red-hot; and then they are paused over it.
And when they are filled and closed.
And if it is possible to suck out the air from the wound, it is better to delay the treatment.
And then, wash the wound with warm water and add a lot of water; and it will be cleaned and purged.
And if the flow of blood to the wound is prolonged by the application of leeches, and it is resolved, then you should put a cloth dipped in cold water, and pause that on top until the resolution is achieved.
And if the blood is multiplying, then powder with triturated vitriol, or gall and similar to their stipptic causes, until the blood is absorbed; or place on the wound the cooked and mashed favas, and stay there until the favas adhere to the wound, and the blood is absorbed.
And then, if it is necessary, repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if the leeches are forbidden from suspension, then cleanse the wound with fresh blood or stick a needle in the places until it bleeds; and then pause, for they will sense some blood as soon as it is applied.
And when you want them to fall off, powder on them a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or ash, and it will happen soon.
Thus begins the third part of the treatment: restoration. This chapter is many very necessary things in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh, son, you should know that in this chapter the foolish doctors and the common people are those who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this manner of the scientists in our land is private; and I do not have it and forgot about it for a long time being all; and I did not habituate it afterwards, except by length of reading from the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of them, until they extract the science from them.
And then I devoted myself to experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which I have passed my experiment; because I have abbreviated it to you others and delivered it from occupation of prolixity; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed it into many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done for addition of declaration, thus as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from being fractures of bones, from which a necessary premise is, before we begin the remembrance of fractured members and diverse things, one by one. So then, I will summarize in the proem of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those which from the beginning are foreseen by the artisans and a station on the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt that they may know or learn this noble art besides you.
And then I say that when accidents occur to a fracture or dislocation or torsion or fall, then it is necessary for you to consider from the beginning with phlebotomy or alleviating that, or whatever means, if no cause prohibits it, thus as debilitation of virtue, or it is that which occurs suddenly, or in decrepit state, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then I am content with a diet of fresh herbs and of meats from young animals and of crayfish; and I prohibit gross meats and filling up on diets and all diet that fills the veins with blood, until you are secure from apostemic caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first regimen, which is customary for them.
And then, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary for the patient to be fed with nutritious diets of much and gross nutriment, and in which there is viscosity, thus as they are diets made from wheat flour cooked in water, and rice, and caps, and feet, and stomachs of cows, and fish, and fresh peas, and many similar ones, and at this regimen it is done a coagulation of fracture with ligament and marrow.
And you should know that the broken bones, when they are in the old people who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of their members.
The Emperor of Nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of all parts any similar cause like glue in which it is grossly strengthened that adheres and strengthens it until they are conglomerated and united, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, thus as a focus at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its own works.
And for this reason it is necessary to pause the veins of the patient, veins in which gravity and viscosity and grossness have accumulated, as we have said.
And we know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I have come to a remembrance of each species of fracture, exposed in its own distinct chapter separate from the others.
There is a great variety of fractures in the same bone. And the species of fractures in the bone are diversified in their meteyssas; for there is an arched fracture that occurs on the stars; and some veiled ones are made by the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagitta and astelhas, proceeding and not-proceeding, as it was done in the pain when it was prepared to write, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
And to each species belongs a proper torment in the restoration of it according to what will come to remembrance of it distinctly in its own places.
There is a great sign of fracture of the bone. And because of this, a fracture of the bone is recognized: it is the twisting of it, and from that prominence and appearance of it to the sensation, and thus of it when it is comprehended with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent twisting in the location nor does it feel deviated from its proper touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
However, it is possible that there is a twisting or small fissure, therefore do not touch it with your hand and compress everything; however, pause on it from the medicines of which you have remembrance suitable for that moment when it is convenient to the location; and thus it will be straightened by subtle stricture.
And we know that the location where it is arched and not separated into two or another that does not occur in the sagitta, as it is entirely remade from its own comparison, then it is necessary to begin from your hour to rectify it, since it has reached apostema caution.
And if it has reached apostema caution, then leave it for some days within which the apostema ceases; and thus enclose it according to any manual skill that you have of levitation and of engine.
And we know that the restoration of it and the reduction of it is less difficult than that of the bone in which they are situated, thus it does not reach the sataghie.
And thus strengthen it according to what will come to remembrance of it.
But if in the bone there are sataghias, then it is necessary to extend this broken member into two parts, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And thus your position is in which you pause the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member, then you will perform so that they return to their engine and according to any manual skill that you have in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that you do not exceed the patient's endurance for your operation, nor lesion; and perform yourself according to your proper power that you apply one bone with another as a companion according to their best forms.
And it is necessary that at that hour you profitably touch with your hand, and if sometimes there is a diverse cause, rectify it and enclose it for the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as many foolish doctors make veiled mistakes that make them reach apostema caution through their operation, or make them reach contradiction in the member, just as we have seen it for the operation of their veiled mistakes.
And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; for we know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And from those that are small, such as the arm and the finger and the vein, and similar to those, then it is necessary that the wrapping be of very subtle cloth.
Those who have large and thick thighs, as if they were wrapped in a bandage or cloak, because in those there is a hidden and hard connection that joins the big member strongly and equally to every part of the body, so that there is no macula (spot or stain) inside.
And then begin, and make your evacuation of equity, pause the convenient ligament at that place, above the area of that fracture in three or four wraps according to how much the member merits; and strengthen your hand with a small ligament.
And then go to that part above the fracture, and strengthen the vein so that it does not weaken your structure at the place of the fracture. And then stretch yourself to envelop the area of the fracture a little, and soften the small structure bit by bit, until you take hold of the place with a great part.
And then take another bandage and envelop the other wounded area above the place that is already enveloped, and then go to the wraps at the part below the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the enveloping and in softening according to what we have said in the primary enveloping from above.
And then pause between the turns of the bandage to stop the slippage or draping on the part where the tortuousness of the fracture is engaged, if there is tortuousness in it; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
And then pause on the other bandage, and engage above these enveloping steel things decently done so far, if in that place there is no inflammation or aposteme to be cautious of, and then pause on the water that sits on the aposteme and removes the inflammation; and thus it will be for several days; and then you strengthen on the steel things.
The steel things are of the kind of cane of a straight race, and be formed saviently; or they are of iron of pine; or of branches of palm; and let each part of any steel thing be according to this form and figure:
However, it is necessary that the steel thing which is placed on that fracture be somewhat thicker and somewhat longer than the other steel things, and the length of the steel thing according to how it is measured on the member in magnitude and littleness; and then strengthen on the steel things with another bandage according to your primary structure; and then bind from above decently as we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the place of the fracture itself, and when it is more aligned with the fracture, it mends the structure.
And it is necessary that the threads be middle-sized in thickness and subtlety, and be of lime; and if the threads are too thick, as if you have seen through the operation of several foolish pauses, the threads of the cord of the tort are stopped, and it is a great error, when one holds the structure without equality.
And also the subtle threads are not so convenient, because you do not conserve structure in those waters that you want, and it is not necessary that between steel thing and steel thing there be less than a digit.
And if the patient is led by the extremities of the steel things to the structure in those places, then pause below those that stop the slippage or the hardened skin, until it does not make a lesion.
Some wounded fractures are a plague, and they cause disruption in the code, and you will find remembrance in that chapter according to singularity.
And you know that all broken members are not straightened with steel things on the first day; which causes it because the member, when it is large, does not need pauses on the steel things unless about five or seven days, according to your securement of the advent of cautious aposteme.
And this is the manner of the plasterers among whom the Ancients restored, who were placed on fracture and dislocation and torsion.
Manner of plastering as a means of restoring fracture, convenient for complex wounds and majorment to the women and children, because it is about that on which there is no heat nor cold: and it is that you take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the millet.
And you find that thus as it is, but that you extract it from the white of the egg, and pause the combination of the non-space and subtlety; and then use it from that.
Another manner of implanting is for restaurant fracture and dislocation and torsion: recipe of assafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of enula, and of migrach, which is made from thousand granules salvaged, of total one drachm; of myrrh one drachm; of aloes two drachms; all are triturated and cribellated and mixed with water or album of Huou if the completeness of the patient's skin is scaled; and then use this implant, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones very gently, and confers a lot of homes.
Another manner of implanting which confers a fracture and torsion: recipe of migrach and met of white altea one drachm; of myrrh and aloes two drachms; of acacia three drachms; of Armenian bol four drachms.
Entirely torn and bruised tissues are ground in a mortar with a very strong contraction, and entirely bruised, and entirely mixed with water or in the album of a person and it is administered.
A kind of emplaster for joints and separated bones in their places, and thus accidental pain occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take a woollen cloth and submerge it in warm oil and cut it and place it over the area.
More, in this emplaster there is not virtue of restoration, but rather a postrema that cauterizes and expels pains properly.
Another kind of emplaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves of a certain type and papaver salvation; mix everything together and make an emplaster of it.
A kind of emplaster abbreviated to be administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution from the remaining apostema: take roots of alta, chamomile, and flowers of violets, of barley flour, of everything in a portion. Entirely torn and bruised tissues are mixed with wine, if the member is not scaling.
More, if it is scaling, then do so with water of Coltsfoot or with water and use it there.
Another kind of emplaster stronger in resolution than the first, when apostema is hard to restore a member: take roots of alta and seeds of li, and balaustia, and mellilot, majorana, flowers of viol, chamomile, of everything in a portion; entirely torn and bruised tissues are mixed with water of Saultza or water of two waters or wine, as it suits the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Moreover, Hippocrates does not disagree in the free text that it should be placed over the tremulous member for its restoration, unless a wax cerate is made of wax and oil, and no other cause; and he recommends that it should be midway between grossness and subtlety.
Moreover, Galen has seen that entirely placed over the broken member for its restoration, and the causes in which it is excessively dry with little warmth, thus also with myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
A kind of emplaster that confers on lesion and pain: take migat, of cezesa, of burned human skin or pennyroyal, and alta, and salt, mixed together; entirely torn and bruised tissues are mixed, and entirely cofitz, and make an emplaster.
Moreover, the quantity according to which it covers that remains of the binding and then dissembles, is that you consider if there has been no pain nor swelling nor the bone is broken, not moved from its place, then you do not delay for many days. And if it happens at the place of violent pain or swelling or inflammation, then you remove or delay that at the hour, and remove the emplaster from it.
And take a drap of li and humid marine sponge, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the place until the swelling and pain are calmed; and then lay it to rest for an hour; and then place over it a woollen cloth submerged in warm oil or warm rozat, and leave it on for a night until you are sure of the apostema's caution, and that the inflammation of the member is rested, and the pain of it is alleviated.
And then you will apply that subtle structure and small emplaster, not too strong for your primary construction, and subtly soften it until it is healed.
And if sometimes the apostema and roughness and pain and inflammation and all accidents are so entirely removed, and you are freed from emplaster and structure, then you will apply that thus as you have done from the beginning of the entire treatment.
And if it does not happen to the member any of those causes that we have said, then you do not delay it unless for three days or four or five. and some vegetables that are entirely laid down for twenty days according to what appears to you for the dislocation of the member, thus as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And then adjust in the structure more than in your primary structure, and assist in the engagement of the patient's food, according to what is preceded by their recollection.
But if you sometimes find the place of the fracture already dislocated and extended more than it should not be covered, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; and thus embark on giving a warm drink every three days; and anoint the structure a little, and for this operation correct the member with nourishment, and it will heal gradually.
But that is when they make restoring remedies for the fracture of the member another way when it is not restored at the beginning, according to what is covered, and it is restored according to tortuosity, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were a detour, it would increase the Antics in their free books and they would obtain more work.
And I have not seen anyone who has gone to them for that, because it is more reasonable that they do not do so.
Chapter according to: Of fracture when it affects the head.
The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fracture is made by percussion of a bone, and the percussion knocks out all the bones into the ciphac, which is beneath the bone, just as it happens in the chest, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the bone is divided into some part of the bone, and divides the flesh of it and does not pass into the back of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levation.
And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attraction; and the cause of it is percussion with a poorness or downfall upon a stone, and its signs are similar.
And this fracture is penetrating which already approaches the peritoneum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
And of fracture it is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of small hair-like fibers, and for this reason this species of fracture is called capillary.
And it is a fracture that is made or by downfall or by percussion of a stone and its signs are similar, which makes some lamina of the bone enter the divided parts, and it is made in the concave location just as it happens to the rounded edges when they happen upon their percussion and are divided from their entry into the divided parts.
And mainly it is made there in the bodies of humid bones, just as it happens to the heads of swollen feet.
And thus all these species of fractures are set apart, they are weights just as if they were separate stars. And I will find remembrance of all that in its place.
And I will know all these species of fracture by detection above them and by inquiry into their tents and signs of corrupted flesh that is above them.
And the capillary species is recognized by this that it is discovered above the bone, and it is scraped off, and limited around its tents, because the fracture appears black.
But in the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you sometimes find the accidents that signify manifest signs on pain, just as it is vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of will, and syncope, and acute fever, and movement of the veins and rigor of those, and similar to their accidents in the major dispositions, unless they are not healed.
And if you find non-concurrent accidents you hope for health, then you begin the cure of it.
Which cause is because if it has come to you the plague at the beginning as it plagued and that is in the days of winter, then it covers that you studied in the monument of the bone beneath the 14th day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then it covers that you touch or starve the bone beneath the 7th day, having that which is beneath the bone be corrupted by the peritoneum, and that accidents happen that we have recounted.
And if the fracture has penetrated to the peritoneum covering the brain, and it is in divided parts and attraction, then it covers that you incise the comminuted and attracted part, according to what I have recounted to you.
And it is that you prepare the head of the patient plagued, and discover above the bone according to custom and manner possible for you, following the figure of the plague, and that it may be healed on the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, whether of blood or aposteme caut, then you oppose it to that which covers, and it is that you fill the place of draining fluxes in wine and rose oil, and make the plague repose until it is sedated by the aposteme, and be secure from fluxes of blood; and begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
And that is according to one of two manual operations.
And one method is that you insert the bone into the stretcher, and this is its shape: And then administer another insertion, a little later than that; and this is its shape.
And then administer more insertions later than the second one.
And it is necessary to give a name to various insertions, some of which are later than others; and some of them are shorter than others and end in the rear of their extremities, and some are iron or felt.
And use them to facilitate percussion on the insertions so that it does not touch the head and lead to that.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to perforate in the circuit of the tooth before you administer the insertions with the trolleys, which are called non-deep trolleys.
And they are not called thus because they do not touch the term of the bone in the test to that which is near it, so that the trolley has a rounded extremity or margin over that which is below the head of the aguja, resembling a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the narrowness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these trolleys which almost converge at the narrowness of each bone, so that they are presented to you in all tests of the brain with the extremity which is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of narrowness of this test.
And this is the form of three species of trolleys: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that it pauses the trolley over the bone and revolves it with the ties until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then permits the trolley to another place, and pauses what is between all the tracts of the quantity of the thickness of the radius or environs it.
And then insert the insertions that are between each tract of the bone, and make them more subtle so you can place them in the end of levitation, as we have said, until you irradiate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause to stir up the instruments which will be prepared for it, as we have touched upon and with forceps and subtle tongs.
And it is necessary that you keep all caution so the insertion does not touch any part of the cephalic region.
And thus when you have perforated the bone, it will be separated from the cephalic region if it is continued in it, and you will extract, it is necessary to reason and equalize it in the roughness of that which is in the bone with another instrument similar to an insertion, more imperiously it is necessary that it be thinner and more subtle than the other insertions.
And if you find some small bone fragments and splinters, then take them out in order to facilitate what is necessary for your instruments; and then cure the wound with linen and bind it with the threads which we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is the ligature, far from pain, which Galen and others have praised for great success; and this is its sermon: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most vehement and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and have placed below it the extremity of this insertion, slow and gentle, which is its shape.
And it is that the lenticular part is smooth and does not insert any cause, and the sharp part is of it in two lengths beforehand in length, as we have said; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the cephalic region with the face of the incident sharp bone.
And then percussion is made on the insertion of a part with a small hammer until you insert all the bone in facilitation as it revolves, and you will be secure from the panniculus that does not happen in any manner, and if the medicant was more foolish than all men and most ignorant of their own; certainly, and if it were dormant.
Then if you find some annexed cause to the bone of the panniculus in certain places of bone, insert that of it with the extremity of the insertion, that lenticular one, and deliver that of it in facilitation, because it is delivered from its roughness and its pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and that which is separated or removed from the bone is its face, and remains in its roughness and subtle splinters, then it is necessary to reason out that roughness and irradiate those subtle splinters with subtle razors, for which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it is possible to administer them in all places most convenient to them and most direct according to what you perceive in your operation on the broken bone and its figure.
And it is necessary to administer in your razio with the quality that razes the bone at the beginning most later of those razors, and then use again more subtle parts of it, and do not cease far from what continues until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle parts of all those.
Among other small fragile fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary to administer care according to what is lost in order to correct them.
It is a cause that has not been written about by all those who have studied this art. And we have written above what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the poultice is stretched out when you radiate the bone, then it is necessary to take a cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the primary cloth so that you can put it more lightly on that, which does not harm the cipher; and then administer the latament over that, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound has, just as much.
And leave that on for a day or two until you are sure of the aposteme's caution; and then remove it and administer medicines as those which are superfluous to dryness, thus with linseed oil and flour of barley, and powder of nuts and aristology, and similar to those.
And it is that you make from these powdered medicines a powder to be sprinkled over the wound, thus as they are dry; and universally, administer all the medicine of property by which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
And beware according to your virtue that the wound in your cure is clean; and it should not be in the surdity of evil nor another; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; because when it is adjusted over the poultice of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and falls upon the patient with a malicious malignancy.
And it falls upon the cipher of the head, as if the bone is mondified and worsened when the cure of it is misrepresented, and it turns black on its surface; and therefore consider then that it falls upon the patient with the accidents that we have said, knowing that they are pernicious in all you do.
And if it does not turn black because of the medicine that is placed above, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then it is necessary to take a third part of honey and three parts of rose oil. and apply those liniments to a cloth, and then place it over the cipher; and then cure it with the species of cure that are convenient until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is bruised.
You know that the nose is not bruised unless two parts are simultaneously pushed upwards, or one of those curved and twisted ones, because in it there are two bones, because the part below is cartilaginous, and it is not bruised and does not fall to it except with contortion and tortuosity and sinewiness.
If one of the two parts of it is bruised, then it is necessary that you introduce the small finger into the nasal passage, and that you adjust that fracture gently with the index finger, and with the finger in front, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do it thus for you have facilitated, and beware that you do not fall into that operation over the patient's pain.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then it is necessary that it be equalized with the extremity of a rod on which there is a small groove.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the same as that.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then wait seven or ten days for the rest of the aposteme's caution.
And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or half of two pieces, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it be in the thickened calyx of as much quantity that fills the hole of the nose.
And thus some of the ancient restorers said that the calyxes were infused in boder, and were permuted all day, but it was not seen by me; however, it is necessary that the piece be infused in a mixture of egg white and powder of mulli; and then leave the calyx until the bone is firm and the cartilage is indurated.
And some curved ones are introduced into the nose, in place of calyx, almost like a nest that is enveloped by cloth of lion's skin; and it is that you already have the fracture of the nose strongly and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do it thus, and if you want, make calyxes.
And if another type of aposteme's caution falls, apply the nose with a wax cerote or a cotton swab soaked in wine and rose oil, or with diachylon.
If the aposteme's caution does not fall, then it is necessary to apply beforehand flour of Sizami and powder of nuts ground in egg white; and then place it on the lion's paw, and do not lift the nose for any cause.
When the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, then cover them with bandages, and extract those that are in the way with instruments; and then sew up the wound, and cure it so that it becomes encrusted and consolidated, and apply plaster casts to it conveniently.
And if the nose is afflicted with dentition, then cover it so that you cure it with warm remedies and administer cannulae of lead until it is completely healthy.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is dislocated and the fracture of it is not infected, consider then if the fracture is displaced only slightly, and not broken in two and curved towards the divided parts, then its knowledge is easier.
And cover thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you introduce the index finger of your left hand into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the index finger of your right hand; and impel in this way the gibbosity of the divided fracture to facilitate the displaced parts, with your other hand on the front part of the bone; and adjust it equally in this way.
And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two, then cover that you administer extension of two parts according to rectitude until it is possible to equalize it.
And if it happens with concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those which you expect will remain in a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and place a pause on the fractured jaw cerot, and place a pause on the duplicated drap, and place on the great star-shaped drap decently made, or a piece of sole enamel along the length of the jaw; and place it thus according to how you have prepared the ligature of it and how you will apply it, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and pause from eating their usual food for a while.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in some manner, then you will be deceived and delay it until the third day; and then rectify what has already been altered of it and apply a poultice of soft powder, or album of egg white, or farina of chickpeas, since you will have stayed near the cerot of it, and place on the poultice for a while.
And then with the annex and adjust that poultice over it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, thus leave it, so that it does not dissolve until it is healthy and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is strengthened in three weeks.
And if another occasion happens with a post-crisis abscess, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healthy, and remove that abscess.
And if the fracture is infected, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or shattered, then you will subtly understand that you must remove those shatters in what is convenient for the removal of those instruments.
And if the orifice of the infection is narrow, then amplify it with a fleubotome according to the quantity of your need.
And then when you have removed those shatters, and of those none will remain, then close the orifice of the infection if it is wide; and if not, place on one of the poultices that are convenient for it and encrust it, until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the ankle when it is dislocated.
Many times the ankle is broken on the inner side of the foot beneath the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch shatters; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens so in the shatters, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens so that the fracture is infected.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is infected, is that you must have two ministers present, so that one has the assistant and holds the dislocated ankle, and the other extends the vein to that part.
And then bind the fracture with tight bands until it is formed in its shape according to what is convenient, and it is not in a small prominence nor curvature.
And if you need more extension, then cover that the patient's bed is raised with a drap or wool, and its greatness is according to the quantity of your need; and extend and elevate the ankle and shorten the bandage with your hand until it binds the fracture according to what is convenient.
And if you cannot reach the extremity of the ankle to the front parts, because it is perverted to the forefoot, then cover that the patient should be resupinated on their back, and place on the muscle of one bigger size.
And the minister presses the patient's muscle at the affected parts so that the bone of the forearm is elevated and then you straighten the fracture and bind it with bandages on the ties.
Maybe you feel numbness of the forearm and it is weak, then cover that with a bandage and extract those numbness to facilitate.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision on him with one of the instruments which have been prepared for that, because you had placed under the forearm the instrument that serves the purpose; and it is an instrument of wood or iron whose shape is that.
And it is similar to a culier whose shape is the concavity; and its width is according to what is needed of it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
Maybe the length of it is according to what is possible for you in the operation; that there be two extremities thus at times, and one extremity is wide and the other is narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the numbness of the bone is wide, and yet there is a risk of aposteme caught, then you adjust the two lips of the wound to suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear an aposteme caught, then you fill the wound with drainage and poultices according to the quantity of the discharge of the wound.
And if an aposteme is caught, then you put a warm drainage in a gentle oil and rose oil, and apply it to that.
And that's all, so that the sheet is not weakened over the broken bone; and for this reason cover it so you can see the patient every day, because when the ligament is mollified or the sheet is already remade, then you straighten that and strengthen the binding.
And then put the patient to sleep on their chest, and place beneath their thigh so that they sleep at night in a small chair; so that in this way the helper of theirs from the side of that is elevated, and thus the fracture of the forearm is elevated by the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of theirs is tied to the neck.
And do not loosen the bandage if it does not catch in the right place or aposteme, until twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it up to that, and adjust in the structure and restore it and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the forearm is consolidated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in 28 days, and some weakened in some homes are made in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
On the restoration of fractures of the shoulder.
The spatula-shaped bone is broken in the lateral part of it and does not break unless the edges.
And then when it is broken in the middle part of it  and it is broken in the middle part of it  and it is not known unless by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture thus you prepare it and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way to put it together as is possible for you.
And then apply to the affected area a powder of millet flour with egg white and stop it with a lion's stop; and apply double poultices of cloth drainage; and apply to it a thin sheet of table, according to the quantity of the entire spatula or maybe a little.
Maybe if the sheet is concave in some of the areas of the spatula, then you bind that concavity with a lion's stop, and apply the sheet according to equality.
And then strengthen beneath with a long humectant to a decent constraint and firmness of the sheet until it is not remade from its place.
And consider the ligament every day; and all weakened areas that are mollified, another weakened area and strengthen it and equalize the sheet if it is remade from its place.
And adjust the patient on their own side thus.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
Then when this number is complete, you dissolve the ligament, and you know for certain that because those bones which started to unite are not yet tempered nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed to the place of the bone that hurts and put a cushion underneath, then you lean over it, and lift it up, and follow as we have said in the fracture of the forked splint of abscessed aposteme, just as it is accustomed to be done here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of a fracture of the foot.
Some feet are broken in the middle place of it and that ends badly; but the extremities of it move badly and are crippled.
And of the accidents of it when its middle is broken, it declines to the internal parts and accedes to great pain, and difficulty in the health, and weakness, and strengthlessness, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be resupinated on his back, and a cushion placed between the spine's vertebrae; and then press also the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs to the two sides of the back, and subtly proceed in the operation of it and in the equation according to all manner possible and convenient, until the shape of the bone returns as it was.
And then place a cushion on the plaster and stopper and place one above this table of subtle sawdust or of chalk and of their similar levitation, since you envelop it in a cloth; and then subtly proceed to bind that over the broken bone so that it is not dislocated; and go with the binding according to the retondition to the back of some feet, and strengthen it with decent strictness; and then consider the binding at all times, and when it is mollified, strengthen it.
And if it is necessary to provoke the dislocation of that which corrodes or putrefies, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the place, then you cut and detach it and eradicate the plaster and rectify what occurs through the manner of cure of it; and then return the plaster, if sometimes it is done thus; and adjust to its strictness until it is healthy.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are cracked.
You know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in gross places that are under the back; and of the extremities of their part from within do not accede to those contractions unless through what is cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden from the sensation, because of the inquiry into its causes.
And the restoration is thus that it equalizes the fracture with its causes according to the possible manner, until it is equalized as it was, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone in this way, if it is necessary for that.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines to the internal parts, then it accedes to the patient's vehement pain and puncture, thus as puncture that accedes to one who has suffered a fall, and through what the bone puts forth the swelling; and it accedes to the difficulty of handling, and weakness, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And now the Antixes are ingenious in that with many clever devices.
And of them it is said: they pause the remedies of the patient that generate inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is impelled to the former parts.
We have avoided that so it does not cause lightness to generate abscessed aposteme, if it does not accede; and if it already accedes, then it helps towards that.
And some of them said that it should be paused underneath the window and then sucked with fortitude; and it is similar to reasoning, but I think that the window attracts the superfluities to the place due to debilitation.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and powders are placed between the ribs until it is fulfilled, so that it is the equal binding when you envelop it according to retondition; and then the patient is cured with a cure of plentiful remedies and medicine.
And if it causes vehement constriction to the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts forth swelling with puncture leading, I remember about the patient, then it is necessary that they place upon the place, discover from the broken rib, and then pause over that instrument which conserves the ciphac, the remembrance of which precedes, and that inserts the bone with facilitation, and extracts that.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with cozidura, and cure it with plasters until it is healthy.
And if it accedes to internal abscess, then you cut and pour powders in rose oil and place over the place, and that the patient is cured with what is necessary for the internal abscess.
And let it be raised above the blanket on which they sleep, until it is healthy.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Some vertebrates have fractures in the neck bones, and then they have their own attribution, and similarly to the spine of the back. And when water accumulates in some veins to know if it will be healthy or not, then consider, because sometimes the sieves are more mollified and stupefied and dead and cannot be purified nor extended nor strengthened, and when they constrict them with the tight tendons or pungent ones on the ague and do not feel pain in them, then know that it is not healthy, and in the same disposition it is mortal.
And if you find that they are constricted and feel constriction in the tendons and punctures, then know that the knot of the bone is saved and that the patient's illness will be cured.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to water and want to know if it will be healthy or not, then consider his feet.
Then if you see that they are already mollified, then the water that has accumulated in the veins is excessive, and when it falls on the vertebrae of the back, there is ventilation and ejection according to their will, and some vertebrates are raised above the vertebrae of the back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore do not struggle with their cure.
But if you do not find any cause for this, the cause is worse and more hidden.
And the cure for it is that you make a perforation at the seat of the aposteme, because it pauses over the affected vertebrae, or at the joints of the humors assembled; pause on that day until the aposteme is seated.
And then pause with some comforting and exiting emplasters, and strengthen over that joint; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side where they feel pain until it is healthy.
And if you find the attribution of the bone is dislocated or some cause that has already separated from it, then remove the decayed part from the code and extract that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with a large suture if necessary; and then cure that encarnated enguentz until it is healthy.
But if the bone of the fingers is broken, and it is the end of the wound, then remove the dit (finger) from the left hand in the cul ( rectum), and reunite the broken bone with the other hand according to the possible second equilibrium; and then pause on the emplaster and astelha, if you need them, and strengthen that.
And if you feel broken vertebrae in it, then make a notch over that, and extract that, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the narrow (or constricted) passage.
The bones of the narrow passages are often broken, and if they break, then the fracture is not just communication in the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the affected parts; and you find pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stupefied when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that until it is on the fracture which is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then reunite that according to your apparel and equipment for reunification until it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the loin or has already declined to the lower parts, then make the patient sit on the vertebrae of their belly until it is prepared for you to restore that fracture. And then when you have reunited that, pause on the emplaster, and also pause on that astel of wood or code, and strengthen by stricturation over which there is no fear of fracture puncture nor removal of the astel.
And reunite the concavity with water that fills it until it takes the stricturation according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
But if you find an aposteme cold, then cease the extension of it and its restoration until the aposteme is seated, and pause on the water that surrounds it according to what is preceded; and also return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it thus as is convenient.
And if you find them in the vertebrae or they are communicated, then treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of the fracture of the adjutorium (adjacent or auxiliary).
The adjutorium is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, one of which is that you take wood placed in the middle of a groove according to this form:
And the ligaments are in two extremes, and then suspended from an elevated place.
He places the patient on a stool; and then he throws out the broken branch over the hollow of the tree until it reaches the tender spot of the patient in the middle place where the curvature of the tree is attached.
And then suspend above that heavy cause of grief, or the minister extends it to the lower parts; and then the doctor examines the fracture in the worst places, until the fracture returns according to its natural course.
And another way is that the patient is resupinated on the chair and suspends his hand at the neck of the column with a ligament; and then he commands two ministers that one of them holds above the fracture in his worst places; and the other holds below him; and almost all of them extend to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you stretch over the fracture with a ligament and over that with another ligament, and almost all of the two ministers extend to their two parts.
And so if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then it happens that half of the ligament is placed on the nipple and the other below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it happens that the ligament is placed on that place and on that elbow.
That joint is facilitated and its trouble, and then when it is facilitated according to its nature and applied for good application, then stretch that if you do not reach a postrema caution.
But if you reach a postrema caution, then loosen the structure until the seventh day, and pause on the woolen bandage wrapped in seven layers and oiled with rose oil until it repairs the postrema, and then you stretch that.
And the way of stretching that is to put a plaster on the fracture, and then put a wrapping of new cloth around the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that adjutori, and put your hand opened over the patient's muscle.
And put the cloth and stretch over the adjutori the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, if it does not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
And then use stilts.
And it is that you put on the fracture that stilts which are more laden and stronger than the other stilts; and put between each stilts the width of a finger, and let the length of the stilts be according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers from the whole part.
And then stretch over the stilts with the structure which was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your structure on the place of the fracture should be more stretched. And when the fracture is more lengthened, the structure is less.
And so if you observe the situation of the stilts and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its original position, then you do it.
And if you fear postrema caution, then loosen the structure and the stilts until the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not become inflamed or swollen in the place of the fracture; or it is prohibited to bring food to the member by disposition of superfluous structure; and thus rectify all that according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature for three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their worst places be above the stomach.
And put on the adjutori a full woollen cocoon, and consider in all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed nor dissolved, or that the ligament is mollified, therefore rectify all with your virtue.
And put the patient's food in order as we have mentioned before, so that the food is subtle at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then it happens that you thicken the patient's food.
It is customary for the adjutori and the leg of it to be strengthened in 40 days; and then it happens that they are loosened and administered baths and medicated with ointments which rectify that.
And if the fracture is badly shattered, then you do not loosen that ligament and stilts until 10 days or until two months.
Chapter 12.
On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm bones; of which one is small, and it is the one that is called the radius, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small bone, from the part below.
And sometimes the larger forearm bone alone is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes they are broken together.
And when the small intestine below is torn, then its restoration is more difficult, and its healing is even more difficult.
And when the intestine of the patient's thigh is torn, then its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are simultaneously torn apart.
So if the bone that is torn is the small intestine below, then it is convenient for the doctor to slow down its restoration, so that a small extension can be facilitated and thus it can be easily enclosed.
But if the large intestine is what is torn, then it is necessary that a more violent extension be made.
And if both intestines are simultaneously torn, then it is necessary that you make the extraction even stronger.
And it is necessary that you make the shape of the hand from the restoration of it and the extended extension over a cushion, and the pulse of the hand is at the upper parts above, as all the other fingers, and the auricular finger is lower than the other fingers, and the malady is centered on an inclined chair.
And there should be a cushion beneath it in its altitude or inclination, so that the malady does not encounter trouble.
And then extend the minister's arm from the affected part down to the healthy hand or limb, and another minister extends similarly from above.
And then the doctor encloses the bone within so that it returns to its best shape as much as possible.
And if the fracture of the bone is jagged, then you should perforate all the skin in the healthy place with your virtue.
And if it appears that the separated jaggedness holds the codename and is not according to your hope in its restoration, then you finish over it and remove it according to the manner which we have spoken of above.
But if the fracture is a plague, you have already made it a singular capital, and therefore take care of that.
And if you find an aposteme at the beginning of your restoration, then you lay a cloth with cerate oil and white wax, and it is better between specificity and subtlety, and stretch the cloth over that in a subtle structure until the aposteme is calmed; and then remove the cerate and pause to prepare a plaster made of powder from millet in clear water, and apply steel; and let the steel be that which is placed on that fracture strongly and firmly.
And you know that the name of the steels of the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is a fracture in one intestine or in two intestines simultaneously.
And then place your structure over the area of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when it is more certain that the extraction is from the upper parts of the fracture or from the lower parts of it, place the structure a little softer according to what precedes the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be very humid cloths, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is stretched should be of its own proper middle way between subtle and gross, just as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament to be in place for some days. And if you find some cause for which correction is necessary, just as the symptom appears on the limb, and then it is necessary that you immerse the limb in hot water until the correction ceases that symptom.
And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return to the structure.
And if the extraction is already softened and the bone is already repaired and seems like that, then correct all of it with your virtue.
And consider that it is more probable that the nutrient is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess of structure, because then it is necessary that you soften that a little and let it be for some days until it runs to that nutrient, and then strengthen it.
But if the malady does not find any cause among those that we have said, then it is not necessary to delay until around 20 days or thereabouts.
And then the hand of the malady is suspended by its virtue of agitated movement, and make it sleep on its healthy back.
And you know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or perhaps it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of that is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of fractures of the fingers of the hand and of the toes.
You know that the fingers of the hand and the toes are often subject to fracture, and do not find their place except with very gentle and careful treatments.
And when you find a hand fracture or dislocation, then it is necessary that the malady follows the inclined and goes beneath it equally, and then place the hand of it on that extension.
And then the minister extends the torn bones and the doctor encloses them within so that they are well-conjoined in good conjunction.
And when you have to apply an plaster and stop it, if the aposteme does not accumulate; then pause it according to the quantity of the area, and you have already enveloped that in a wrapping of linen.
Maybe the treatment is on the divided parts of the fingers of the palm, and then it seems to spread like a wrapping of cloth, and command the patient to stretch out that in their wrapped palm; then it will be strengthened in a long wrapping of cloth.
And the star-shaped bandage is wrapped around which is lifted, so that the body can be applied to the palm; and stretch it according to what is fitting.
Maybe the fracture is on the forepart, then you have to pause above the star-shaped bandage and another bandage below on the palm, so that the hand can be elevated and straightened; and then pause the structure, thus as the hand revolves back into its place among the fingers in alignment.
And if the fracture occurs at the knuckle of the fingers, then the finger is bent, according to what is fitting, and then it will be strengthened in the palm and if you want, pause a little straightened splint for so that the fracture is elevated and not bruised.
Maybe the fracture is in other fingers, thus as in that of the middle location, or in the index, or in the auricular, or in the annular, then it will be bent and tied with the finger to which it belongs; or tie them all together according to continuity, and it is better; or pause above that little star-shaped bandage, thus as we have said about the finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the arrangement of cautious posts and opposing  in the surgical operation  in what is fitting when some cause among those occurs, according to what is reiterated in the narration of it.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of fractures of the bone of the hip.
The bones of the hip joint are disjointed and broken, and it is declared by sensation according to what is converted into the forepart above and below.
And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is strengthened above the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient is stretched out on their back and on their face.
And then the minister extends all the ligaments to their part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle location of the bone.
Maybe it is proposed to the root of the hip, then the ligament is propelled from below to the part of the knee, so that the extension falls into its place, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is proposed from below, then it will be made the ligament propelled from below, and the extension to the parts below.
And then the doctor bends the bone in both its joints more inward than it was reduced according to natural appearance and the bone is joined by good jointing; then you have to pause with plaster and structure, if the member does not accumulate aposteme. Maybe it accumulates in the aposteme, then you leave that for some days until the cautious aposteme is calmed, and then return to your cure.
The structure of it is thus made: you have to wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and double that two or three times, and remove the superfluous part; and then wrap the leg inward until it reaches the heel and the root of the hip.
And insert a long fillet between the hip and the leg proper from below to the parts below, and join the extremities of the fillet of the part above the two parties, and then revolve around the leg and the hip what is superfluous of the bandage.
And then pause above the hip in the place of that fracture thus, and pause one star-shaped bandage above the bone of the leg.
And then fill the voids between the leg and the hip with many wrappings, so that the structure is consolidated.
And then begin with a strong structure fortifying the middle above the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and when you have already loosened the ligament of the place of the fracture, your structure will be less and lighter and more flexible.
And then extend the two extremities of the fillet to the parts below until they reach the ankle of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the star-shaped bandages on the other part so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the structure on that, done thus so that it does not accumulate corrosive member nor cautious aposteme nor inflammation and similarly to those; and if some cause among those occurs, then cut away from the dislocation of it, and rectify what accumulates all together, according to what we have said many times.
Maybe in the bone is the weight of the bone which it supports, then you have to bend that according to what is possible for you; and if not, finish above it and remove that, and cure what is preceded by the remembrance until it is healed.
Some vertebral injuries are strengthened by this fracture of the hip that has been adjusted to the stiles, as we have said in the adjunct and in the arm.
Perhaps in the restoration of it in such a way that does not aggravate the patient's lameness; and if it is restored alone, another thing that must be applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that they limp for a while.
You know that the hip is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, and all that is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap of the thigh bone.
You know that a fracture of the kneecap of the thigh bone is difficult to heal, and more aggravates the already weakened joints.
More aggravates the fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and that is a wound or several wounds, and about that all is stated in the sentiment.
And the restoration of it is also such that it is reunited with what has been broken off from its parts, and that is glued together with the pieces within, so that it is aggregated and conjoined as much as possible for equalization and facilitation.
And then apply an plaster and place it on that rounded steel, if you need that; and strengthen beneath with a structure adapted to that convenience.
And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as postrema caution and similarity to those in which it is opposed to all accidents in that which is convenient for its healing.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large, and it is named by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and it is named fibula.
And it happens to some species of fracture that it affects both bones of the arm, and for that reason the restoration of it is made like the restoration of the arm, by union, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into several parts.
And if the thin bone is broken, the leg is converted into the anterior parts.
And if the large bone is broken, it will be troublesome afterwards, and it is one of those causes that are not easily alleviated.
And then administer extension and equalization and ligamentation of the tendons according to that union.
Perhaps in a case, if the fracture of the leg is already having many satisfactory motions, that the extension should be milder and less vigorous, and it alleviates your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you unite the steel pieces and complete the entire operative tie, then you will take measures of wood or pine which are placed afterwards to remove the causes that were paused in solitude; and they are made into branches of palm; likewise from those to the ones that have small grooves, and not be of the handles, and be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and of the thigh bone up to the furthermost.
And then envelop it in a certain cloth with two envelopes according to the length of it, and place one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they are from the thigh bone up to the lowest place of the foot.
And then bind the two steel pieces in three places of the extremities and at the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right and left sides, and it stays in good station.
And then administer a wooden splint according to the length of the leg; and it is placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
And it is better that you do this in fracture, and when it has a proper wound.
And then consider each day the leg and study it for further study, and you will guard against postrema and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then you will oppose them to the leg so that it may be healed.
Chapter 17.
On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not suffer total fracture; but the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer fracture, and they do not suffer it unless there is traction in the midst of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot suffer fracture and those bones are elevated above them between themselves, then the patient puts their foot on the ground prepared thus as a nest.
And then place one foot on that which is elevated by those bones, and then calcify them, and press, and unite them so they return to their places.
And then apply a plaster and stop beneath, and place underneath the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat plates.
And then you strengthen that limb on the foot in its structure downward, because you have enveloped that limb in wraps and other causes of which they are indicators.
When you pass three or four days, then you loosen the ligament, because you will find the bones set in place, or reset or repositioned, and the operation on those is thus performed with great skill.
Perhaps some of these are reset, then restore them, and reposition them thus as you have recommended to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then you stop the reset finger according to the length of the finger, and it is thus slightly shorter; and then place the foot on this table which is recommended to you, and strengthen that limb in its downward structure.
Perhaps it is reset with two or three bones, then you stop on each finger according to its quantity enveloped in a lion's wrap, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the legs of the table for the belly of the foot to have good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which I have told you in the other fractures of accidents that we have said; and pause to consider every accident in which it covers.
Chapter 18.
On the fracture of the kneecap in women and of the bone of the little finger and of the wound of the man.
When the kneecap of a woman is reset, then make that cavity in the cartilage, and then incline it to the part of the two little bones, and it should be held from behind.
And then the midwife places the kneecap in its place, and it is done on the kneecap of the woman just as I have said; and then the woman should be comforted, and lift the little bones a little, because all that is forgotten until it is put back in place just as I have said, and the reset bone returns.
And then stop placing poultices on the little bones, and when one wants to urinate, remove the kneecap to facilitate it, and reduce and return that according to the manner in which you began, and then return to the first poultice.
And do thus for seven days or around that, because it is restored.
And if you want, take an egg of owl and strengthen over the trajectory of the little canal of cane; and then put all the vesicle in the kneecap of the little one, and then blow into the little canal with virtue until the vesicle is inflated within the kneecap, because the fracture returns.
And then it is filled with kneecap and stays for some days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the little finger of man or woman is reset, then administer in the restoration and agulation of that which we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
And that which is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and little inconvenience, mainly to the one who has some study and uses it and understands this my free book; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions via direct restoration and in the structure of the limb, and therefore understand well.
Perhaps in the wound of the man when it is reset, take a poultice of water, and put the wound in that; and then stop over the wrapping of a lion's wrap, and it is wrapped, and then let it be for three days or around that, and it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are badly bruised.
It is convenient for the one to whom occurs fracture with bruising, and mainly if the bone is large thus as the bone of the hip or of the adjutori, or similar to that, which you have seen and felt so much if the conditions of feeling are testified to you or shown thus as we have said.
And if the bruise flows with blood, then it covers that you have seen in the retention of the limb thus as you pulverize over the little finger reset, if another cause is not present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if there is no abscess.
Perhaps if there is abscess caution, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause bad accidents.
Perhaps if the reset bone is prominent over the uncovered cartilage, then it covers that you perforate to reduce it and reposition it with your hands facilitated and little extension.
Perhaps if the extension is not prepared and the equilibrium of the limb with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands to this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length is seven or eight fingers and its width is according to the quantity of the bruise; and for that reason it is necessary for the doctor who takes those three or four according to the quantity that indicates to him in the cure of all species of fracture.
It should be relaxed, and it should be in a quiet small place so that there is not confusion over the patient during the time of the operation.
It should be an acute extension to which the margin is in the hollows of the extremities; and it should be the underside of it with a large taut tendon, and from its middle to the partitions.
And this is its shape:
It is named in Greek "wandering wandering club", so it is a small shovel.
Because it is necessary that the extremity of the acute elevated part be placed above the prominent bone's extremity.
And push it in a gentle way until the bone returns, and it should be balanced with some equilibrium.
And then it is necessary to balance the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is subtle, and you do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone in all that we have recommended, then insert it into one of the incisions which we have described; or it will be one of the incisions in some manner possible for you.
And then scrape off what remains on the bone of roughness and small scales.
And when the bone is reduced, and then the reduction relieves the patient of vehement pain, then you will know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you can to confer great joy to the patient.
When you have completed your restoration which you make to the bone, and then steep it in a violet-colored liquid, and properly if it is in summer, and do not apply it on the cerous plague or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not induce putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer stitches at the time of the completion of the bone's restoration, and reveal the uncovered plague in such a way that you insert the thread with forceps and uses of enveloping according to the quantity of the plague.
And be careful that you do not touch the plague with the fracture, because many times it is made in such a way that foolish doctors, and they cause death or corrupting gangrene, or sudden death, so it is sanity. And if the structure of the bone is loose, soft, different from the structure of other fractures.
And if the plague is great or is a bad plague, and you fear about those evil accidents which we have recommended, and it causes pain in the place, then it does not fit to apply upon those stitches, but rather do that enveloping of harsh cloths in place of stitches and tighten them with those.
And when one or two days have passed since the plague began, which in it has generated pus, then you remove from underneath the cloth which you had placed on the wound, and then administer poultices, applying them as we are accustomed to medicate plagues, thus administering tetrafarmacom and similarly to that.
And it is convenient for you to dissolve the ligament and consider the plague in any morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that putrefaction can flow from it to the lower parts more easily.
If the plague passes many days, and it is not consolidated nor has pus abscessed from it, then you will know that there are satanical matters in the little wounds because it is necessary to inquire into the plague in this way. And of those satanical matters, those that are separated remain and extract, those that are not separated and put the member and cause pain, therefore you should insert them according to what is possible for you.
And if you reach the plague with zeal or enthusiasm, it is stupidity, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply one of those things that is convenient for the cure of which a preceding narration was made in the previous chapter.
And of that which it is necessary to establish my best sermon and you make present your effort: when the bone is crushed, examine above the member as if it were the bone of the thigh and of the helper and similarly to those of the great members, and do not presume attraction from it, nor the extraction from it because many times it causes death; having thus until you reach, for it is strong enough to endure for 20 days or more. And then cure the plague if you have seen it, and if there is not that one.
Chapter 20.
On the cure of swelling that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Many times it happens that this swelling occurs in the vicinity of a healthy fracture, and it is more frequent near the joints, and it is ordained by the figure of the member; and strongly it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer in that medicine which has been stipulated thus as aloen, and enses, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similarly to those; in such a way that you take some or all of them, and mix them with vi stipated, or album of water, or vi agree, and apply it upon the swelling in a stopper, and constrict it well over the member for good constriction.
And the extracted structure that does not release that for many days; then return it and iterate again, until the nodulation is re-absorbed; or strengthen over that lamina of lead decently, because lead has the property to remove all that is inflamed in the members.
Perhaps the nodulation is already converted into stone and strengthened, and it is necessary to provoke an ostensible contrition, and then divide it for the superior part of the body, and remove the superfluous and eminent, or touch that with alkaline remedies until it is re-absorbed; and cure it until it is sanctified.
Chapter 21.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then returns to its subtle member, freed according to its own natural sieve.
When a fracture of a bone is restored, and then returns to its subtle member, freed, it is not done except for many causes: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the binding of the faulty joint; or due to superfluous structure of the ligaments until the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member; or due to multitude of excessive embrocation; or due to superfluous movement not at its hour; or due to lack of soundness in the body of the patient and weakness of it.
And the treatment of this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender until the health is multiplied in them; and administer baths; and introduce gauze and linctus over them.
And then pause the poultice over the member, so that the poultice attracts to it the main nourishment, or continues embrocation with warm water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored wrongly and prevent the operation of their own that is convenient.
When it happens to the member that is restored then there is a healing of its wrong formation and prominence to the broken bone and nodulation, and it is because of this fedida of the form of the member, perhaps impedes the member from being prohibited from its own natural operation, then it does not happen that you receive the word of those who existed, that the member was newly broken.
Perhaps they have been many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this on our earth; and this operation is very reprehensible, producing great fear in the sign of which is mortal.
Perhaps the numbness and nodulation are recent, then it happens that they are embrocated with warm water in which they collect soft mollifying herbs, thus as they are fuels of altea and radish of them, and melilot, and similar to those; and make a mollifying emplaster for them; or take a mucilage of radish of altea and be continued in gray of gualina or oil of cirami, and be emplastered in that; or take fat figs and be trissaded in femur of colom, and similar to those of the medicines that are named asermann's consolidation.
And some roots are dissolved in assiduous friction liqueur that is in the most humid places, and administer movement of the member to every part at all hours.
Perhaps the wrong formation has gone deep inside and is made strong and converted into stone and provoked necessity for treatment with iron, then it happens that the pus is dried up above and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and is inserted what superfluously nods to that metal in the bone with subtle incisions, and is administered facilitated in that which is solicited and studied.
Chapter 23.
On the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints from their proper place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is altered, and brings about pain and great lesions to the patient.
Therefore when it happens to some dislocation, then it is necessary to perform it quickly so that it is reduced, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes apostemated and strongly inflamed with what makes difficult the reduction of the dislocation.
And for this reason it does not happen that it is manipulated or stretched at the time of apostema, because many vigorous movements bring about spasm and intense pains.
Perhaps when this happens, then it is necessary that you take care of the flaccidity of the patient, and then pause until the apostema subsides; and then the member is embrocated with warm water and oil, and then reduced with facilitation.
And every member is cured with water of which the remembrance will come to its place.
And I have now ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the superior part of the body down to the inferior part.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
Thus the two lower jawbones are dislocated if not set in place; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two manners: either they are re-absorbed into their places by slight movement, and so mollified a little; or they are completely dislocated and complicated, until they are mollified at the joint so that the saliva of the patient flows and cannot hold it nor clear its mouth, and the tongue is enveloped in its speech.
More when the dislocation of it is slight, then in the major preparations it returns by itself for a slight cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it is necessary that reduction of the limb be administered immediately, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and inserts his fingers under one of his shoulders near the jaw to reduce the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers at once, if the dislocation is on two sides, and the other fingers of his hands are before them so they can guide; and he commands the patient to relax their jaws and release those that wander from any part; and the minister guides the jaw and pushes it in until it returns to its proper place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until it facilitates the reduction of both and does not delay the reduction of both at all, thus we have said.
And thus when they are returned and joined, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, then pause on those pillows of dry cloth with cerate, and make a wax and oil poultice; and then it will be easy to facilitate the joining of the limbs.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be steady between two pillows, so that they do not incline to the right or left side; and do not force them to hold any position; having taken a moderate diet, forbid them to eat anything that is too heavy, until when the pains are remitted and the jaws are numbed, then they can eat what they want.
And this is to be administered to facilitate, and do not trouble about the perception of the mouth, except for eating and drinking and evacuation, until the jaw is numbed and healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any hour and not converted to their proper places, then many evil humors accumulate, and a feverish and assiduous sweat comes, and it strengthens the belly of the patient, and it strengthens and evacuates pure cholera.
And when you see this, then you will know that it is perdition; and many evil humors die in that which falls into it within ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The ankle is not dislocated from its joint near the foot through its continuity; and some evil humors are dislocated at the front part beforehand, and that is declared by the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends both arms. And then bind the area with your palm in a strong binding, so that it returns to its place.
And then pause on that plaster and pillows and strengthen it.
But the extremity of one who has seized the thigh and its continuity with it is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and joined according to what we have said and according to what appears to you.
And then pause on that plaster, and pillows, and bandage, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And in this way, the cure is reduced, the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its proper place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You will know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is dislocated at the upper part towards the outer side and below.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and that is very tart; and it is not dislocated at the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the lower parts through the nerves.
And especially it is dislocated and beforehand exists at the lower parts of the outer side, and especially in those in which the flesh is slight, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there are many flesh, it is difficult to dislodge.
And it strongly accumulates in some men percussion or contusion, and the muscle of it is inflamed by a hot aposteme, and it is cooked through that which was already dislocated.
Then it is necessary that you sprinkle that until you are certain of its condition, and then proceed with the cure of it.
And it is known the dislocation of it when it is at the lower parts towards the outer side; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, because you find among them manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the concave muscle and below the outer side towards the joint of the head of the muscle as if it were a hollow, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to the outer shoulder, nor can they move it at all.
If it has slipped out of place, either foot or hand, and then you find obvious deformity, and it is not concealed.
And from this dislocation, make gentle reduction when it is fresh and the patient is in a favorable condition.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises their hand to the upper parts; and then place the tied poultices below the tiny strip of it, and raise the joint with strength in its own place, and the minister raises their hand, and extends it thus, so that they return gently.
Perhaps because of what we have said does not return, and so from the beginning that causes the dislocation, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and receive a gentle massage that softens and relaxes, and thus if there is a callus or roughness, and fenugrec, and melillot in water, and let it be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and positioned below the tiny strip of it, waiting for a handbreadth that is equal between levity and strictness, and then the doctor places the other talon on the spine, and raises the head of the muscle to an upright position, and touches the hand of the patient so that it is not moved to the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not moved to the parts below, because then it will return to its own place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make yourself present at home where it is longer than the patient, and stand on one side of the bed, and insert your muscle below the tiny strip of the patient and raise the tiny strip to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the lower parts of the back. Perhaps the patient is weakened, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended, so that they can bear that, because the dislocation returns soon.
And it is reduced in this way: and it is that one fixes to the ground a long post with a rounded head of moderate size, like a pile of mortar, not too large or subtle, and then place it below the patient; because when placed on top of the post's head, the patient stands according to the length of the post, and then extend their hand to the lower parts of the other side; and strengthen the body of it from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its own place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the reasons we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a post of the quantity of which is in length of two arms, and its width is of four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted on the surface of the tiny strip according to this form:
And then place linen cloths around the rounded head so that the post does not harm the patient.
And then place it below the tiny strip of the patient, and extend their hand or arm over the post up to the lower parts, and tie the post to the adjutorium and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a scale of steps according to the width, and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and the other body is suspended from the other side, so that the joint enters soon.
And when the instrument of it is completed according to whatever method is possible for you, and then it is necessary that you place below the tiny strip of skin of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of moly and album of egg white over all the muscle, so that it is revolved above, and then strengthen below the tiny strip with decent strictness; and the ligament is revolved around the plaster, and the hand of it is attached to the neck of it, and let it be, and do not move the hand of it for seven days.
And it is necessary that the food of the patient be placed nearby, until the member is comforted, because it is easier to bring about their healing.
And then the food is given more abundantly for seven or eight days, and thus an exercise of movement is performed; and so if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
Perhaps the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that affects it or for another reason, then it is necessary that in this case be administered a cautery with three tracts, according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and seven days are spent disentangling the ligament and the joint is not strengthened, and the plaster and strictness are reduced over it several times, and it is not strengthened and can't elevate that arm to the upper parts, then you will know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either inscribed or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint will never be fixed in its own place.
From the dislocation of that which is caused by a fall from the chest or thigh, to the reduction it is caused by an impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns.
And let it be administered in the other structure, and care for it until it is healed.
And if it happens that the healing is slow in the limb and tardy in its movement, then the patient uses many well-directed remedies until the gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Chapter 27.
On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, and mostly in the part in front of the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you because you see the vein or the touch according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, that is to your declared manifest, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the surrounding muscle.
And you should be aware that the hip joints are reduced, and the dislocation is adjusted as soon as possible before it becomes a chronic apostema, because if it becomes a chronic apostema, it is difficult to reduce it, and hardly ever fully healed; and especially when it is in the back parts, because it is worse than all other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many remedies are useless against that leading to death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that its hand should be extended with two fingers, and its arm should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are placed on the hip and below it, and the joint is manipulated with the tips of its own hands, or at the edge of its palm until it returns to its place.
Moreover, if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus that it bends its hand with its own hand, until it strikes the hip at the edge of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that same position for two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
And then the arm is revolved from all parts, because it is enveloped by a doubled cloth bandaged over its hand, or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, until he finds some oil for so that it is those causes that help in lubricating the joint to facilitate; and then he manipulates the joint with a vigorous impulse until it returns.
And then the reduction of it should be placed on that plaster in which it is stipulated and exception made in the white of egg, and it is extruded in a descending structure, and the arm is suspended from the pillar, and it is left for some days.
And then it is dislocated; and therefore if the joint is formed in its own place, then you dislocate the ligament of it and leave it like that.
And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you iterate the plaster and ligament, and leave it like that for some days until it is extruded; and then dislocate it.
Moreover, if it happens that the gravity is towards the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidity in abundance and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or pause on the joint alleviated, so it is a hip of great motility; and then it is bound, and leave it like that over the bone day and night. And then remove that, and place it in a bath; and when it sweats, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then iterate over that alleviated, so it is rounded by motility, one remedy, and the second, and the third. in a warm bath, until it is relaxed.
And if you want, pause on that fenestra of humid and scaling wound with bandage and strengthen over that; and make some remedies, because it is humid and reduces to its disposition.
Chapter 28.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder of the hand sometimes is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is urgent, and conversely it is unlike other joints, moreover I believe that speed is necessary in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, lest the place becomes chronic or it falls into chronic apostema.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends his hand of it, and the doctor places his hand or his palm over the vicinity of the joint, and manipulates it until it returns to its own place.
Master's authority commands that it be considered if the palm of the hand has been placed on the belly of the mother, then the patient should place their back on a table with extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous to the back of the mother, then the position of the mother's hand is above the table, so that the doctor's hand falls onto that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns soon, it's good; and if not, then strengthen that arm by applying a poultice to the abscess and let it be; and do not iterate there, because if not, it does not suffer nor can it be placed on the reduction of the pus that passes through the days.
Master's joint is twisted according to its tortuousness; and do not notice any cause in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you will know that the nerves are pinched or compressed, and then it is not engendered in them unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the correction of them and to fortify their confidence.
When the evil humors are returned, then stop on the poultice that we have recommended, and let it be strengthened for five days; and then it will be dissolved and let it be strengthened, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
If the movement of it is stopped and accelerated in them with some gravity, then anoint that arm with warm water and friction with certain gentle touches, until it is alleviated.
Chapter 29.
On the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Certain gentle touches can dislocate the fingers entirely.
And when a finger among those is dislocated to the back of the palm or to the belly of it, then stretch the finger and impel the dislocation of it with the tied poultices, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in that seventh day.
And when it is night, lay it according to that narration, and do not cease to unbind it in the day and exercise its movement, and lay it at night; and do so for some days until it is strengthened.
And do similarly to this, if it is dislocated to the belly of the hand, and lay it at that part and do so with the first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated to other parts.
Chapter 30.
On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it accelerates to one of the vertebrae of the back or neck a complete dislocation, and thus many vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that case there is no cure, because death will soon overtake the patient.
And it is clear that the evacuation of the patient is beyond their control, and they cannot retain it; and many gentle touches can soften some members of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or a vertebra is removed from its place, because many gentle touches are removed and many gentle touches make the removal of those in four parts.
Then that one is already removed to the back parts and is called paralysis.
Master's cure of it is that then you should consider if the paralysis accelerates from weakness, because then in that case there is no cure nor healing at all.
Master's cure of it is that which goes by cauterization or percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients said that the methods of cure are numerous and prolix, from which Master returns with profit; Master has already written about that from which I have little excuse for the troop of it, for my proximity to the intention of my exposition, in which I have expounded and formed diverse instruments from that which I will show and expand.
And from those, none are cured except the one that accelerates in the back properly, as I have recommended.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face over a soft pillow near the wall, and should be extended below them with a soft mattress, so that they are not hurt by their feet.
And then a straight pole should be placed, fixed in the ground at the extremity of the pillow around the head of it, and another pole in the air above the feet of it on the other extremity of the pillow.
And the minister should hold the pole, and not be fixed in a hole; and another minister should hold the other according to that form.
And then envelop above the head of the patient and below the thin linen firm; and extend the extremity of the linen to the pole which is above the head of it, and lay it on them; and then strengthen the other linen over their hips, their thighs; and then adjust all the linens and lay them on the other pole which is above their feet.
And then the minister extends the ligament to the division of the thigh, and does not leave the two thighs and the ligaments of the surrounding places in which they are fixed, but rather empowers them so that they are not firm thus as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine for added strength until it returns, or places them on that one table, and then adjusts on the table the surrounding feet until they return.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table on which the width or length is in the air of three handspans, and carve into the wall of which we have said that it is proper for the patient to enter a place where the extremity of the table enters. And then place the mattress of the table on the spine, and the doctor places the surrounding feet on the other extremity, and stretches well until the spine is corrected and returns to its own place.
And if you wish, open what is revolving in the hand; and it is that you fix on the ground the head of the patient at the back of the two thighs, the length of which should be an arm's length, and from the head to the back of the two thighs again; and let the length be between each thigh a palm, and already it is made in each thigh a hole in which the turning occurs, and each one is firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be a round thigh in which the turning occurs, and let it revolve in the two holes of the two thighs.
And at the extremity of it there is a hole in which the thigh is formed, the length of which is a palm in water where it revolves; and in the two other thighs it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments that you have stretched on the chest of the patient in the hole where it is opposite the head of it, and the ligaments that you have stretched on its thighs in the turning where it is opposite the feet of it.
And then it is necessary to turn and stand as a minister who turns the turning with his hand, and the doctor straightens the spine according to what we have said.
And then because the spine is returned, and the place is straightened, then it is necessary to apply an emplaster excitation in a album of wool, and then stop; and then apply on the emplaster like a table of which the width is three fingers or around that, and the length of it is as much as it takes up the space of the swelling, and on the division of the spine thus.
And then let it be joined to the ligament which we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment until they are healed.
And if there remains some impediment in the place at the end of the healing, then it is necessary that medicines which mollify and linish are administered on the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a lamina of lead.
And some veiled accidents occur in the back of the two spines, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already warns you so that it does not happen to make a precipitous fall with this medicine, because it will make your far-off affair deadly.
Chapter 21.
On the cure of a dislocated ankle.
You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not end in anything but dislocation only, and it does not occur to those which occur to the other small joints with little movement and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the inner parts, or to the outer parts, or to the anterior parts, or to the posterior parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inner parts, and rarely to the anterior parts or to the posterior parts.
And the sign of dislocation of it to the inner parts is that, when you adjust the limb of the healthy patient with the patient, it is then longer and the denudation is more evident than in the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their own foot from the knee, and it is the place where the ligament is apostematized by an apostema of caution, so that the head of the thigh has already been perverted here.
And the sign of that which occurs with dislocation to the outer parts is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that which occurs with dislocation to the anterior parts is that it expands the limb itself according to its natural inclination, but rather does not bend because of the pain that is in the denudation, and if it is forced to walk and cannot stand on that anterior part; and its urine is retained and its ligament is apostematized, and its ambulation is on the ankle.
And the sign of that which occurs with dislocation to the posterior parts is that it does not expand the denudation, nor can it bend that anterior part that bends the ligament, and its limb is shorter than the other, and its ligament is mollified, and the head of the thigh is in that place.
The greatest reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and chronic, it has already been anticipated by you and you have administered reduction of it according to its disposition, then it is not in complete cure; and therefore it does not become necessary for a second attempt.
More in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you touch there to see if you can reduce the joint and extend it to the adjacent parts behind and before, and move it to the right and left, because it strongly returns and does not indicate need for another cure.
More, if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare a strong minister and extend the leg from the back part behind, or with its hands, or with the ligament that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends the hand of that one below so that they grasp the fingers of the patient; and you strengthen the ligament on the joint of the thigh, and hold another minister to steady the extremity of the ligament.
And it is an extension of it or from the back part to the angle of the elbow, or from the back part to the back of the spine.
And it is the extension of all those in a single direction until the patient is elevated on his back from the ground and remains suspended.
And this species of extension is a common species to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that I speak of regarding their own cure.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the back parts, it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back lying flat; and then pause the ligaments on the joint of the thigh at the place where the head of the thigh and the place below the elbow meet; and then extend the ligament from the part of the elbow to the back part of the spine.
And then another strong minister takes the arms of it, and grasps the large spot of the patient's thigh and extends to the front parts for vigorous extension, because that returns to its original place.
And this species is of more gentle cure in which this member is reduced than the other species.
More, if it is excused about you and does not obey the entrance in this species of cure at all, then it is necessary that the two feet of the patient be tied together with a strong ligament, gentle, above both ankles and both knees.
And it is the length of each one by the quantity of four fingers, and it is the patient's leg extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient is suspended above the top of the wooden stake, and that it is in the marrow; and it is the length of it from the ground by the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong youth to move the head of the thigh, and it is suspended with the patient another youth, and the other youth moves the thigh with strength in an empowering way, because the joint returns to its original place with velocity.
More in the proper reduction, when it is a dislocation to the front part, it is necessary that the patient lies on a cushion according to what we have recommended in the previous gelbozitation; and it is strengthened by the ligament above the patient's own leg and above their feet.
And then two wooden stakes are placed, one at the feet of it, and the other at the head; and then two wooden stakes are adjusted to the middle of the pole fixed above which drapes humidities are enveloped, so that the patient is not damaged by what the wooden stake is between their thighs, so that the extension to the back parts is not attracted.
And then each minister extends to their own part, and the doctor with his own hand guides the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the leg be extended gently, and it is according to this method narration about the pole; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the patient's elbow, and then cuts with the other hand, and in that cutting pauses the extension to the back parts at the back of the spine.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it does not become necessary that the patient be extended to the back parts, and it is elevated above the ground; however, it becomes necessary that it be placed on a hard cause, thus as it becomes necessary for the examination if the joint of it is dislocated to the front parts, according to what we have said about its examination on two anchors; and it is above its face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no trouble.
And you should administer compression on the table above the area where the joint is.
Since the reduction is completed according to what you know  and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend the patient's two legs, and when you see those groins and the patient stretches out their leg and expands that excuse, then you know that the member according to what you know is returned  and then you adjust both thighs and pause in the bandage and stretch it thus so that the width is not hindered in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then release the ligature and the bandage, and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see those groins in alignment, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore leave the patient to walk.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and plaster it, and stretch it according to your primary structure, and leave it in three days.
And then release that, and make it wait in walking on crutches for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter 32.
On the cure of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is dislocated in three ways, for it is dislocated forward, and backward, and downward more than upward; and it is not dislocated inward.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply their leg to the thigh; then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is that you make the patient straighten, so that they extend their leg if possible; tie the two feet to the chair, and place the foot of it between the two feet; and then make them tie the ankle with both palms, and hold those between the two feet above the ankle with strength, and another minister extends the foot until the ankle returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction of it is that their leg adheres to the thigh without effort.
And then plaster it and make them tie the leg to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release them.
And do not allow the patient to walk for some days, until they are healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it is excused by you, then administer strong extension on the ligaments which are in the cure of the preceding narration of the hip.
Chapter 33.
On the cure of dislocation of the ankle bone.
Some ankle bones are removed by small movement, and some bones are dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is done either backward or forward.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you see the ankle bone swollen preceding to the part where it is dislocated.
But the cure of the movement of it is by gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with ease in the hands and be aligned until it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated according to completeness, you should make the patient straight, and hold that with a strong and valiant minister behind the two feet in the middle place of it.
And then you put your right hand straight on the foot above the superior part, and your left hand below the foot at the place of the ankle.
And then you pull the foot to your right hand, and with the left hand for two fingers, and stretch with the left hand; and you will feel the foot of the leg towards the back of the thigh.
And make those two fingers according to what we have counted.
And then you will feel the foot of the leg at the third finger, and you are at the ankle.
Then if it returns to one finger or two according to this manner, and if you see the foot aligned, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, for it will return.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it with what we have recommended, then make the patient sit on their two feet on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth strongly onto the earth, and enclose it between the thighs of it, and you have enveloped it over the drap so that it does not touch the patient.
And then the minister of it holds its thighs, and another minister extends the foot to their hands or to the ligament that lies on the neck of the foot; and then extend that minister against extension of the above part, and the piece of cloth is stretched between the thighs of the patient retaining it, so that the body of it is not pulled towards the lower parts away from its extension.
And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh below, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
And then when the dislocation is returned and declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause and apply a strong plaster and strongly bind the foot to the leg.
And beware that you do not tighten or guard the nerves which are detained above the ankle, so that the binding on it is not violent and holds strongly.
And leave it like that for two days or three; and if the binding is softened, remove it.
And then discontinue it on the third day or on the fourth, and prohibit the patient from moving for forty days. But if it is forgotten to go to that space, it is not made secure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted there, and then it will not receive a cure.
And if you reach the warm aposteme, then beware that you administer in the softening of it what precedes our narration, in another place of cure and of embrocation, until it is relieved.
Chapter 34.
On the Cure of Dislocation of the Toes of the Feet.
It is necessary that one who is dislocated be treated with little extension of his troubled parts; and it is not difficult, because it is lighter.
But if the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient sit with his foot on the ground or on a table, and stand like that as if he were going.
And then you stand on foot, and place your foot on what is imagined from the joints, and then press that foot firmly into the ground until it returns, and see that it is already treated and does not appear in the eminent location.
And then place underneath the belly of the foot on a table that takes all the foot, which has two cups, and then strengthen it with a decent structure and fix it for three days; and then discontinue it and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Chapter 35.
On the Species of Dislocation that are Made with a Wound or a Fracture or any other Simultaneous Afflictions.
When you reach some cause of those, and you are hindered in the cure of that and in the restoration of it, many sudden successes will precede death.
And for that it is not necessary to presume on the cure of it, but rather one who is skilled in the art, with long usage, merciful and pitied, tardy, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses in the beginning of medicines that calm down apostemes as much as possible, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, except for the one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with alleviation of malady, and in which appears some hope. And then you should hasten to remove it as much as possible from the beginning of the cause, in order that an aposteme is not generated.
And then if the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that calms down aposteme and cures the wound with what is convenient for it of the swollen and desiccated limbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and reaches the separated sacrum bones, then you make a statement of theirs, and do in it what we have said about the simple maladies of that which is preceded in the places of those.
And beware and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear, as it has been preceded by my preaching; because it is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your cosmos, which are verified in your time. Thus end the paragraphs of Albucasim, perfectly filled with those that God may bless. Amen.
