Oh, sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last part of the science of medicine, for the completion of its consequences in it, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that you have fulfilled what I wanted from you in this treatise, which is a part of my operation on hand, so it is surgery.
Because the operation on hand is spread throughout our region and in our entire private time, until they have very little perception of its science, and its investigation has been stopped; and I do not remain silent about it except for some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddy the waters and lead to those errors and hesitations until the intentions of it are closed and its strength is elongated.
And it seems to me that you have vivified this hand in the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that they come into the forms of the ferraments of cauteries and other instruments of the work as if by addition of the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
The reason why there is no expert artist in this our time, is because the art of medicine is long and it covers the whole actor who needs to be exercised in the science of anatomy which Galen described until he knew the juices of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves and ligaments, and their number, and their precision; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and of the places of their establishment.
And for this Hippocrates said that a name is not enough, but rather in the small work, and mainly in the art of the hand.
We have already said this about him in the introduction of this book; because who does not know what we have said about anatomy, is not exempt from falling into error, by which many men have died, thus you have seen many of them, because they were formed in this science and got away from that science and its experiments.
Because you have seen a foolish doctor who has incompetently induced an scrophilous abscess on the neck of a woman, and damaged some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed until the woman nearly died among his hands.
And I saw another doctor who promised that he would remove a stone from a man's bladder which had progressed to his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone in a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And you have already called him to remove that, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and due to the disposition of the patient's body, he was going to die under his hands.
And I saw another doctor who received a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he made a bad incision on the thigh of a man who had a fracture in his leg; and due to the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, above the wound, with pumice stones and asters in strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then he dislocated the joint according to his foolish desires, and then he relaxed, and then he left it for several days and commanded that we should not disturb the limb; and it was thus until the thigh and foot became putrid with apostemes, and he came to perdition.
And you have already called him to it, and he has prepared himself to dislocate the limb, and thus he achieved tranquility and also alleviated his own pains.
But the corruption had already spread to the member, so that it could not be restrained, and did not cease to walk with the corruption in the member until the patient suffered.
And I saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and he ulcerated it for several days, until the evil of it was magnified in his lord's sense.
The reason is that the cancerous tumor was pure melancholic humor, then it did not cover that it would come to him at all, but rather that it was in a member which suffered from everything, and had been held back from everything.
And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation on hand be divided into two devotions: one is an operation where health is associated, and another work where danger is in the major dispositions.
And you have already existed in every place of this book where I have found operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard against that and leave it, so that the foolish ones do not take the way to speak and deceive you.
And then take your arms in solicitude and protection of God, and your evils are abolished and strengthened.
And you have used the best way for the grace of God to obtain health and laudable success, and you have left the terrible evils of difficult healing, and you have stopped your arms from that which makes you afraid, so that you may stay in your faith and in your name you will not be evasive: because it remains in your glory, and afterwards in the world and finally among your sanctities.
Although there are some difficulties in this patient's joints: "There is no medical treatment for a bad case of gout, because bad doctors do not know its name."
"And I have divided this book into three chapters."
"Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part." "The first chapter deals with the head entering into the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the ferrumens of cauteries, and what is necessary for the operation."
"The division of the second part." "The second chapter, on suction and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of poultices, and of extraction of arrows and of similarities to those, all capitulated and ordered according to the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and of curvature correction and of similarities to those; a chapter ordered from head to feet, and according to the forms of instruments."
"So that I indicate the quality of the juvenations of that cautery and of its instruments, and in what complexity it is prohibited to use cautery."
"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the juvenation of cautery and of its instrument is long and prolix, and subtle for science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree with each other, and I need a little bit of their sermons, fearing prolongation."
"Therefore I say that cautery corresponds to the entire universal complexity, which is either matter or multiple matters, except for two complexities, which are warm complexities of matter."
"In the warm and dry complexity matter disagrees; because some said that cautery is juvenated to that, and others said the opposite of that, that cautery is not convenient in bad gout which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that bad gout warm and dry matter is healed by cautery and dryness."
"And they say that those who say the opposite of that, that by cautery it is made juvenation in all bad warm and dry gout that occurs in men's bodies, because when you compare men's bodies with the humidity of them to the complexity of fire, you find that men's bodies are cold."
"And I say by the sermon of that, that experience has already taught me some things to discover."
"Moreover, I do not know what comes over that which has already been experimented and exercised in the chapter of cautery for the last exercise, and to know the diversity of the complexity of men's bodies and the disposition of their gouts in their meteyssas, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those."
"Moreover, in the other complexities, it is not about your fear, and especially in the cold and humid gouts, because all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree about the juvenation with cautery in those."
"And you know, sons, that the secret of cure by cautery is fire and its goodness, so on cautery I make comburent medicine, because the fire is simple, the action of which does not penetrate except to the member which is cauterized and does not touch another member unless it is a small nuisance."
"Moreover, the action of comburent medicine penetrates to that in the members which are affected by it, and strongly makes them come into the difficult-to-heal gouty member and strongly assists."
"Moreover, fire, by its sublime nobility and goodness of substance, does not do anything but overflow; and it is already known to us through experience and long service of studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that I have excused the length of the sermon; and if it were not that I did not read my own book in this pause to you, secretly hidden fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of the expulsion by which it expels gouts, a philosophical sermon demonstrated, which would be acute in your own footsteps."
"And you know, sons, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to use cautery and pause at the best time of spring."
"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the nuisance from the accidental time is submerged in the juvenation of that which I have with cautery, and especially if cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fast, which do not suffer delay so that it is feared by those who bring malice, which is greater than small nuisance entering at the wrong time."
"And you do not see in your footsteps, or, sons, that which is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is that at that gout which is healed by cautery, it does not return at all times, and they pause at that consequence."
And the cause is not so because the doctors do not understand that cautery is only in place of medicine, which alters the complexion and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pains.
Perhaps emperor, I will place cauteries superficially on medicine to show the value and truth of its operation and greatness of your wise lordship.
And it is possible that the disease returns at some point in time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease, and its truth, and what has been prepared in their body through the addition of superfluous humors, and what has happened to them in acquiring habits and semblances of those causes; unless the disease in which cautery is administered is a subtle disease with few superfluous humors and moisture, thus as cautery for toothache and similar to that, it is possible that in them no pain returns, but rather it is made small.
And it is a common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and it is a desperate remedy, not because they understand it, for they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved through medicine or any other cause that would make them resort to cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when they administer the methods of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not concur, and thus at the end of the cause they administer cautery, and it is made suitable for that. And from here onwards it is clear that cautery is not the last resort of medicine, but rather according to the intention which understands the simple and foolish doctors.
And they said that the ancients believed that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the limitation of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as if it is not absolutely true, because you have already probed and experienced that it does not do so except in certain bodies like the others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron, thus as they said; but emperor, when you perform cautery with golden focus, it is not for you to declare, because it depends on the quantity that you want for the rigor of the gold, and prepare to receive heat; and if you adjust over the ignited focus, the gold melts per the focus, and sometimes in the focus some layers are made so that the artisan can occupy themselves with that.
And therefore it is done with iron cautery, we do not push lightly and do not propose immediately the rectitude of operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that I can clarify what is demanded from them.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers on the humidity and coldness above the servile accident of which there are two causes, thus it is the cause of swelling and multitude of flux rheumatic, called corrissa, from the head to the divisions of the veins and of the fluent auricles, and multitude of drowsiness, and of toothache and of gout, and universally of all diseases that come from coldness, thus as paralytically, swelling and apoplexy, and similarly in those diseases.
The form of this cautery is this, that primarily it commands the patient to evacuate the medicine in a laxative manner from the mundane head, for three or four nights, according to the truth of the patient and their age and custom.
And then it commands him to shave his head with a razor, and then makes him sit between his thighs on a warmed-up bench and places his hands over his feet.
And then places the razor of his palm on the sole of the foot between the veins of his nose. Perhaps emperor, as the doctor said in my place, it has happened, thus that place is tender, and then ignite the olive oil cautery, of which this is the form.
And then places that on the sensitive spot that is tender, in a manner that descends, in which the doctor's hand is constricted little by little, and you turn it around.
And then lifts his hand lightly and regards the spot, and if you see already from the bone being uncovered some quantity of hair, thus as the quantity of grain of errors, then lifts his hand, and if it does not turn to his hand in that iron, or another of that, if it is frozen, until it is seen from the bone what I have said to you.
And then takes a little salt and dissolves it over the spot and leaves it for three days.
And then places it on the bent edge of the box and leaves it on top until the crust of the focus is destroyed. And then cures the spot with four-part angelic water until it is healed.
And they said that when the Roman plague breaks out, so much better gets the scar, because it is better and more jovial.
They should remove some of those that are to be cauterized from the code inward into the bone, and hold the cautery inward so that it is burned in some part of the bone's thickness.
And then return to what has been adjusted on the bone, and then take care.
They should also push the cautery through to the back, until it penetrates into the bone strongly, so that the bone breaks, and this is the way to release small fractures: They estimate at that place where the vapors of the head expire.
And hold the open wound for a long time, and then take care until it is consolidated.
But I have not seen these two special kinds of cauteries in everything, except in some homes according to the way of fear; and therefore, you must, my better health is there, when it is; because the head is developed by solution of continuity of the same as we have testified in other members, and mainly when the head of the patient is of frail nature.
And the kind of cautery first mentioned is more salvaged and better for me; and from that house and in that work I am healthy.
Following chapter.
About the cautery of the head.
When the entire head aches with chronic and long pain and it is in prolonged illness, and uses remedies of poultices and of bandages and of cupping glasses and of plasters and of ointments and of catheters and of similar things, and mainly if it has been cauterized by a cautery which recounts and does not alleviate any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and troublesome with great cold, then that cautery is another cautery besides the one mentioned. And then cauteries that one on the horn of the dry head with a cautery inward so that the code is parted. Cut the code and discover the quantity of bone which we have recounted and cautery that one with a cautery in the back part of the head at the place which is called "vas" — and it is that place where the windy pause is made. And lift your hand in that way, and do not discover the bone, because the patient suffers so much great diverse pain from the pain of all the other cauteries of the head.
And you will direct this cautery to its place, because it is necessary that the cautery which is being cauterized on the horns of the head and the occiput is more subtly cauterized than that which is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the way of it.
Chapter three.
On the cautery of non-ancient migraines.
When pain dwells in the head's partition, or it is stagnant pain inward to the fontanel, then evacuate with medicines that moderate the head, and then administer another cure, which you have stated in the devotions of illnesses; and if not alleviated, then cautery is in two ways: either cautery with acute burning medicine, or with iron.
One cautery with acute burning medicine is that you take a handful of salt, and scrape it off and bind the extremities of the hand with both hands on the heads. And then incise the place of pain in the temple with a sharp lancet inward so that it is in the same location behind the code, so that it is concealed.
And then strengthen over it with a stopped constriction, and leave that for three hours' space; and then remove the dressing and treat the wound, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then pause on the submerged joint in a bandage until the place forms a crust.
And then cure that one with a poultice inward so that it is healed.
And if you want, make those some burning medicines which I have written about in the twelve treatises of burning medicines.
One cautery with iron is according to this way: ignite for cautering which this is the form.
and it is called "claus clavilhs", because the head of it is thus formed like a nail in which there is some curvature, and in the middle place of it there is a small prominence.
And then pause on the place of pain, and hold your hand — so that the acidity which is beneath is not burned — and turn the small iron little by little with velocity.
And if the quantity of it which is burned by the thickness of the code is thus as much as its greatness, and hold your hand so that the artery is not burned which is beneath, so that no flux of blood comes.
And then embibe the joint in salt water and pause that on the place, and leave that for three days; and then pause the joint wrapped in a bandage, and then cure with a poultice inward so that it is healed.
And if you want, cautery the extremity of the cutaneous according to cautery, and beware of incision of artery in this non-ancient migraine specifically.
Fourth chapter.
On the cauterization of old migrating humors.
When you treat migrating humors in the way that we have spoken of before, and as we have divided into types of illnesses, and do not hasten the treatment, and sometimes because of the illness that does not respond to what we have said about the first cauterization or fire in medicine, then it is necessary to ignite the cauterizing iron until it whitens, since it indicates on the line of the long axis of the part where the pain is, or thus; and pause your hand for a while and strengthen it before you pierce the artery and penetrate to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to take care of the continuity of the jawbone, which is weakened by chewing, and that the tendon is not injured and the nerves are not affected, so that no spasms occur.
And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is blocked, because in the blockage of it there is fear, and greater harm to he who ignores what he does and is not studious and experienced; and thus the operation begins at this point.
And you will find in the remembrance of the regulation of blood flow by chance of the artery, according to its own manner, in its own place of this free book.
And if you see that this illness does not respond to this cauterization and you see the body of the patient is tolerable, cauterize it in the middle place of the head as we have recounted, and cure the plague until it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the stretching of arteries by cautery having two ends, and it is a better cauterization than this one and more confident.
Chapter five.
On the cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear there is pain due to cold and it is treated with laxative causes and another treatment which I have said in the division, and the pain is not alleviated, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has been named pointed, of which this is the form.
And point the pointed instrument at the ignition, and it should be directed towards the entire ear as if rotating, or in a circular motion around any area where the pain is. Gradually I go with the cautery along the root of the ear, little by little, until I feel that I have reached the spot where I aim.
And if you make points on the entire ear with the cautery, and thus, and then cure the areas until they are healed.
Chapter six.
On the cauterization of gout.
Gout which is treated and cured by cauterization is not just of the species that come through flux, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
It is necessary to cauterize the species that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that species of gout with herbs and head-purging and gargling, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the illness with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And pause your hand with the cautery on the opposite side of the ailing part, because mollification does not occur unless on the side that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the extremity of the ear, slightly above the crown of the head, and in another temple, the length of which is according to the length of the digit, and pause your hand at the cautery until the quantity of the pain of the specific code is consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a species of cutting iron, the form of which is described in the table. However, it is more subtle because that one little thing thus seems; and it is necessary to cut into the excess fat a little.
And then cure the area where it is described in the process until it is healed.
Chapter seven.
On the cauterization of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not work and the illness has no fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: on all the crowns of the head; and with the cautery in the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with the cautery in the nape. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been said before.
And then it is cauterized above the mouth of the stomach; and it is more backward; and then it is cured with what proceeds.
Chapter eight.
From the cautery of oblivion made for fluxation.
Because they have given to the patient in the beginning of the illness great and pilling serving magnificent medicines.
And then you will take off the whole head of the patient and place it on the wooden board of this described plaster in the treatise of plasters.
And place those cooled burners, because that is the manner of cautery. And do it secondly according to the method which I have already said.
And thus if the patient is not better; and if not, then make three cauteries on the rear part of his head, which are dependent on the superior part of the head down to the part below the neck. And place between each cautery the greatest thickness of the finger, and then take care that the cautery is made as it is proceeding.
But if you see the patient is tolerant of that, then make the cautery in the middle place; and if you see major tolerance, then cautericize it above both horns.
Then take care that it enters until he is healed; and let the olive oil cautery be according to the form previously given.
Chapter 9.
On the cautery of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Because you are proceeding in magnificent healing of the head with jaundice and with what we have said; and then take off the patient's head, and then cautericize it with a cautery in the middle place of the head, and cautericize it above all the horns of the head, and cautericize it on the rear part of it, and make three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body to remove that and the patients are tolerant and the illness is strong, then cautericize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterwards make a cautery until it is combusted from the cold humors of it, and raise the tied hand. And then take care that it enters until he is healed, and this cautery is with olive oil.
Chapter 10.
On the cautery of epilepsy.
It is not a cautery for the epileptic, but that epilepsy is from fluxation.
And therefore it is because we mend the brain of him at the beginning of his years and another cure which we have dictated in the division when the patient is great and is tolerant of the exception of medicines.
And if it is an infant who does not suffer from medicines, then administer gentle and softening serving magnificent medicines, previously given for many days, with a good purification of the veins.
And then take off the patient's head, and then cautericize it with a cautery in the middle place of the head according to the previous manner, and another cautery on the occiput of it, and above each horn of the head it will be cautericized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cautericize it with the cauteries which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the olive oil cautery be according to what has been previously said.
But if the patient is an infant, then place a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter 11.
On the cautery of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and great fluxation, then cautericize it with the cauteries which we have said in having paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give him something that purifies his brain according to what has been previously said in the division.
And then take off the patient's head, and then make a decent torrefaction of those above the circle, and then place it in the middle place of the head.
And let the patient be seated comfortably, and let him be held by all parts.
And then place a liniment; and it is better to anoint with old oil of olives. And heat that over the fire for temperate warmth by measure, which it is said to suffer when it is mixed in him. And then put that in the middle place of his head in the circle, and let it enter until he is refreshed.
And do that to the patient for a whole week, another regimen of his good until he is healed; or if you wish, cautericize it making small points according to the size of him, but hold your hand with one cautery thus ordered: this is a special type of cautery which humidifies the brain in equality.
And then place that covered in bandages or in gray wraps of wadding.
Chapter 12.
On the cautery of water descending into the vein.
When you have declared the commencement of water in the vessel through the pipes which you have placed in division, then begins and gives in drinking to the patient that which monifies the head of him, and guards that from all humidity.
And make that sugar dissolve in water for several days.
And command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery on the middle of the head; and also cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the commencement of watering in two vessels, or one side if it is the commencement of watering in one vessel.
Inside, you will cauterize all the veins and arteries which are located at the back of the neck; and place the cauteries in that length along the latitude of the temples.
And beware of fluxes of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see the fluxes of blood, or remove the limb with some medicine, which is to you possible.
And you will find wisdom in the extraction of arteries and in the removal of those and in caution against fluxes of blood.
And some veins are cauterized at the neck behind two bones with two cauteries, immediately producing.
Chapter 13.
On the Cauterization of Old Tears.
When the tears of the vessels are old and accumulated and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head before, and it is verified that this is a superfluous flux of phlegmatic matter, then cauterize that with a pointed cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the commencement of watering caused by the vessels, and cauterize in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries behind both bones. And if you indicate an addition, then cauterize that on the entire side of the vessel above the extremity of the eyebrow with a small pointed cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the Cauterization of Foul Odor of the Nose.
When you medicate that with water which we have said in the division and does not perfect your medication, then prepare and give in drinking to the patient three nights; and raise his head, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery more gentle than an olive-tree cautery. And then cauterize that with a keyed cautery and two cauteries on both eyebrows behind the hair, a little.
And beware of the artery that you do not injure it.
And of the keyed cautery, this is the method.
Chapter 15.
On the Cauterization of Softening of the Eyelids of the Vessels.
When the eyelid of the vessel is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery of this lunar cautery; and this is its form.
And if you, cauterize that above both eyebrows a little with two cauteries in the entire partition, and then they will be elongated from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter 16.
On the Cauterization of the Eyelid of the Vessel when the skin is converted to the internal parts and punctures the vessel.
When the skin of the vessel is converted to the internal parts and punctures the vessel, cauterize in those places according to two manners, because either it is with iron or it is with combustible medicine.
If you cauterize with fire, command the patient to hold still that which reads the six skin layers thus as those which are worldly, until they are prolonged and enlarged; and if you puncture that which deviates from its proper place, then strengthen the vessels of him with a band so that it is not moved until the skin is born.
Since they are born and enlarged, then pause the head of the patient in the same place, and place a sign above the eyelid of the vessels of him with a tent, and signal that which is according to the figure of the leaf of myrtle, and it is the commencement of the proper signal of the skin.
And then pause with cotton in a bundle of wool or in a mucilage of ptilly above the vessel.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is its form.
And then cauterize above the figure which has been signified, little by little, in well-ordered motions, until the surface of the neck is combusted, which is thus as a leaf of myrtle, totally appearing properly.
And the signal of sanitation of the entire work is that you see the eyelid of the vessel already contracted and the skin of him elevated from the puncture of the vessel.
And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place a poultice on the affected area so that the wound may be healed. And then take care to apply an ointment inside so that it may be healthy.
Sometimes it returns to the skin for some reason, and then the eyelid is softened, so do another application of the cautery on the entire area, just as you had done previously.
Sometimes the skin is on the eyelid below, then cauterize that inside so it may be elevated to its natural place and be enclosed, and the skin does not puncture the vein.
Sometimes the cautery is a burning medicine that commands the patient to lift the skin inside so it may be prolonged and enclosed, and then make a paper template in the shape of a leaf of mint.
And then take soap made from congealed goose fat and living snake's water. I think there might be a mistake! The text you provided doesn't seem to make sense in the context of medieval medicine. So here's the water, and then mix those causes well, and make that into a fermentation so it may not be frozen; and then spread it over the paper which was made thus in the shape of mint leaves, and place it on one vein of both arms; and place below the vein, enclosed in albumen of egg white, and the head of the patient should be in the same position.
And place the finger on the medicine and apply a little of it, not too much, so that the patient feels the biting sensation of the medicine, because the biting sensation is in it just like fire.
And then as you will perceive that the bitter sensation is gone, then remove the medicine and wash your fingers; then as the biting sensation ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the vein with water; and then consider if sometimes the eyelid has been lifted thus as it has been washed away from the constriction of fire or incision, because then it will be; and if it does not return to that place where the medicine was not applied and is not denied until the operation is enclosed and the vein is constricted.
And then place on the affected area with a poultice in order to eradicate the root of the inflammation, and then take care to apply an ointment or another remedy so that it may be healthy.
And it is necessary for you, because of your operation, to keep diligent vigilance so that the remedy does not fall on the vein, and if the eyelid becomes softened after several days and some cause of the skin punctures the vein, then repeat your medicine on the place where the eyelid was softened, and properly thus as it was done at the beginning, and then apply it inside so that it may be healthy.
And this is the shape of mint leaves.
And you know that the veins of men are diversified according to magnitude and smallness, and thus according to this, your contraction is made.
And it will not be confused the way of direct treatment with that which was studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
On the cautery of fistula that is in the tear duct of the vein.
When you cure a fistula with water that we have spoken of in the divisions of the diseases and do not confuse your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head thus in the same position, and hold the head of some minister between the thighs in such a way that it may not be moved nor agitated by the seated head.
And then place the poultice infused with egg white or in a mucilage of ptilli over the vein of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which should be conical, thus as it is in the shape of a reed or a point of a wing, from one extremity to which the cautery was made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate inside to the other extremity. And if you want it to come out thus as you intended.
Sometimes the emperor orders that which is cooked is better for the entire work.
And then take the fistula if it is opened, and draw out the bloody serum and dry it. And if it is not opened, then operate on it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on the vein the cautery which was well ignited, and you have that in your hand a little away from the cautery of the vein at the bridge of the nose, so that it does not err with your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the vein and corrupt it.
And then at the beginning of the vein cautery, it is seen to enter into the bone; well; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then place on that affected area with a poultice and enclose it in an ointment exsiccated inside so that it may be healthy.
If it has been passing eleven days and there is no health, then stop using the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and is scraped according to what is convenient in the seventh chapter.
And it is another method of cauterizing the fistula, which previously mentioned doctors: then at the place of the fistula, make a hole and apply a subtle instrument in the shape of it; put in it a quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand firmly on it, so that the lead does not penetrate to the hollow of the patient; and be careful to apply it to the hollow of the patient's body or in albumen of egg white or in water, because the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it marvelously.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterizing and treatment, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a poultice of the nose and reduce the fistula to its proper place in the body of the nose according to how it will come into its own place.
Chapter 18.
On the cauterization of the fracture of the toes.
Wounds or cracks that occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
So when you treat those cracks as we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then ignite the small cutting cautery according to this form that is taught.
And it is the conquest of it according to the subtlety of the scalpel.
Then place it gently in those cracks until the cautery penetrates to the bottom of the cracks.
And then treat it with wax until it is healthy.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth there is an aposteme and then it breaks, and then it bursts, and then it becomes chronic, and correct the break and make a fistula, and then you treat it and do not deepen your treatment, then it is necessary to ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited thing in the poultice of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron ignites at the bottom of it, and afterwards make one or two wounds; and then treat it with what we have said about treatment until it is healthy.
And so if the ulcer is abscessed and healed, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and extract the corrupted bone according to how it will come into its own chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines and do not confide in them, then place the head of the patient in a straight position, and ignite the cautery in the form that will come forth, thus that you place the cotton on the tooth and insert it into the ignited cautery, holding your hand firmly so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be penetrated.
And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to how you want.
And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the decayed tooth is strengthened and the softened gum is toned up and the corrupted humidity is dried out.
Chapter 21.
On the cauterization of toothache.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or if there is cold or worm in it, or does not respond to medical treatment, then cauterize it according to two methods: either cauterize with a cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
Cauterizing with a cow's horn is to take a cow's horn and boil it in a kettle of iron, and then take it out and wrap it around the extremity of the tongs, and then dip it into the boiled horn, and place it on the aching tooth firmly until it is cooled down.
And then repeat it several times until the virtue of the fire penetrates to the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, dip a needle or a thread into the aforementioned horn, and place it on the aching tooth, and place it on the ignited iron until the iron penetrates to the bottom of the conquest of the tooth.
However, be careful with the cauterization by fire that you attend to the quantity of iron or of fire, and it is in the heart of some grossness and the acuteness of the fire does not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form that will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled down; and do this several times because the pain will be relieved or on that day or the next day.
And then the patient should receive the impression of that cautery, which will fill their mouth with good odor and hold it for an hour; and this is the form of the cautery.
You should cauterize at the point where you feel extreme pain, according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the tube:
Chapter 22.
On the cauterization of deformed limbs.
When deformed limbs are of a fluid and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines and you want the digestion of those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the form of which is this following, having two hollow extremities to introduce smoke through the cautery into the other extremity, and pause that ignition over that aposteme for a while, and another if it is indicated for that, until it reaches the root of the aposteme.
And if the aposteme is small, then pause the cautery according to the quantity of the aposteme, and leave it for three days and pause over the inflamed area in good odor until it is removed what the fire has consumed.
And then heal that wounded limb with tents and dressings until it is healthy.
Chapter 23.
On the cauterization of ulcers of the voice and of constrictions of the wings.
When humidity comes over the canal of the lung, and especially when that is with a complexity of completion, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that which is the root of the galleon in the predetermined place.
And beware that you do not reach the cautery to the galleon nor burn the coding of it, but only a little.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the spine in the posterior part of it. And the cautery of it should be shaped according to the previous method.
And then heal that which is preceding until it is healthy.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization of diseases of the lung and of coughs.
When coughs and lung diseases are of cold humors and the patient has no fever nor thirst and it is an old disease, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the furcula in the predetermined places, lengthwise and widthwise; and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between two nipples; and shape the cautery according to the previous form.
And if you wish, your cauterization should be pointed with the cauteries that are called points, the form of which is preceded in the pontication of pain of kidneys.
And point them until they reach those; and then heal that which is preceding, until it is healthy.
And now the cauteries have three ramps because cauterization is like that: in one way you can do three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter 25.
On the cauterization of stiffness that is at the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating cold humors and does not stop at the hour of its return, until it is in its customary place of returning, and then through a small movement it is dislocated thus that it is endeavored, thus as we have testified, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation primarily, and then the patient should be reversed over the two hips or over the sides; and then elevate the coding which is in the inner part of the citillic to the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
And then ignite the cauteries having two heads; and this is their form.
And then cauterize the coding until it penetrates into the other side; and you will find the figure of cauterization then with four heads of cauteries.
And some times it is adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
And then pause over the cauteries poured with salt water, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is at the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a shaped cautery or three pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healthy.
Chapter 26.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and humidity come into the stomach until it extracts its completion and is multiplied there, and if you continue the manners of cure and do not confirm, then it is necessary for the patient to be on their back with legs raised, and extend their hands and their thighs, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cautery below the chest for the quantity of a finger in a shaped cautery, and two cauteries below the two sides of the cautery, until the figure of the triangular cautery appears; and elongate between those that are not adjusted so they will make purging.
And if the depth of the cautery reaches the quantity of two thirds of the thickness of the scab on the knee.
And the figure of the cautery is added in this form, and if you want, make a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cautered at that point to whom this cautery brings fear: and it is that you feel on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want to hold, and then cautere that with a cautery at the points; and then take care of that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
On the cautery of the fetid fever.
When the fever is induced in the foot by coldness or humidity or gross ventilation until it deviates from its normal complex composition and is treated with the remedy that we have said and not comforted, then it is necessary to resupinate the patient on their bed, and feel with a probe three cauteries according to this form and this quantity measured on the foot below the hip bones, where one perceives the decubitus of home.
And let the space be which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the said finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right body.
And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery motion.
And if the quantity of water that is absorbed is equal to the quantity of the marrow of the spine of the knee, and it is not further adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them sit, who has already extended their thighs, and lifted their shoulders.
And it is possible for you to cauterie these cauteries with a cuticular cautery, when you are with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And beware that you do not proceed excessively in the cautery, and let the spine of the whole knee be absorbed so that it is absorbed throughout the body and penetrates into the intestines, because the knee here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the perforation of an abscess of the foot with a cautery.
When there is an ulcer or abscess on the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tendon, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient will feel grave trouble and pain are acute.
And if it is in the tendon of the foot, then the pain is greatly acute and many times the doctors are fatigued by the cure of it.
Therefore it is necessary that the patient be turned over on their bed; and then make a sign on the place of the abscess with a probe; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled like a rod, the form of which has been described on the previous page. And cauterie it with that cautery until the whole knee is burned, until it reaches the hip, until it scorches the sanious humor.
And then treat it for the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used unless the one who has studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the hands of which many maladies are known; however some experiments have been ventured upon this operation, however I will leave that to those who do not see us, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
On the cautery of ulcers.
The ancient cauteries of the roots of Aristology ulcers burn according to this manner of being a doer, and it is that which you take from the roots of Aristology, a long dry root that is found, and let it be of the thickness of the said finger.
And then submerge it in oil and expose it to the fire, and then cauterie it with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the fork and the neck; and there are two small cauteries below guiding, one slightly declining towards the part that is below the beard, and there are two cauteries where it declines between the fifth rib and the nipple, declining slightly towards the back parts; and there is another cautery in the middle of the foot, and another on the stomach, and three cauteries of the back parts; and there is a cautery at that place which is between the two shoulders, and there are two cauteries of the two sides of the foot, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And do not comprehend your hand with the cautery, but rather it should be in the manifest of the code in operation.
And thus I have described the ancient authors who are the ancient ones of men who use iron cauteries that resemble a ray and ignite it, and place it in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach the abscess and burn sanious humor, just as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
In this perforation, I do not use a pointed cautery, because it is not suitable for the time when the humor accumulates in the fistula, which does not heal.
Chapter xxx.
On the cautery of the worse (or "of the worst").
When you treat the worst part of the disease, as we have said about the treatment in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then cautery it in three ways, all of which are straight, one of which is to make three or four linear cauteries according to the length of the worse part, according to the shape of the cauteries on the foot, the shape of which has preceded.
And let there be a space of about a finger's width or a little more between each cautery, and the manner of the cautery should be the same as we have said in the cautery on the foot, namely, in an oblique direction.
And do not press your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be elevated above the two cushions.
And there is another way of cauterying, which is that you should ignite the cautery having two virtues, which causes we have said in the chapter on dislocation of muscle, and elevate the codena which is at the end of the worse part where it feels the pain of the patient's sinister side.
And let your elevation be the one that elevates the codena according to the length of the body, so that you make straight cauteries according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two virtues, igniting motion, in that entrance where they penetrate the codena on the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus you will have made four straight cauteries.
And if you wish, cautery with a cautery having three virtues.
And then you will cure the cautery better than to have tried to grasp or to hold for three days, because it is more comfortable that the other causes preceding in the treatment.
Chapter xxxi.
On the cautery of hydropsy.
Cauteries are not made on hydropsy itself, but rather in adjacent areas properly.
When you treat hydropsy, the methods of treatment are those which we have said in the division and do not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that those cauteries be four cauteries in the circle of the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and one cautery on the foot, and one cautery on the worse part, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery on the right of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the specificity of the codena.
And then leave the cautery open so that it can hold for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment then with the cautery as it is necessary for them to be added to the two intentions, and they will be fixed to their helper for health.
The shape of the cautery that is applied to the belly should be club-shaped according to what its shape was previously, and it is that which is applied to the back and should be olive-shaped according to its preceding form.
Chapter xxxii.
On the cautery of feet and thighs.
When the feet are apostemated in hydropsy and full of stagnant water, it is necessary to cautery the feet on the back of the foot at night, in a place that is between the auricular and anular, and elevate your hand over the cautery and do not press on it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return it at all, because the stagnant water resists.
The cautery is according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh a straight cautery at the extremity of the cautery cutter. And the cautery is according to the length of the thigh: one at the knee and the other at the middle place of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And then leave the open wound for a long time, so that some stagnant water resists from it.
And then treat them with those causes which we have said.
Chapter xxxiii.
On the cautery of the belly and intestines.
When the belly and intestines are full of cold and humidity inside, so that they weaken the vertebrae, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with those methods of treatment and do not confuse, and sometimes the patient suffers from exhibiting a cautery of virtue, then cautery it with a large cautery on the navel stomach according to what has preceded in the cautery of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four cauteries in the circle of the subtle navel, with a club-shaped subtle cautery; and a cautery on the alcantin above the great alloy, or two cauteries.
And if at times the exuberant humors and the patient tolerate it, then cauterize that over the perineum and over the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, because it is a perfect cure for juvenile gout, which does not err.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one of gross humors that corrupts or of corrupted humors, and they are cured with what we have said in the division and do not confer evil cure, then cauterize with three cauteries over the pus below the spine of the small and small triangular, and with a cautery above the umbilical region for two digits.
And if you suspect that their stomach is inflamed and their food is not digested, and their face sometimes appears apostemed, then cauterize it over the stomach with a large cautery according to what has been described; and with one cautery on the arm, and another cautery on their waist with a clave-shaped cautery, and leave the cauteries for some time open, and afterwards take care that they are healed inside.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of athelia, suitable for their removal.
When you remove athelia, then you ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row. Then insert the ignited cautery into that removed athelia, and finally touch the hand inside so that you bring the cautery to the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make that an option or two, because if the achievements are tropes, then cauterize some of them according to what we have recounted, and afterwards take care of those who confer benefits to their joints until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the buttocks, it is more beneficial in youth.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the nature of the patient's parts.
When the nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is desperate for it, then heal with a cautery.
Then when you have a fistula in the patient's nature, and it is ancient, corroding their sanity and corrupted humors, then that which is more worthy to be covered is that which proceeds with a subtle thread, and afterwards you will know the quantity of the depth of the said thread according to the previously mentioned subtlety.
Then ignite the cauteries that are assembled in a row. And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you introduce the thread.
And iterate over that cautery until those corrupted bodies are completely burned, one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessary need.
And beware of combustion of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it does not penetrate.
And afterwards take care of the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and you have removed from it the materials, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it is entirely cured.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting their bone, or it falls into those causes of which there will be remembrance in its place.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of the kidneys.
When in the kidneys there is pain due to cold or gross ventosity, and therefore the coyt of the patient's hip is weakened, then it is necessary that you cauterize that over the kidneys with a cautery on each kidney with a clave-shaped cautery from which proceeds the remembrance.
And strongly cauterize them according to the second small indication, so that three lined cauteries will come, and then they will be more beneficial in youth.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is debilitation and mollification in the bladder due to cold and humors, so that the patient's urine does not retain, then cauterize that in the part below the bladder, where the skin of the perineum begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side of it.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the notes of the pulse; and cauterize that with a cautery in the part below the lower back, or with two cauteries if it is necessary.
And let it be a clave-shaped cautery according to what has been described.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the matrix (or womb).
When the matrix is humid and swollen, and for this reason it is prohibited to take action, and the muscles are corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and it causes pain in the joints, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries in the circuit of the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and do cautery on the area above the back, or use two cauteries, and let the cautery be clavicular.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When humidity accumulates and is deposited in the ankle joint, and it causes effusion of the fluid in that place, and it is signified by the fact that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is touched in the boy's thigh.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient's ankle joint with a circular cautery, because you will have signified in the circuit of the joint similarly as it is revolved, and for this reason the joint falls into its proper place within the circle.
And let the cautery be the one that precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize with three cauteries in the olive-shaped great cautery.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the inspection of the entire code; and properly cure that which enters, so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 41.
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the ankle joint, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is cured with that which we have said and does not contradict, and that which is ancient, then it is necessary to free the patient from gross humors with foul-smelling pills or artificial ones or similar; and then cauterize accordingly.
And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: either cautery with burning medications, or cautery with fire.
It will be according to two scientific manners, one of which is that which cauterizes the area above the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and do so with good depth. And let the space be between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the said and if the olive-shaped or large cautery.
Some well-placed cauteries should be on the middle place above the head of the ankle because there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, there where the circle contains and burns the inspection of the entire code.
And this is the manner of cautery in every case when pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh above the place where the patient's pain environs; and with one cautery on the hip for four fingers' width below the most tender part.
And if the cautery is cutting, and let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of the inspection of the code.
And if the patient environs that the pain is extended into the place near the fingers of the feet, then cauterize there where it environs with three points or four, or more if it is necessary for that.
And if the patient environs pain being below the knee towards the thigh, then cauterize there with a cutting cautery.
And beware in all cauterization that you do not ultimately use the cautery so much that it burns nerves or great arteries, and that for this reason you are above the patient's bad nuisance or contradiction.
And you have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the hip and ultimately in the cauterization, and the burnt focus inflamed within so that the tumor reached the foot, and burnt and corrupted the entire foot. And then a strong solution of wine, and then death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And I will describe the wise men in the cauterization of ankle joint cauteries, of which this is the manner: make it similar to a circle of iron wire, whose circumference is the size of one palm; and let it be of seven orifices according to the thickness of one finger's bone or almost a little.
And let that circle be another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of the nail of the thumb; and those circles are used for two parts; and let their length be one nail or two nails, and make them decently appareled in iron margins fitting to the circles; and this is their form.
Then let it be ignited in the fire until it is red-hot and gives sparks, and then let it be placed above the ankle joint, the patient seated on a mat. Then burn with three red-hot cauteries in one go.
And leave it like that for three days; then plaster it with bandages and leave the open wound to suppurate for several days; and then heal it from the inside out so that it becomes healthy.
Disciples of Albucasis: oh, sons, we have used this type of cautery little, for fear of the regard of the ruler, and because we have rarely found those who regard it above him.
May the good cauteries be applied to him who suffers, and may they pierce the area of his pain.
May cauteries be medicines that adhere, so you make two circles having an armored perforation in which the iron point of the door's hinge is inserted; it is the length of the wall in the nudity of their sign, two nodes or those irons.
And if the space which is between almost the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and it is opened below and above, and it is that they contain themselves among their following this form:
And then stop on the partition of the water where the patient lies on the mattress, and comprehend your hand on the partition of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be warm little by little, and hold it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to feel the burning and the adjustment of it — because that burning feels like fire — until the burning ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and abstract the hot water from all the water in the water doucette.
And then leave it like that for three days and stop on that bandage until the blackness of the adjusted remedy remains, and leave it like that for several days, and correct his purging; this is the last stage in the treatment.
And then heal it from the inside out so that it becomes healthy.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or leg, make a statue of him in which he contains water according to what is done in the bathing tank.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkaline and non-extinguished burning of both hands, and truss them and stop in a new bowl of which the partition below is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into his vein.
And stop below the bottom of another bowl enveloped, and gather above that alkaline and non-extinguished burning of warm water which covers them for a finger, and then you comprehend them with the good compression of your hand, and leave the hole that descends from his warm water in the partition below to the enveloped bowl.
And then adjust all that water, and gather it above another non-extinguished burning and other alkaline renovating, because at that time it will be of much stronger acuity, which is administered in many operative actions of medicine and in the cauterization of the other members, because that operation makes fire.
And thus of the medicines some are those which are cauterized often, like this you will find and mix and burn with a wise art, and thus they are mixed.
And Gualia recounts of a man of the ancients the operation and the cure in which he was cured of pain from water and sciatic vein, and magnified much to be that of him, and says that there is no need for another cure, and because he is healthy for one go, thus I strongly recommend, because he was inserted in bath and thus he knew of that.
And it is that he took certain green certarragi, and if not found green, take fresh figs recently; and much was trussed with a few gray hairs and placed under the water where the pain is, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and so be laid.
And it was left for a duration of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels comfort from the adjustment.
And then put him in bath and then when his body is relaxed, insert it into the soil, because the pain ceases and he becomes healthy.
And you know that one should not cover how to use these medicines with cauteries unless it is for the evacuation of the body.
May I, Escorides, say that when the vein of the goat's head is cauterized, it is good for him; and it is the cautery in his following manner: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
And then take dry goat's head and inflame it with fire until it becomes carbonized; and then stop it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched out. And then iterate this, and do not cease doing this until the sensation of the burning reaches into the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cautery of cowpox.
Chapter 42.
On the cauterization of pain in toes.
Some toe pains are caused by many reasons, such as by injury or percussion or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, by infusion of cold and humid matter.
And cautery is not used except in this one special case which is made for the effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, cover, then evacuate the patient with small, fitted pillows and similar to theirs, which are made for the toes where the pain is three lines according to the width of them, because you will have a tent in each line or cauteries, more or less, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the strength of it.
And make a pointed cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four at the middle of the clave-shaped cautery, according to this form:
Chapter 43.
On the cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Many times this disease begins in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they stumble upon their structure, with elevation and limitation of movement.
And it starts in the back of the spine of the toes and fingers, which then begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
And so when you see this and want to prohibit it, then cauterize with that cautery which is circular in shape according to this form: that takes the cautery over the entire affected part of the spine, including.
And if you want, cauterize around the circle of the spine with a pointed cautery two lines or three. And the points are properly placed between them.
And then cure the place inward so that it is healthy with what we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is made by spasm of nerves.
Chapter 44.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And so how gout caused by cold is cured in many ways of cure and the pains are not removed, then they remain and need cauteries.
And it is that you should cauterize with evacuation around the circle of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
And make an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains penetrate into the teeth or other joints, and many times it begins there, then cauterize with three cauteries or four from the entire affected part with this olive-shaped cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed, which these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize with them and do not press too hard on your hand with the cautery beforehand, but only surround the specific area of the code.
And if the pains penetrate into the teeth and toes, then administer the cautery which we have said in the seventh chapter.
And if the pains are only in the hands as much, and it is called sciatica, then prick around the circle of the ankles thus as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick around the circle of the ankles above each finger and on the edge of the hand.
And if the pains penetrate deeply into the joints or muscles, then cauterize the affected areas of the entire joint.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is made with good regimen and the weakness is evacuated with this cautery, it will be healthy, God helping.
Chapter 45.
On the cauterization of fractures.
When a fracture occurs in the limbs and the intestines are torn apart from the cavity to the genitals, and this is the beginning of evacuation, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to rest his consumption for seven days and use gentle causes so that the wound heals in the seventh day.
And then follow the patient between your hands above the seventh toes, and command him to hold the seventh wing inward so that it is not torn or separated from the cavity or intestines.
And then return that to the ties of the fingers and sew with thread the rupture above the bone of the thumb, signaling the extremity of which it is similar to the circle of the sub-branches of the body.
And then ignite the cauteries of which this is the form:
until it is very red and has many sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery on that sign at your hand, making sure to hold it straight, and apply it to those parts of the pentaghnel joint within the middle of the duodenum; and if you do not succeed in the first application, try again with the other vein if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
And observe carefully the movement of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, lest it causes death or another great evil.
And know that when you apply the cautery, do not touch the bones, as this does not contribute to your operation.
And take care that the cautery for children is subtle according to their age and measure of theirs.
Then take care to dress the area of the cautery for three days with a bandage, until the scab from the burn is removed.
And then take care of those who have other wounds until they are healed.
The patient should sit on their back for 40 days, until the area is sealed and the plague is purged.
And take care to adjust the nourishment of the patient according to the length of time of their cure, which will strengthen their stomach, and ensure that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And then when it is desired to get up after 40 days, administer decently made liniment, and keep that for another 40 days.
And avoid excessive labor and replenishment of food and drink, and violent vomiting, because when one uses this entire regimen of healing, they will be entirely healthy.
And you will direct the healing of ruptures in other parts of the belly, and so from the beginning, and you want that it does not become worse, then cautery the rupture with a red-hot iron according to its quantity, and it is that which is expelled from the codena thus like the third part of it; and then take care of what we have said, and do not adjust.
And you will discover some first principles that the rupture is cautered with a triangular iron according to this form, because it is marked on the tender part:
and it is a paused line that goes for the width in the lattice below, above the rupture, and another line underneath; and place your hand with a claw-like cautery, but the first cautery is better and more gentle.
Chapter 46.
On the Cauterization of Hernias.
When pain is felt in certain members due to falling or percussion and it persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cautery with a pointed cautery.
And it is the cautery of each member according to its size and smallness, and its virtue and development, and location of hernia and pain.
Therefore, if one is not healed by the first cautery, it is so; and if not, then apply again to him the cautery; because it is customary with those pains that they are punctured in a member adjacent to the one to which you approach, so that you know that those parts are cautered until the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
On the Cauterization of Leprosy.
The leprous ulcers are cautered with a great judgment, and it is better if the species of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
And thus as you want to cautery that, consider if the leprosy is common and as it is cured with what we have said in the division and not delayed, neither is this, and fear about the patient that the corruption comprehends all of their body and all its complexity, then cautery that on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and one below it, and one on the forehead to the end of the hair; and two above the ears; and one behind, on the nape or service.
And finally place your hand with the cautery a little inside so that it impresses a small impression on the bone, and then the scabs are dislodged, so that the expiration of gross vapors is alleviated from him; and cautery on the worst part according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then it is necessary to cautery with those cauteries which we have mentioned on the head; and one cautery on the extremity of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheek, and two cauteries on each vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the hip, and one on the hip, and two on each thigh, and one on each ankle, and two on each heel, and one on each knee, and two on each muscle, and two on the tendons of the sole foot; and cautery on all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each talon of the soles of the feet, and on the flexions of their hands.
And beware of the nerves that lie above the ankle, lest you disturb them.
Some veins are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more you adjust cauteries, the more you will benefit and confer; and know that the patient does not have pain from the cautery, thus as they have said, for the body of the patient is already stunned.
And it is necessary that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints, as is predetermined by the specific iron instruments.
And then heal the cautery with a warm cloth at first and another treatment within, so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 48.
On Cauterization of Stupor.
When a member is stiff or numb and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, and it is not healed, then you cautery that stiff member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let the cautery enter into the narrowness of the channel of the code a little. And then heal that one by applying an ointment within, so that it may be healthy.
And some veins are cauterized for a certain stupor that goes to the hands and feet, and to the vertebrae of the back, and it is the removal of the stupor that damages those nerves which govern that member.
There is no pressure on this except what is known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves to the entire moving body.
Chapter 49.
On Cauterization of Ulcers that are Morphea.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to the application of medicinal ointments, then you cautery above it with a pointed cautery a little according to the quantity of the specificity of the channel within, so that the whiteness and color of it may be restored, and its color may be changed.
And then heal that one with warm cloths and lentil wraps with rose oil and leaves of arnagrosa, and blood of dove or blood of pigeon, each one a part and all are mixed together, and then place a clean cloth and put it on the area within, so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 50.
On Cauterization of Cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you want to remove that tumor, then cautery it with a circular cautery in its circuit, thus as it is turned around.
And I will show you that it is cauteryed with the last cautery in the middle place; I have not seen this, because I think it is ulcerated, and also I have seen some veins.
And it is afterwards necessary that it be cauteryed in its circuit with a circular cautery thus as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Chapter 51.
On Cauterization of Abdominal Swellings.
When some abdominal swelling is delayed in maturity, and it is because of the superfluous fat that makes it, or because of the patient's state, since it is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturity of the abdominal swelling; then cautery it in its circuit with many small pointed cauteries; and afterwards leave it alone, for it will fasten in maturity.
If you want to make a perforation of it with a cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form; and pause it in the middle place of the abdominal swelling within, so that it penetrates the channel.
And if you cautery in that place which is below, so that the body of the arm may be alleviated; and then heal it within, so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 52.
On Cauterization of Corrosions.
Corrosion is a corrupting ulceration in the member, which corrodes it thus as fire consumes dry wood.
Then if you touch that corrosion in the place where it suffers from cauteries with fire, then ignite clave-like cauteries, many small ones, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where there is corrosion.
And then cautery it entirely, so that you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it.
And then leave it alone for three days, and apply a mixture of oil and herbs on the cauteryed places, so that all scars may be eradicated and all corruption.
And then heal it with fleshy ointments that generate flesh.
If after three days the flesh is born healthy in which there is no corruption, good; if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains corrupted in the corrupt places.
And corrosion is treated with some old medicines with sharp medicine, because that is half in place of cautery. Maybe it's better to cauterize at a focal point of pus to remove the juvenile humor.
And you have already said the treatment of his medicine in the division, and therefore take that one which has authority from his auras.
Chapter 53.
On the cauterization of wounds and other similar things.
Mortified wounds are found in the lower parts of the foot affected by gout, which is a gross, inward cause, which burdens the foot; and one should cauterize in two ways, namely, cauterizing at a focal point and cauterizing with hot water.
Maybe it's better to cauterize at a focal point, which is like igniting the cautery with a similar pain to a burning, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the entire affected part, and should have subtle margins.
And then stop that ignition on the wound, and then return your hand to the cautery in the circle of the wound until the cautery penetrates to the depth of the wound. And leave it like that for three days until it begins to form a scab. And then apply a plaster made with malicious-looking herbs saved in salt, and leave the plaster on it for a night, because it will eradicate its roots.
And then heal the place infected with generating flesh until it is healthy.
And if it doesn't convert, and mortified wounds appear on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you administer to those places with hot water cautery, and take a cannula of iron or burning heat, and stop it on the wound; and put a small amount of hot water in the cannula, and hold your hand, and you return it to compression of your entire hand, and it should be inserted into the margin of the cannula at the root of the wound, and then release the hot water through the opening of the root of the wound; and wait for the patient a little while for an hour, and then remove it, because the wound with its roots will be eradicated.
And thus do it in those places until you have treated all the affected parts of their body.
And then heal those places where the roots of the wounds have been eradicated, and the flesh will regenerate healthily.
Chapter 54.
On the cauterization of trembling.
When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or fever from a cold cause, or another similar cause, then it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra a cautery; and cauterize on their feet, and on their stomach, cauterize with olives.
And the trembling of it is relieved and the health of the affected part is restored.
Chapter 55.
On the cauterization of accidental injuries to the body.
When the body is affected by accidental injuries, and pus-filled wounds appear which are made of gross, corrupt materials; therefore, at the beginning of the treatment, it is necessary that it be cauterized over every head of the fistula with a subtle cautery made of myrtle, the extremity of which is extended to a focal point; or with a root of long  erestology; or with a slow cautery.
And mortified wounds are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they are not increased, and the superfluous flesh is dissolved, making them healthy.
Maybe it's better that this be done with evacuation through bloodletting.
Chapter 56.
On the cauterization of fluxes of bleeding wounds due to incision of arteries.
Mortified wounds are found to have fluxes of bleeding arteries which are incised by the plague that has devoured, or by the incision of apostems or cauteries of the limb, and it seems difficult to remove that.
Therefore, when you reach that point, then you should hold it with your hand at the orifice of the artery, and stop it there until the mortified wounds are staunched, so that the fluxes of bleeding cease, and do not flow out.
And then stop at the focus of the cauteries with olive oil and grapes, for a few moments, and exhale over them until they are ignited.
And then take from them a small or large amount according to the place and the plague in which the artery is broken, on that vein firmly, so that you may restore the orifice, and return the cautery until it is bound and restrained, and stops the bleeding.
And if the bleeding is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you restore the orifice and extract the cautery, then take another cautery carefully from the cauteries which are prepared in the focus, and thus do not cease to do this until the bleeding is restrained.
Take care that you do not confuse the nerves here, and that another evil comes over the patient besides this one.
You know that when the arterial flow is healthy, it's not possible to restrict the blood in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, if not one of four manners: either by cautery as I have said, or by extraction when it's not extracted, because when the extremities are burned they are restricted and the blood is restrained, or that it be tied with a tight ligature, or that it be placed on medicinals which virtue is to restrain the blood; and they are strengthened in the pulvinar constriction.
Maybe he who administers decent restraint of the ligature and structure, and strictures drops or by position of burning causes and similarities, does not compare unless it's bitter.
Maybe if it happens to be at some point and there is no doctor present or medicine, then work on the aforementioned indication over the orifice of that vein as I have said, and intend to great constriction within so that the blood is stopped from the superior part of the plague, and above the artery it's not rejuvenated; and above the artery it's aspurgated with water frequently of much great frequency within so that the blood is congealed and thickened; and maybe you will find out whether there is need to cautery or medicine.
Of incision and perforation and vein section and of phlebotomy and of wounds and of their similarities.
I have said in the first chapter all about the malady in which cautery is convenient and comburent medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for the forms of cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters of the subordinate nature of the head towards the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter for that method, so that it may be helpful to the one who seeks it, then above what he will have demanded.
And therefore I begin here, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter it is about the fear of what is in the first chapter of cautery.
And for that which you want to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuated catz, evacuation which is with blood and in which there is life from the aspersion of the vein or incision over the apostema or perception of exit or purification of the wound or extraction of arrow or beginning of rock and their similarities. And all those things are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the end of their evacuation, death.
And I warn you that upon you may not fall into the situation in which there is danger, because some evacuated causes make you manner of men with many manners of maladies. And of them it is certain that they flee from their malady and it is far from them the death, and thus for the vehemence of what they find of their malady, and for the length of their malady, and in the malady it is fear which means death.
And of those it is that which gives to your son to have and said, you hope for his health, and the following malady is pernicious.
And therefore do not think that you consent to that which comes to you from this manner; and your caution should be greater than confidence and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause about it unless with certain science that verifies it for you, and to which you perceive successful outcome.
And you will be established in the cure of all your maladies of prognosis and indication of it which is converted health, because in that there is aid for you on acquiring fame and memory, of praise and of glory.
Oh, sons, God inspire your understanding and does not lack direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this distinct chapter according to the chapters that precede in the chapter of cauteries, on the cure from head to feet, so that it may be helpful to you what you demanded of it and of which you have need.
First Chapter.
On the cure of water that is contained in the head of children.
You know that this malady has many evacuated cases among the children of the infant state and when the nurse strengthens the head of the infant with her livelihood.
And some evacuated cases happen because of a hidden cause which is not known.
Maybe you have not seen this malady except in children; and all those whom I have seen are caught by death, and thus it is to me a sorrowful work in them.
And I have seen that a child's head which was full of water swelled, and the child's head was so magnified within that it could not hold itself because of the greatness of its head, and maybe the humidity made it grow until it died.
And this humidity or moisture is added between the codeina and the bone, or it is added beneath the bone over the kyphosis.
Where the operation is performed if the humidity is between the codeina and the bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make an incision in a suitable place on the head with a fissure in the latitude, and let the length of the fissure be two inches so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the form of the spatula.
And then if the humidity is more augmented and the abscess is larger, then there are two fissures here, according to this method.
And if the humidity is beneath the bone, it is signified that you always close the commissures of the head, utterly divided from all partition and the water is squeezed out when you comprehend that in the same tie and to the internal parts, and it does not appear to be what you are imagining. It is necessary to make an incision in a suitable place on the head with three fissures according to this method.
and then extract the entire humidity; and then strengthen the fissures with draps and plasters; and then apply something on top for six days, and then dissolve the liament and cure the plague with tents and poultices, and strengthen the head in equality; and nourish the patient with dry victuals of little humidity until the member is comforted and healthy.
And it is another method of incision, which considers how to appear the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because some veins are more in the occipicii, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and then attend to the incision so that the abscess appears and the replenishment of water, and finish according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and avoid those veins of blood and mud, lest the patient perish from that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter following.
When there are many catarrhs or wounds on the heels or on the feet, and it is antiquated, and it does not confer on that the cure of medicines, then the last cure is to make an incision in those two arteries.
And then it is necessary when you want to incise those that the patient's reason loses its head, and then fix the place with a rough drap to reveal the arteries, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some drap; and then consider the pulse of the vein; and the places of whatever is above the places which are near the aurelles, and they hide until some homes.
And then sew over the artery with a tent, and then incise whatever is in the spatula of whatever part is about to be incised, and it is for the latitude of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula beneath the artery and turn it to make an incision in the upper parts.
And let the length of the incision be two digits adjusted, because when a vein is incised, the blood is released in a pulsating egress, which beats frequently before it ceases.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then it is necessary that you measure from the aurelhe the quantity of space of three digits, and then sew with a tent, and finish within the bone.
And then it is necessary to stop the bleeding of the blood which is six ounces. and far from getting more or less, and all that is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the patient and the replenishment of the artery of it.
And then consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone some cause of kyphosis, then incise that so that an abscess does not form unnecessarily.
And then strengthen the plague with plasters and liaments of drap from it, and then cure that in poultices until it is healthy.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When there are many accidents of emigrational antiquity or chronic wounds, due to humidity and quality in the lactiferous temples, or an old vehement and similar thing to those, and it is medicated with the methods of cure of medicine and that does not confer, then we have spoken about these maladies extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those thus as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient's reason loses the skin which is in the temples; and it tends to the apparent artery in the temple because it is shown to you by the sieve-like pulse, and it is hidden until few homes due to vehemence of friction.
And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some drap; and then fix the place with a rough drap or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you. And then you take the spatula in the form that this question is about: And then you scratch the code with a facilitator that pervades into the artery; and then get in there with an instrument and extract it from the underlying parts so that you extract it from the code and discover it from the tunics which are already there, of the entire affected part.
But if the artery is subtle, then envelop it with an extremity of the inch, and then incise it into a part according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are elongated and constricted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not pour out completely.
And then evacuate the blood from the vitiated veins. within three.
And if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you ligate it in two places with a double thread of hemp or cord, and do not touch the putrid dregs within the consolidation of the wound and prevent blood flow.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; and do it at that hour or then another hour.
And if you want, cauterize it with a cautery within the bone or with a cutting cautery so that the extremities of it are incised, and stay in place of that same wounded part.
And it is better work because the patient has fever or is of complex constitution; since cautery is one of those causes that help to finish the ending humidity, and therefore it is better in youthful age.
And it is necessary to extract the arteries that fill the place of ancient wound, and they are placed over the decently made poultices, and then be cured with secret medicines that make the flesh and calcify within so that it may be healthy.
And if meanwhile you are working on another wounded area, then you touch to restringe that blood, or with a cautery, or that fills the place of the wound, and strengthen your hand within so that the blood is restrained. And if none of those causes is present to you, then pause the tie on the place so that the blood is congealed, and wrap the place with water of vehement coldness so that the acute pain rests, and be strengthened according to what is necessary.
And that which is more suitable in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, because you have touched the two places with tension, and stop sometimes, much ignorance, until they penetrate to the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that it is elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated at all with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the sharpness of the two points together. But perhaps if you sharpen the sharpness of the two points it is better, because if you are skilled with two points properly on each wound, and do not incise the flesh with velocity.
So when they are in that condition, heat from the fire is held in them and the flesh is more easily abscessed.
And this work is better in all works and most gentle.
And it is the space which is between two points, according to the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Fourth chapter.
On the cure of bodies of acute and acidic ulcers of the eyes.
When the ulcers are acidic, and it is the body of those veins which are above the head of the cap before, and do not find in that any cause of medical cure, and sometimes the face of the patient already enrogeses and feels in the sieve of ambulation like if it were an ambulation of ants, and the eyes of that one are extinguished, humbled thus that already their skin is constricted, and the eyelids are scabbed by the sharpness of tears, the ancient masters have hidden themselves in the cure of those through this operation, and they do not number that cure among the sparse.
And it is that you command the patient to rub their skin which is on the sieve of the front, and then incise into the front three fissures equally distant according to the length of the front. And if the length of the fissure falls into two digits: one fissure is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle place of the front, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other part.
And beware of the incision of the arteries which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuity of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is adjusted to the quantity of three digits exactly.
And if you have a piece of spongy apparatus or secret drawers very much with which they extract the blood.
And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it: That it is from the division of the temples into the second incision. Extract the whole cord that is between two incisions at the symphysis, which is above the bone, and then make an incision from the middle of the incision into the second incision. And then insert this spatula into the first incision and introduce it into the other opening with another instrument called a cutter, which has one part that cuts and another part that does not cut.
And stop the blade of that cutter from reaching the adjacent flesh of the cord, and the blade of the lion's tooth does not reach the bone, and fill in what has penetrated to the middle fissure, and dissect all those veins that descend from the head to the heels.
It is better to continue the incision up to where the cord appears, and then make an incision in the middle fissure into another fissure.
And since the flow of blood is considerable in quantity, express the places of the blood clots that have congaled.
And then stop in each hot fissure of the moist cloth, and stop over those swollen pustules that are inflamed with venom and oil, and beware that no aposteme is generated from a bad ulcer.
And on the third day, apply the ligature and administer a great infusion of hot water or decoction, and then heal with basilicon ointment and rose oil, and other things that are being applied to cure the sores.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of ulcers caused by catarrh and descending from the divisions of the head.
When there comes catarrh and it continues, and the patient's thighs are somewhat extended, and already their gaze is debilitated, and their eyelids are ulcerated and because of that their skin is affected, and in the front of the head there is acute pain and consequent inflammation, then we know through this accident that the catarrh does not come from many veins of the divisions above, but rather proceeds.
And the best cure for these is this: order the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in a middle place of the forehead, a small one for the width (and begin with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and it should be an incision into the bone; and extend your hand from the lacrimal bones of the temples which are swollen from mastigation), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or absorbent cloth, and then replace it between the two lips of the fissure with a moist cloth or absorbent linen. And then strengthen underneath with swollen pustules that are inflamed with venom and oil, so that no aposteme is generated from a bad ulcer.
And when you see that the aposteme has already diminished, then it is necessary to scrub the bone until it reaches the newborn flesh, and then heal with a regiment of desiccative powder which makes the flesh dry, thus as if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony and mix them, and make a plaster and apply it to these sores on the native flesh.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment of what falls into the ears.
The total cause that falls into the ears is one of four species, whether it is mineral peyra or a cause similar to peyra, thus as iron and vein, or it is from a plant thus as cinder or fava, or it is a fluxible cause thus as water and venom agree and their semblance, or some beast.
And then when peyra falls into the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not adjust nor believe in the ear, and stop the ear at the sun, and if it is peyra, then distill it into some oil of violet or sisami, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the stirring with conditi, and open the nostrils to receive the event of stirring. And then stop in the circuit of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the divisions above, because many evacuated matters are forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not evacuated, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtle, of which this is the form:
And if it is forgotten in the gesti, well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with an instrument subtle of few duplications.
And then if it is not forgotten for that, then make a canal of silver and introduce the extremity of the canal into the trunk of the ear and close the environment of the canal with wax and oil mollified so that nothing gets in except the canal. And then extract with the strong ventilation attraction, because many evacuated matters are gathered with water that we have recounted.
But if it is not forgotten in this manner, then take alum bat or prepared vessel apparatus with which the wings are pressed together a small quantity, and stop that at the extremity of the ray, and then envelop it decently paused. And then you will insert that into the tube of the ear to facilitate, and then extract the earwax due to humidity.
So if it is not forgotten in all the causes that we have recounted, then you will touch that dentated area where an abscess or spasm is developing.
And the manner of touching that is to start by cleansing the patient's vein of phlegmatic humor and extracting the blood according to the manner of his vertigo, and then you will make a circle between your fingers and convert the ear towards the upper parts, and find a small fissure in the root of the ear from which the greyness of it is coming out. And it is the lunar-shaped fissure that leads to the stone, and, the stone being removed, you can then use an appropriate instrument; and then close the fissure at that hour with velocity, and cure it until it is healthy.
And if the cause residing in the ear is one of the fats that grows and becomes inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey your own judgment, then take a subtle spatula according to this form. and administer to that the absorption of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
And do not think that it is humidified by the vapor of the ear, and place it in small pieces, and propose to extract them with the onyches or subtle gestures, or as if by inscizio, as we have said, because the extraction of it is alleviated.
But in the water that has entered into the ear, because the patient uses sternutation at the beginning, and fills the entire ear with a lot of vile matter, and pours over that ear in which there is water, and if it is forgotten, well; and otherwise, then take three or four stones and place them according to the length of the finger, and cauterize them in the focus of a small fire, and the patient inserts one of them into the tube of his ear and sounds above one of the parties and percusses with another stone on the stone that is inside the ear. So it does not stop until all the water has been forgotten.
So it does not stop until all the water has been forgotten. And already the water will be forgotten, and you will take pieces of paper or of cotton. and place one extreme end of it in the ear and extend the other extreme end into the fire until it is burned, the wax of it.
And then put another cotton and do it so many times until all the water is forgotten, and draw that out with a cannula as it has been said about the extraordinary stone.
But in the extraction of the beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small thing, thus pierce and to its semblance, cure it thus as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size which causes apparition at the sense of the vessel, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and onyches, and the cause of it is more light than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
But in the extraction of a worm engendered in the ear, when you cure it with water as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not confound your cure, then it is necessary that you expose the ear to sunlight.
And so if any cause of worms appears here, then extract it with gestures or subtle onyches, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula strongly stretched and amplified from which this is the form of it. And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can bear; and then suck strongly with water for a strong suction, and do it many times, until all the worms are forgotten.
But if you do not obey your own judgment, then operate and close in the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been experimented on by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations.
And this is your effusion which you pour out medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form. And make that of silver or of copper, strongly stretched, in which there is a small tube, and placed thus.
And so it is how they fill what is in the cavity of the cannula, which will be necessary here. And if you want, take the rod and wrap it decently with wax at the extremity of it, and then put oil in the cavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want to put in the cannula — and that is in the ear —, and then insert the rod with wax thus and express your hand so that the compression is tempered until the oil is expelled from the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil dripping.
And it is necessary that the auricle be scarified with a small focus. Beware that the cause which you distilled in the auricle is not too frequent, because auricle medicines do not suffer it.
Chapter 7.
On the treatment of ulceration of the auricles.
Some evacuated ulcers on the sides of the belly of pregnant women are not perforated, and it happens in some homes, ulceration in the flesh of the auricle due to a plague or carnal wound; and this ulceration is made in the preceding trauma of the auricle which does not consent to healing, and some evacuated ulcers are on the outer parts.
And that which happens in the preceding trauma of it, which does not consent to healing, is in the major dispositions of difficult sanitation.
And in that which follows, you should pause the auricle of the patient towards the sun and regard it in that. And then if an apparent suppuration occurs, observe carefully with a subtle spatula the form of it:
If the extremity of it is where the latitude is small, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the spatula should be of two gentle lengths so that it does not cause harm to the auricle.
And then if the ulceration is born from flesh in the auricle or in its flesh, then you should make subtle incisions and vigorously facilitate entry so that all the flesh is removed.
And if the ulceration is in the preceding trauma of the auricle, then take a subtle razor and scalpel that place with a small focus, and then put it in the flesh of the auricle.
And then if you have sensed suppuration in that which the patient's atrophy has facilitated, due to the gravity of absorption, it forces the oppression of it to be facilitated; and beware that you do not harm the nerves of the auricle.
And then pause on the auricle, drap it with linen according to the quantity of the width of the bandage which you have enveloped in Egyptian unguent; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or take some water and pour it into a bowl and pulverize over the bandage and use it to anoint; and if the auricle is about to be apostemated, then beware that you extract the water and permute it with another water which you have enveloped in cerate so that it is done with roasted oil, until it is apostemic caution; and then cure it until it is healthy.
Moreover, if a flow of blood occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and pause it on the auricle, and use another cure which restricts the flow of blood, which is stated in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
On the treatment of athelia which occurs in the eyelids.
Athelia which occurs in the eyelids of some eyes is humid, some evacuated ulcers are dry.
Then beware that you hold those with tenacious or pointed nails, and sharpen them to the root of their roots, and then pause on the affected places thoroughly.
Moreover, if pain with a flow of blood comes, then you should cauterize those with a subtle lancet-like cautery.
And the best cauterization is to pause on the incisions and too evacuated ulcers that return when some cause of their roots remains; and when they are cauterized in focus, those roots are consumed and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment of cataracts that come to the eyelids of the eyes.
Some evacuated motes dwell in the eyelids of the eyes for some cause which is assembled to grandeur in its strength and hardness, and thus grandeur is appealed.
And it is an addition of gross humidity in the upper eyelid and underneath.
Then the operation on them is that you consider then if the grandeur is proceeding in it from what appears of the eyelid and is magnified to the whole part; and the cause of it is lassitude.
Then make a fissure above it for the width, and then scrape it from the whole part to facilitate evacuation, and then suspend it with a pointed instrument and absolve it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and cure it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not overcome evil through that because the unction of it restores and incarnates.
And if the grandeur is declining to the deep parts of the eyelid, then you will evacuate the eyelid and suspend the grandeur with a pointed instrument, unless you indicate an incision, and prepare it from the whole part, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, that will not be noticed in any cause.
And then apply the treatment, wash the wound with salt water; and take care of the area where the disease is entrenched so that it may be healed.
Chapter 10.
About the treatment of abscesses under the eyelid.
Abscesses are grayish in color which are generated in the membranes of the eyelid, and they increase especially in children, aggravate the eyes of those who have them, and cause them to avoid the brightness of the sun because of the pain that is felt by them.
And for this reason you will often see them shading their eyes all the time, and sleeping with their eyelids half-closed, which have been covered in inflammation, and there is a threat of apparent aggravation in the eye; and when you press on the area around the veins, you feel the aggravation entering into it.
And some manner of operation is in that which the patient pauses his evil humor in the vein, and then pause to draw off the fluid and of the hot circle, according to the quantity it contains of arthritic matter from the whole affected part, and then pause to apply it to the area and press on the veins of the entire circumference, and then finish in the middle of that humidity at a certain point incident in the fissure, and the fissure is not larger than the one made in phlebotomy.
You will find in the preceding chapter that you should insert the entire code into the vein so that you may reach the arthritis, because in the most disposed processes arthritis proceeds through a fissure according to the form of white crust.
Then extract that humor with the fluids which you have enveloped between the veins of the affected parts beforehand and revolve it between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to touch the fissure so that the fluid does not reach the eye and descends into it.
But if the arthritis does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then you should adjust in the fissure a small facilitated humor until it processes the arthritis; and then extract that humor as we have said; and then submerge the fluids in water and vinegar and place them over the area and strengthen those humors with poultices.
And then it is necessary to filter salt and pause it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity may be absorbed.
And then treat it until it is healed.
But if there are aposteme abscesses in the area, then treat them with emplasters of cedar until they are healed.
Chapter 11.
About methods of touching the eye.
When on the eyelids of the eyes there are natural and ancient adjustments, then those who have them in their eyes and become accustomed to ways of evil and thus cum lacrimal fluids and mollification of the eyelids and web, until that becomes a cause of destruction of the eye which is called touching the eye, and it can be treated in four ways: either by cautery with a focus; or with acute medicine according to what has been said in the chapter on cauteries; or it is done by touching with an incision and suture; or with canes as you have already heard.
And then it is necessary that you pause the evil humor in the vein; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is converted, good; and otherwise, insert a needle in the area where there is faithfulness of the affected part below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate into the faithfulness above, and that is — near the edge of the eyelid where the natural adjustments are — near the adjustments, and pull out the faithfulness to the upper parts above the eyelid, and convert it into a ray.
And then finish in the affected part within the eyelid below the natural adjustments with an incident fluid of the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal; and then extract the faithfulness and pause beneath the eyelid small poultices of cotton or cloth, and then place a thread over the eyelid in a tent-like shape, and it is thus like the figure of a leaf of myrtle.
But it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity of elevation of the eyelid, because that has been diversified in men, because of those who are born with a great quantity of faithfulness from the eyelid according to the quantity for which the eyelid is mollified.
And then finish with the fluid over the two lines which have been marked, and beginning from the major lacrimal into the minor lacrimal. And if your fissure is near the natural adjustments thus like the large tumor of the king.
And then place the ounce in one of the two angles of the code, and then excoriate that entire thing, and then adjust with a subtle thread the two labia with wool or faithfulness of wool, and absorb the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the faithfulness over the two eyelids for some visionary causes, if you want to do that, and otherwise, do not cure.
And then leave the stitches on the wounds for three or four days, and then take care to remove them.
If you want, leave the wound with its stitches, and take care that it dries and strengthens, because the swelling is lifted from the sign of the wound and its aggravation; a better stitch is thus achieved. And so you will then dismiss the ancients' taxes.
Greater emperor's advice is sought regarding the patient, and it is of good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another manner in taxation, and it is that you place on the swollen figure thus as fuel of mirty, and then elevate the swelling by three separated and gathered inches according to this form:
But if it is not possible to do so, take the inches, and that which is not swallowed, then take a needle in which there is a thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other end near the larger lacrimal duct, and the end according to the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between the two ties of the threads equally, and then elevate your hand in elevation, elevating the entire code above which there is a sign thus as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound to stitching, and take care that it enters so that it may be healthy.
But if there is an abscess from your incision or your fracture, then that abscess is to be cleaned and it seems similar, and it is purified.
And some veiled intentions are hidden in the swelling that the wise men have converted, therefore you should use them in that which we have said of incision; but stitching is sometimes more artificial.
The ancients' taxes follow according to this form: and it is that you convert the swelling and divide the figure which is defined according to what has been recounted; and then for art, make two channels or two subtle stars of which the longitude is according to the longitude of the swelling and the latitude of theirs is smaller than the latitude of the spatium. And you have already incised in the extremities of certain divided parts, where you hold the threads.
Then add some subtlety under that which superfluously flows from the swelling of the vein, and constrict the channels of certain divided parts with a strong structure, and leave it like that for several days, because the code for the strict structure will be denied and it will be forgotten until you can put it back in place.
But if it is delayed, then cut the vein with the scalpels, and then take care of the wound until it is healthy.
So when it is consolidated, the swelling is elevated and the skin does not sting.
And this is the method of making two channels which you will do according to this form: and it has the quantity of longitude and latitude neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
On the elevation of stinging skin in the vein with a needle when the skin is hard.
When the skin is unnatural, hard and rough and stinging the veins, then the operation on it is that you take a subtle needle and pause in that thin thread of silk and lion, and then adjust the extremities of it and move subtly in some manner. And it is the longitude of the threads of a quantity of one palm.
And then you will compose another subtle thread below it in brief, and adjust the extremities of that if you wish.
And then stop the patient's bad humor in the tie, and it is proper of the sun for your work to be declared, because it is a subtle and minute operation.
And then introduce the needle into the root of the adjusted skin which has need of ingenuity, and make it penetrate the swelling firmly until you extract it from under the natural skin.
And then pull the skin until underneath and introduce it into the alloy, and be the skin one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand until the skin is forged in the alloy in the swelling with the natural skin.
But if it is not forged in the alloy and the skin is not joined, you will forge the alloy to the parts below with the thread which you have composed in that, until the alloy is joined from the upper trauma.
And look at that in the vision of the vein, because then you will forge the alloy and the thread, and grasp something and close the vein, and leave the closure for two days or three, until the skin adheres to its own place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a long skin of natural skins, and it is elevated in that, or that which is left until it is lengthened properly in some space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter 13.
On the treatment of evacuating the humor which is seen in the swelling beneath.
When the veins are inflamed in the eyelid, and it is opposed to the contraction of the eyebrow when it contracts inward, either on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the wound or from scarring or cauterization, and it is called leporina, and this inflammation is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of the wound or from scarring or cauterization, or for the resemblance to their bad circulation.
Perhaps the manner of operation in this case is that you perform that consolidation and separate the lips from it, and pause there where it is between them a kind of layer of dressing, and tie them together so they are healed.
And do not cover that you use for the cure of it from the causes which are external, constraining; because if you do so returns to inflammation worse than never having had healing.
Use in that case the causes which mollify thus with fenugrec, and immerse it in the water in which there are mixed altaea and essence of it, or enguient dy aquilon, which is liquefied in some of the oils, and submerge it in that mixture, and cure it in that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perform all together so that nothing remains unconsolidated according to the form that was established at the beginning.
And this operation which we have described is not but a certain rectification of the inflammation that does not return the form of the place according to what was previously.
Chapter 13.
On the cure of inflammation which is made in the eyelid below.
This inflammation which is made in the eyelid below, which is naturally called vertadierament inflammation; and it is either a natural one or an accidental one.
But accidental ones are caused by wounds or by scars or by cauterization or by other similar things.
And the method of operation for it is that you take a needle in which you make a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread penetrates into both extremities of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew it with the needle, and insert it into a spacious spatulum. And then if it returns to the figure of the eyelid as it should be; otherwise, take the thread and pause it in the figured fold, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the side of the lower eyelid.
And they are the extremities of the two fissures at two angles of the incision, which was made until they converge, and it is from their made angle until when they gather together it forms the figure of them.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then lift the flesh there for the quantity that is the size of the lower part of it, which closes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with the thread of flax; and then cure them with what we have said about the mollifying medicines and poultices until they are healed.
And if the inflammation ends up with a fissure or suture or cauterization, then it is fitting that you make a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been preceded. And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the cure of inflammation whether it is above or below, that runs in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of inflammation, and that is in various diverse forms.
And the skillful artists always prepare everything in any manner possible to return the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and that malady according to what is convenient for the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many homes in this way that the eyelid is solidified above the album of the eye, and it is prohibited from the facility of movement and of its natural works, therefore it is fitting that you insert the extremity of the thread below the eyelid, and elevate it in its own, or stretch it with the hook.
And then you insert the adhesion into a subtle spatulum, which is not acute from the incisions, having obtained a small perforation so that the malady is not disturbed during the operation, and remain with the spatulum that does not lead the eye to its acuity.
And it is your incision that excises that adhesion in facility until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then you put in the eye salt water in which you wash; or dissolve zinc oxide in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a poultice of it, and pause over the eye a flaxen infusion in an album of wool, and then use three days of causes consolidatives until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
About the incision of a nail and the prominence of flesh in the tear ducts.
You know that a nail is according to two manners, because it is either nervous, and appears like a hard, subtle cyst; or it is non-nervous, appearing as white, congealed humidity, which when you touch it, or try to take hold of it, it is cut off and the onychia (nail disease) does not fix itself in it.
And both species do not begin except from the major tear duct, where it goes little by little, covering the vision and hindering the light and movement of the wheel.
The way to operate in the incision of it is that the patient holds their head back, and you operate on the wheels of it, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail from the little duplication and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and introduce it into the horse's hair or ox hair or vaqua hair, or similar, or strong wire, or duplicate the extremity of the little needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it to the nail; and extend it to the upper parts, and extract the skin around the nail which closes the pupil. And thus you will follow it into the skin towards the back of it.
And then you will incise the rhizome in the root of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and remove the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that by incising it, you do not induce continuous flows of tears.
And sometimes the nail is on the sole of the foot extended or strong, thus we have said, and then it must be excavated with a lion's spatula, of which this is the form.
And beware that you do not touch the corneal membrane with the spatula and that it does not rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then make an incision in the wheel with a little of salty triturated powder or of clear fig-tree sap, and let it be until another day; and then take care that it is covered so that it may be healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put in the needle, nor is it fixed in that onychia, then many remedies are applied to this type of nail, and it is healed thus, as I have written and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then you operate on the wheel of the patient and take a subtle lion's spatula of sharp, acute edge according to this form. with subtlety. And if sometimes it is rarified and congealed and takes hold in that root, then distill from your work in the wheel of clear fig-tree sap or with clear rog or salty triturated powder, and apply the wheel until another day.
And then iterate over that operation until it is completely removed, so that nothing of it remains, unless the contrary happens and an abscess forms in the wheel, because then you will leave it, and take care at the beginning to form the abscess until it is healed.
And then iterate your operation on that root until it is healed.
The prominence of the tear flesh, if you notice it in the wheel for great annoyance, is suspended on the onychia; and incise it from that one part, and do not ultimate the incision so that you do not induce flows of tears.
And then distill in the tear duct clear rog and fig-tree sap until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
About the incision of gangrenous and of that which is born from adjusted flesh in the wheel.
Some remedies in the wheels of some are born from red flesh, and it is superimposed until it covers the pupil, or approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the upper parts before and is assembled like a bouquet of flowers.
The operation in it is that the patient holds their head back; and then operate on the wheels of it and collect all that flesh in convenient onychia, and you have a forcep or a chest; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished in the incision, and beware of the wheel that does not leave that which deviates from your operation.
And it is your incision in which you will incise those or with the spatula that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps that are collected as it seems according to the form of it, as we will find in this chapter.
Then when your incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wheel with salty triturated powder, or distill in it a red powdered sap and similar to the corrosive medicines, and put over the wheel before a crust forms from the matter of the wheel until it is assured against abscess.
If there is some reason for the inflammation and it is seen that the patient has a hot apostema, then take away the bad humor and cure that apostema in a way that it ceases to be an apostema, and apply it to the area of operation until it is sanitized, and similarly make an adjustment to the flesh which is affected by this species.
Perhaps you will find that complete healing of the bad humor occurs naturally or accidentally, avoiding iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that the member is sufficiently affected by that operation.
Chapter 18.
The collection of sweat from the body.
Sweat that comes out rough and is tested on the body and prohibits its operation, and reveals the body in length of days.
Therefore it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the body in which the sweat is strong and there is no other bad humor than sweat, then you collect that sweat.
And it is that you command the patient to place their ill head in the following manner, and suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and let that inch be of subtle duplication according to this form.
or two inches gradually in a hollow according to this form.
And then collect those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and absorb the healthy hour at that hour, until you see those veins being cleansed of the body and being revolved.
And beware that you do not lead the body to the extremities of the spatium; and if your operation is in the middle of the day, under the sun, and be very firm in your operation so that you do not insert except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then distill in the body clear green or red liquid because it is acute corrosion that is cleansed of sweat.
Perhaps if it is not possible for you to collect all at that hour, then apply a poultice with all that cures the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is calmed and assured against hot apostema.
And apply it to him according to the manner of the material until he is healed.
And this is the form of the prescriptions:
Chapter 19.
On the reduction of aristocratic nose.
When you treat aristocratic nose with cautery or sharp medicine burning according to the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not generated in it except that you operate on the apostema until the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the pus until the bone is discovered.
And then when the bone is discovered and you find in it corruption or blackness, then you scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form.
And it is called an asp head, and it is made of iron indeed, and the head is rounded thus as to pierce which is made pointed by pointing of file or whetstone for subtle pointing (thus as it is in the following form).
And stop that on the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolve it between the fingers of the hands, and press your small hand little by little until you know that the corruption is removed.
And then make some evacuations, and then restore the place with desiccative and styptic causes.
Therefore if the place is consolidated and it is in good flesh born and the body is freed from the sane and Roman for 40 days, and it is not renewed and it is not apostematized and does not happen by accident, then you know that it is healed.
And otherwise, then it is not in the generation except to reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you discover from following bone or sharp medicine, and when the bone is discovered, then you take three tribulations according to this form.
It is the external triangle of the iron, and the handle of it should be first extended until the extremity thus as sometimes thus.
And then stop that on the bone, and it is that prop of the lacrimal; and hold your hand a little from the body, and then revolve your hand with the tribulation until it penetrates all the bone, and the patient feels for as long as it takes to remove the bad humor and for as long as it takes to come out by itself.
Therefore then restore the place with styptic medicines that dry thus as you are expert in it.
Therefore when the flesh and the place are indurated, then the matter which was poured out to the deformed parts returns to the nose, therefore it is possible to lift it above the bad humor.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the body.
When the body emerges in its entirety and does not suffer from vezzing nor diminution, then you find that the bad humor is relaxed, and then it follows, and then you stop ventoses on the cervical scarifications and suck for good suction; and then stop on the body with liniment made of acatra and aloe and enses and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the poultice on the body with many powders.
And the manner of treating the pulse is to take three drops of the strongest lion's milk, and each drop should be divided into four places; do so with those strongest.
Then pause on each one over the other according to the quantity that the patient has needed. Then stretch over those I will give a strong structure; and afterwards apply cups with suction to scarify the area; then remove the cups and let the patient's skin be straight day and night.
Perhaps meanwhile the ligament is softened, then it is good that it should be most straight.
Then remove the ligament day and night as we have said.
And if the patient is not reduced, well, then, afterwards apply the plaster to the pulse and the structure and the cups until they are healed.
Chapter 21.
On the inflammation of the prominence of the tunicate vein.
When disruption occurs in the tunicate vein, and it becomes prominent and proceeds outward towards the eyelids like a grain of radish, and its shape is that of a man for this purpose, and you want to make an incision, then the operation on it is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the vein of the lower part below, and then place the other needle in the double fold of the lacrimal area, and let it penetrate and remove the first needle according to its disposition; and then make an incision at the site of the double fold and lift it up to that part of the vein in the circle of the needle, and stretch it strongly.
Then extract the needle and pause on the patient's lane infused with water of egg white, and let it be until the thread is in the vein.
Then take care of the patient with what comforts them until the wound is healed.
And some vegetables gathered from the whole area in a circle of three drops until the patient adjusts to great prominence, and then it should be perforated with a subtle spatula that goes to the peritoneum of the patient, and correct the albugineous humidity, and descend the patient and enter as soon as possible.
And then strengthen until they are healed.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of ulcers.
This bad ulcer that is called alconati is not but a sane one which is adjusted in the patient similar to descending water and it is not that.
Perhaps the manner of operating on it is to make the ulcer sit above the prepared seat and straighten, and then take the dry cap in the two most tender parts and mauve until you see the sane part pervading downwards, and then it should be dried and not descend, and the light should be obscured, and the ulcer sees the causes as it was before.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
Perhaps if it is not prepared for the descent to the sane part with water as we have said, then make the ulcer sit between the two most tender parts and take a subtle spatula and fenestra above the panniculus, circling a small devision of the continuity of the conjunctiva in the corneal tunic in the crown (at the site of the vein), until the sane part is forgotten.
Then since it is forgotten, then you distill on the patient water heated in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it should be treated for the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 22. (Note: It seems that the text has ended, and there are no more chapters to translate.)
On the treatment of descending water from the patient.
We have said the species of water in the division and what is convenient to declare openly, then that according to sanity.
Then it is good that you make the ulcer sit between the two most tender parts above a warm tile and bind the patient's hand strongly.
And then pause near the eyelid of the patient's hand on the left side, if the patient is on the left; or on the right side, if the patient is on the right.
And then take with your right hand the almond, if the patient is on the left; or with your left hand, if the patient is on the right.
And then pause the extremity of the almond near the crown for the greatness of the vein in the white of the patient's eye on the part of the least lacrimal, and then peel the almond in a circle and turn your hand around it.
And then penetrate into the white of the patient's eye and feel that the almond has already been introduced to the cause of the vein.
And it is good that the measurement of the path of the almond at the point of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black, and it is the crown of the patient's eye; because you will see in that pupil with the vision of the patient through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then pause the almond at the site where the water is, and then you will attract it downwards another time, and so if the water descends soon, then see the ulcer above which the patient has lost their sight soon, and the almond in the patient's eye.
And you should rest for a little while; then if the water has descended, afterwards you put aside that other wetness before it mixes with the pus.
And so when it is dry and does not descend, then you extract the pus easily, and turn your hand little by little, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from gemstone and apply that warm liquid to the dent; and place outside the warm cloth or stoppage or wool infused with oil of roses and album of wolf and ligature around that warmth.
Maybe we, those who are from our time, place above that wound a dressing made with album of wolf's [balm].
And if you do not observe your pus entering the wound through its hardness — because it is a sign of the men who have the wound that is very hard —, then gather the spatula which is called scraper of the one that is the form:
And then pierce through that conjunction, and do not push your hand in the wound, and it is not so that you make a way to the pus in the subtle place.
And then we enter the pus according to what we have said.
And you must complete the preparation of your work, prepare the patient's bedroom decently made in which they sleep on their back with two pillows in a darkened room, and prohibit all movements.
And pause in the nature of that water so that its nature is purified, and do not move your head to the right side or left side at all.
And be the treatment according to its disposition until the third day.
And then dislodge that in that darkened room and expose the fresh air, and do see some causes, and then return the treatment until the seventh day.
And do not gather that you make water during the hours of the remedies or almost then apply the infusion. Having gathered that you remove water for thus because the water can flow gently and abundantly with great and vehement regard.
Maybe you will find a cautious abscess, then gather that you dislodge the wound within seven days, and correct that with water that falls from the abscess.
Then you absolve the sight of it and pause over the face of its orifice for which the governance of the evacuation is done in a few days, existing in the darkened room.
And then it will be gradually evacuated from that darkened room and converted into its causes.
And you know that in the case it is not excused, the disciple of vision sees some visions, and then you are ready about the operation.
And now it has come to us from some of those who are at the Artach, and some said that they made fire in the Ayroc magnetized perforated with which the water is succeeded.
Perhaps emperor, you have not seen anything in our land which has perfected water, nor is it legitimate in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magnetized water, so that it is above those which ignore those:
And they are made of iron or of iron properly, and they are the extremities of their love in this subtle triangularity, the acute extremity thus as it is the form.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are born diverse flesh growths adjusted from which some cause is assembled to scorpion of many feet, or to a polyp foot; and this illness is called polyp because it is similar to that foot represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, rough, of dark color; and of it is that it is not lion's flesh of dark color.
Then in that which is in these lion's flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, gather that you make the patient sit between your hands and place him in the sun, and open the nostrils of it, and prick the tendon once in those flesh. And then extract that from the previous parts beforehand, and then inject water that you have comprehended of those with a subtle spatula of one part until you know that all the flesh is restored; that if it remains of it some cause for which the abscess is possible, then you prepare water with one of the subtle instruments facilitated until it is removed from any cause. Maybe you will find a cautious abscess, then you pause at the water that gathers; or it is of the malignant apostemes, then you touch and cauterize it until it is absolved healthy and all the cavities are restored.
And then it will be purified in the nose, then inject with agreement of water or wine. Maybe the nose is opened and from it proceeds humidity to the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Maybe the humidity does not penetrate as it gathers, then you know that the dent is flesh in the purulent bones of the nostrils which have not undergone abscess.
Therefore, it is necessary that the doctor feel with his hand the thickening of the limb at the place where there may be some swelling, and not to touch excessively the tender spots, and pause between each spot to assess the quantity of pain or discomfort, and examine the patient and insert a finger into the nostrils in order to detect if there is any abnormality in the flow of air or for some other reason.
And then it is necessary to make an effort, that the doctor's attention penetrates into the nostrils through which the air reaches the canals of the nose, and he sits on the patient's bed, because too many times it seems similar to this action in schools, and it is a lighter cause for those who do not want to do it.
And then pause the two extremities of the limb, one extremity that is placed on the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a gentle pressure with flesh on the nails that are on the limb, and make an effort to know if the flesh is already on the nails of the limb.
And then extract the limb, and pause at the nose to abstract the blood flow with a cooling treatment, and make an effort for three days or more until the inflamed area is completely cleansed of all that is rotten from the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, pause at the nose with a tube of lead for several hours until it is healed.
There are many ways to cure this disease, but I will describe one of them that is effective.
And this is the form of the instrument called cupping, which makes the patient's blood distilled into oils and medicines in the nostrils.
And make one of silver or copper, which is similar to a small, covered lamp, thus like a small container, and the material is similarly shaped.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the handle of the cupping instrument is flat, uncovered; which is manipulated at the back of it, with which you hold that which you extract from the oil or what you want of the juices and causes that are sucked.
Chapter 25.
About the veins that are born in the extremities of the nose.
Many times it is born in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and mentioned for several days until when a motion is felt regarding it.
And for that reason it is necessary that you write down what appears at the beginning of its appearance, and erase all that. And then pause on the spot where the cautery or burning medicine is, which was placed on the spot of it.
There are many delayed infections until it is magnified, then consider if it is lapified, hard, of dark color and of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron because it is an aposteme of cancer; because many times it happens to those who write down this infection in the great malice over that which they had.
And if the aposteme is of a tender touch and not of dark color, and sometimes writing down is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and write down without fear, and cure the spot with what cures and constrains until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
About the stitching of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by similar things.
You know that when you apply a solution of continuity to one of these cartilages, few confer with each other in that operation unless in some homes.
Therefore, it is necessary, when you come across some cause of those, to consider if it is fresh plague with holy blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the plague with stitching, and then cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then it is necessary that you excavate each part of its apparent code until nothing remains unhealed. And then adjust the two lips with stitching and strengthen them, and upon those sprinkle holy dragon's powder and let it sit for three days or for four, and place on the powder a piece of emplaustra diafinicon, or some other of the consolidating emplasters, and leave that like that for two days or for three, and then remove that and change that emplaster and leave that until the limbs are absolved, and then cure with an ointment until it is healed.
There are many ways to stitch that you add the solution of continuity or with threads like we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity to the limb like I have done and made known.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come into the two lips in the divided parts.
Removed fat is found in the divided parts of their lips, which appear as hard, grass-like errings, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Then you should convert the lips and remove each of those hardnesses from every part, and afterwards make an incision to release the trapped blood, and then wash with warm water and clean the area where it is stipulated, so that it may be sanctified.
Chapter 28.
About the incision of the adjusted flesh in the gums.
A great deal of fat grows over the adjusted flesh in the gums, which the ancients called albumen, therefore you should suspend that accumulation or hold it back with a forceps and incise it to remove its root, and let the healthy blood flow or the healthy blood.
And then apply a poultice over the area where it is stipulated, or other powders that are stimulative or excitative.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, because then the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
About the reason for teeth that are iron-hard.
When on the surface of the teeth in the divided parts and those of the forehead and between the adjusted gums, there are rough, scaly, and blackened deposits, and some fatty ones are greenish or vertiginous until the gum is corrupted by that decay and the loose teeth.
And then you should make a separation between the patient's hands and place their head on a towel, and scrape the teeth on which those rough deposits appear, and causes seem like sand until none of them remain, and that is done to remove blackness and greenishness and other defects so that they may be mondified.
Then if that is the start of the reasoning, well; and if not, then you iterate the reasoning over those others on another day and on the second and third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
And you know that teeth have needed various forms of roots and figures according to how they are prepared for your operation. And thus because the roots are those which the tooth is rooted in the divided part, it is different from the roots which are ras between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of roots are prepared by you, which will be seen soon.
Chapter 30.
About the eradication of teeth.
You should cure the tooth of its pain with entire understanding and delay in the entire eradication of it, because there is no cause that supplies the fatness of it when it is eradicated, because it is a sublime substance until it is excavated in the eradication of it.
Moreover, you should be certain when the patient is forced to eradicate that tooth, because firmly you must be certified which tooth is painful, because many fatnesses of pain deceive the patient and make it seem like it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate it and then the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, because we have already seen this through the operation of the barbers.
Then how can you be certain which tooth is painful, and what do you know, then you should scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatulum in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum of the entire part, and then you have mauled those teeth with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that concurs.
And then you should place something in the strong teeth with good speech or strong estoupe, and pause the head of the patient between the teeth that you hold so that they do not bite, and then draw the tooth according to rectitude in many ways so that it does not tremble, nor does the patient have major pain.
And then if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it beneath the entire part to facilitate and force the removal of it, so that it is done from the beginning.
Moreover, if the tooth is traumatized or corroded, then you should complete the drawing of that trauma and strengthen it with a subtle extremity of root for so that it is not trapped in the hour of your construction over those teeth.
And you should operate extremely carefully in the scarification of the entire circuit of the gum and guard much your strength so that it does not tremble and remain divided from it, and return to the patient for the evil that is greater than the primary pain of it.
And beware that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and audacity over the eradication of them, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for many fatnesses come over the bad homes with great difficulties that are more trapped, and their roots are entirely removed, or some of those, or that you extract those from the mandible also as many fatnesses have testified.
And then apply eradication of his saliva by washing the mouth with hot or cold salt water.
And if you induce flows of blood for a while, thus with motivated evacuations, then apply some quantity of powder and aspersion on the wound, and if that powder doesn't work, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps should be subtle and fine as those that are suitable for extracting teeth at the beginning, with a short handle and large, so that they do not become dull when one needs to operate.
And they should be like times of large handles that enter so that when you stretch them out they do not become dull, but rather brief extractions.
And they should be made of iron from India, expertly crafted for brief extractions, and in the extractions of those there are teeth like the ones that enter into each other and stretch out by strong constriction, and sometimes evacuations of those are in the shape of a bird's beak which is called ciconia, so it is guaranteed, and they are of strong constriction.
Chapter 21.
On the eradication of teeth and extraction of bones from crushed jaws.
When you need to eradicate teeth which are broken for some reason, then it is necessary that you apply pressure on the affected area with a bandage for a day or two until the area becomes mollified; and then insert gently or take out the extractions with which they are assembled in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia or guarantee, the form of the forceps:
The extractions of those are made of dentine, thus like lime or alum.
And if they do not obey you in this way with these forceps or instruments, then it is necessary that you operate on the root and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called atali, so it is a small lever whose shape is this:
And let it be of brief extraction, thick and small, and not be bent so that it is not broken.
So if the root is not extracted, well; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular extraction in which there is some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have subtle extractions.
And thus you will be helped with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form suitable for the following: and with other instruments which precede in the root of teeth; because juice flows out with this instrument which is assembled on a large hook, and this is the form:
of the triangular extraction twisted or curved, which has some thickness, and not bent so that it is not broken.
And another thing is that the instruments for teeth are moved thus and similarly to the other instruments.
The skilled artisans are wise and subtle in their art, attentive to themselves according to what they mean by operation and diverse ailments; because they are among the ailments which the ancients did not diagnose nor pause for proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
More, if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are broken, or if they are rotten, then it is necessary to cure above that in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have spoken about in the extraction of roots of teeth, and help yourself with gestures of which this is the form:
And let it be with some small thickness little by little, and let it be held or tied in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is fully extracted; and then restore the place with suitable medicines according to what is convenient.
More, if there is small rottenness in the bone, then remove that from the rottenness and its blackness, and cure it until it is healthy.
Chapter 32.
On the cure of teeth prominent above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course in that form is lagging, and especially when they induce in women, and especially in venerable elderly people; therefore it is necessary that you consider: if a tooth is nothing like another tooth, and it is not possible to straighten or align it, then root out that one; more that it is not joined to another tooth, then you separate it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it is similar to a morr of pork, and let it be made of Indian iron of extruded sharp point.
And let your incision be in which you separate it in three days for the duration of the tooth, and that it is not joined to another of the teeth.
And if it is a prominent tooth exposed to filing, then file it with a file of Indian iron of which this is the form:
And let it be all of Indian iron and the margin is ornamented; and let it be of many minute points thus like a file in which they are made agulhas, in which the tooth is filed little by little in many days with facilitation, so that it is not another tooth joined and fixed. And then apply those lines on the forehead, and scratch it there with rough rasps.
And if a part of the tongue is tied and the lines are led, then it is necessary that you remove what has been taken from that fraction, and it should be applied so that the tongue does not slip away nor the speech becomes corrupted.
Chapter 33.
About the restoration of fallen teeth with gold foil or silver.
When teeth fall out due to concussion and removal through percussion or causation, and the patient cannot hold on to what they are eating, and you have treated them with medicines that stop the flow, and your treatment has not been effective, then it is so that they do not generate evil humors in those strengthened with gold foil and not with silver, because silver turns greenish and then puts itself aside after several days, but gold at no time becomes muddy.
And it is the foil in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the method of reception is that you take the foil and take its double between two healthy teeth, and then it grows with the twisted shape of the foil between two fallen teeth, or one or more, until it reaches the fabric on the healthy tooth of the other part. And then iterate the treatment until the part where you started, and hold your hand with facility and wisdom until it is not fallen.
And it is your diligence that holds the foil away from the roots of the teeth so they do not become loose.
And then remove the superfluous foil extremities with forceps or tweezers, and add those to whatever place you have handled, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the fallen tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave it like that, straight as the Romans do.
Moreover, if it is dislocated or broken, hold it or them with another foil in such a manner at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and of two fallen teeth, thus as I have linked them:
And when it happens that one tooth or two return to their place, and they are recut like I have recommended, and they remain.
And do not do that without good artisans and knowledge.
And some ivory is apt for a certain cause of the cow's bones, and it is made like their form of tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened thus as I have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the incision of the ligament that grows in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that grows beneath the tongue sometimes has ivory or is natural in which men are born, or it is accidental and happens through a wound that has already consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth, the existing head being in the tender skin; and elevate the tongue, and then incise that nervous ligament according to the latitude until the tongue is freed from its retention.
Moreover, if there is some hardness or induration, and that has been stagnant for consolidation of the wound, then you inject oil and separate it along the latitude until you have incised the ligament and the induration is dissolved.
And beware that there is not made a fissure in the skin of the flesh and that you separate here, lest you cause an influx of bloody flux.
And then wash the remains of the incision with warm water or wine or cold water; and then pause beneath the tongue, licini; thus it is customary to hold the patient's tongue beneath the tongue at any time so that another growth does not consolidate.
Moreover, if there is a flow of blood, pause over the vitriolated place three times; if the blood stops, then cauterize the place with a gentle cautery that is convenient for that. And then cure it in other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
About the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Some ivory grows beneath the tongue, an aposteme resembling a small pearl preventing the tongue from its natural operation; and it is magnified until it fills the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth, seated in front of the window and consider the aposteme.
And if you see it is of dark color or black, hard, which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch it because it is cancerous.
And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is humidity, then you put the onci in it, and incise with a subtle spatula, and incise the entire part; and if blood stops during your operation, then you pause for three hours, thus it is vitriolated, until the bleeding is restrained.
And you return to your work within, so that you have treated them completely, so that they are washed in a warm and healthy manner; and take care of the other treatment in order to be fully healed.
Chapter 36.
On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles and from that which is nothing in the gullet and from other abscesses.
When you find a tumor in the gullet, it is glands that are assembled there, which quickly accumulate and are named two auricles, which when you treat them, if they have not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron for the flow of blood; but first let it mature, and then you will operate on it, or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is of white color, radish-like, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what needs to be incised.
And the operation on it is what you consider, during your operation, if you have already rested the abscess with a complete rest or if it has diminished with some diminution; and then make a section in the patient's sole, and the head of it should be in the thigh, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between their hands before the tongue of it, holding an instrument most noble whose form is this.
And let it be made of silver or copper, and let it be subtle as a knife.
Then when you press it against the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and you cut above it with the thigh immediately, then take hold of it and place it in the amulet, and pull it towards the divided parts as much as you can. Or another thing that you pull out some cause from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form.
Or another thing that you pull out some cause from the tunics, and then incise it with an instrument of which this is the form. and it is assembled to forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one of them is in the end of the other, very sharp, which is of iron indeed, well-cooked.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form of it: Let it be pointed on one side, not pointed on the other side.
And after you have incised one vein, incise the other according to this same method of incision, and then wash the patient's gurgling mouth with fresh water.
But if there is a flow of blood, wash with water of decoction of sage or of mint leaves and similarly to that of the stiping causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then take care of it until it is healed.
And some vegetations grow in the gullet besides other abscesses like those two auricles, and incise them according to what you have said about the incision of two veins previously.
And you have already medicated a woman with an abscess which was born in her gullet, the abscess tended to dark color, with little sensation, which had closed her gullet, and the woman breathed with great difficulty, and had prohibited eating and drinking water, and was near death if it had not been treated for a day or two.
And the abscess had so grown that it had formed two ramps until they burst through two tracts.
Then you carefully dissected it and placed it in one of its holes, and pulled it out, and extracted from the large portion, and then you incised that which comprehends the other tract, and then you opened its mouth, and comprehended its tongue, and then you placed the hole in that abscess.
And then you removed a large part of it, and there was no flow from it except for a little blood. Then the gullet of that woman was absolutely cleared, and soon she began to drink water, and then she started to eat, so you no longer needed to incise that abscess many times per day, and successfully removed the abscess from its place, which was prolonged until it was healed.
Then you healed it and cauterized the gullet of it, then stopped the addiction; and then you walked and did not know that God did that miracle.
Chapter 38.
On the incision of a tumor when it is abscessed.
When the tumor grows on the skin, and it is abscessed and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a thick and round part, then it is called a bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and you do not contradict your cure, and sometimes it happens that the abscess has remained subtle, then it needs to be incised which are aggregated round; and if it is of long duration, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and it is not in its center, then it needs to be operated on, because in this case there is fear about the patient.
When you sometimes follow the method by which you have decided to open the white and long vein of the patient, so that you make the patient's tongue protrude and press the instrument on it, which processes its shape and then places the nail in the new moon, and pulls it down and inscribes it with one of the two instruments, which are marked on the inscription of two fingers.
And beware that you do not inscribe it unless it is adjusted according to the natural term of its additions, because if you inscribe it more, you will disturb the liquid speech.
And then the inscription, use that which we have recommended in the inscription of two fingers, and cure it within so that it may be healthy.
But if the patient was frightened by the inscription of it, beware that you use gentle handling in the cauterization of its fear, and the manner of the cautery is not but a sharp point, and it is that you place the head of the patient in the tender spot, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have stated in the chapter on cauterization, and make it alive, and pause that it does not spread nor become subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument with this form:
It is the extraction of the hernia in which the medicine was placed as well as the hernia of a golden rod, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient will spit over the shoulder for so that corroding saliva or mucus from the mouth of that one does not obstruct the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not hinder any cause on the throat of it and that it descends to that.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for a space of half an hour within which it will be diminished and calmed by the absorption of the medicine.
And if you want, take cotton and envelop it around the extremity of the rod, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the rod with the cotton into a canal above so that the cotton adheres to it, and do this as many times until you obtain what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it for three or four days.
And if you need to iterate the medicine, repeat it, and then the cauterization will be more effective in the circuit of the grape with cotton wrapped around the border, and notify that which is in the circuit of it from the medicine, and it will be washed with fresh water, and it will be cured beforehand by embrocation, and it will be freed from gargling until it is healthy.
And this type of cure is more saving than inscription and more lengthy in fear.
Some wounded uvulas are cured with that which is more subtle than cautery and inscription, because it is cured by subfumigation in this manner: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes, or some of their, in a bowl, and they are submerged in vinegar agreeably, and boiling; and the bowl should be covered decently, and it should be in the middle location of the bowl a truce, on which is placed an instrument conquered by silver or copper according to this manner; it is made of silver or copper.
And then insert the extremity into the patient's mouth so that the vapor reaches the uvula above the canal, so that the uvula is not too obstructed.
And then iterate over those many wounded places until it is dry, and beware that you do not make this cure at the time of the coming of abscesses, because it would too much adjust in the abscess, and do not think that you are doing this, but rather declare the abscess of the cautious doctor.
But if it is not present to you with this instrument, then take a cane and compose it on the extremity of it in a closed house, so that the patient's mouth is comforted, because the closed house of the cane prohibits the vapor from entering the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
On the extraction of thorns and of that which adheres to the throat and other causes.
Many wounded places adhering to the throat or thorn of feet or some other cause.
Then beware that you extract that which is apparent from those, upon which the sight falls, because you take the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it may be declared to you what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear and is occult in the throat, beware that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause annexed to the throat will be forced out by vomiting; or give the patient a piece of nap or radish of lettuce or a bite of dry bread; or take a piece of dry marine sponge, and bind it strongly with faith, and then transpose the patient across this, so that when you perceive the place in which the thorns are extracted, then it is forced out. Take a small animal and bind it well, and place it on the table and let its essence be extracted; or take a porridge and let its juices flow through the affected part.
Maybe it is not forgotten how those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it is better to use a large one than a small one, and in the extremity of it you will find the conduit that you insert into its throat to facilitate.
And the ague has its head elevated in them, and beware that the touch of the ague's bone is on the throat, so that it does not descend into the body and it does not pierce the bone or the spine, or that the doctor places his hand.
Maybe it is better that the patient inserts himself, by his own knowledge of the place of the adjacent cause and pierces himself, and draws his hand along with the instrument in them, as much as possible according to the quantity which has been prepared beforehand so that it is forgotten.
Chapter 39.
On the extraction of blood from the adjacent area to the gout.
When bloodletting is medicated with the aforementioned remedies and not comforters, consider then the gout of the patient in solitude, since you have comprehended the language of the instrument which I have recommended to you.
Then if you want to perform bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle and decent gestures.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout of the patient, and place a ignited iron in the cavity of the cannula, and do so many times (until the bloodletting is dead and separated from the gout) and abstain from giving the patient water for a whole day.
And then take a vessel full of cold water, and put the patient's mouth in it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not transgress from this rule for any cause and avoid giving water for an hour, then give it to him by hand, because the bloodletting is so sensitive that it feels the cold water like a cat.
Maybe it is not forgotten that which we have recommended, then suffumigate the patient with cimetic or asafoetida through the instrument which we have recommended in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Do it thus, since it is four times a year.
And there is another manner of operating in the suffumigation of this, that you take a vessel in which are ignited coals and the vessel is covered with a covering in the middle of which is a tube; and place it beneath the suffumigation; and pause to put the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that the suffumigation has penetrated to the bloodletting, because the bloodletting is very sensitive.
And if it doesn't work, then you repeat the suffumigation many times, and abstain from giving the patient drink, and eat salty and healthy foods, and don't ask for water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen is not forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument with which gout of the joints is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps, but not because it is in some curved shape: which is placed on the gout, and its extremity is similar to the beak of a stork, which is hollow, in which there is applied a file, so that, when you comprehend some cause, it does not let go.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the sermon in perception of abscesses and in section of their.
The abscesses are many species, of many manners, according to the remembrance of them, in this book.
And they are diverse in perforation and section of them for two manners, one of which is for the species of abscesses in their metrics; and for that which is comprehended from the humidity.
And the second manner is proper for the places in which accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that occurs on the head is different from the abscess that occurs on the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy place occurs differently from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each one of them is judged according to operation.
And many abscesses are such that they cover that they are not perforated but rather mature with the sap of those or complement them.
So other abscesses cover that they are traversed when they are crucified, and do not mature according to their complement, just like abscesses that are properly placed in the joints, because an abscess that is properly joined to a joint, its essence is prolonged until it can corrode the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it makes a cause of contraction of that member; or it is an abscess of principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it matures, it will not harm the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, then perforate what has not matured; and do not cover that they perforate cruely, from non-completed digestion, but only that which is near the buttocks, so that you do not feel the pain of it and it becomes elongated to the internal parts of the buttocks, and makes a fistula, or it is made in the term of it that it does not heal. You should know the time of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it matures.
You know it has matured when the cessation of pain and the reduction of fever occur, and then there is a decrease in rigor and pulse, and the acute phase of the abscess's head, and other signs.
And because you know that the perforation will occur in the place where pus is beneath the abscess and from which pus comes out for the urgency of the treatment.
And perforation often occurs through the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the partitions of the muscles or feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerve cords, of the arteries; and, finally, in all swollen places where there is no reflection; because in those that do reflect, use perforation according to that member.
When the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to delay perforation until digestion is confirmed according to the compliment, as we have said; because if you perforate at that time, it prolongs the body of the pus and causes much putridity, and strengthens the lips of the abscess so they are indurated and deep.
Some abscesses are perforated according to the latitude of the flesh or body that needs treatment, or according to the quality of the member that is injured.
And you know that you should administer small perforation, and in large abscesses a large or ample perforation, or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses are those in which you know that the codena (codename for a medical term?) is conquered and enclosed, when it is made thus and it is in term that already stagnates, thus as that which accumulates in drops of dubellum and of buboes.
And of those that are incised in a section having three angles; and of those that are incised thus as the figure of a leaf of myrtle, thus as the abscesses of the anginas.
And of those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similarly to those.
When that which is not able thus as the superficial abscesses of Lions, you know that you should perforate with a superficial perforation, or a plain one only.
And you know that when the abscess is large and has collected much sane matter, you should perforate it and not be afraid to extract all the pus at that hour; having extracted a part from it, and then you should open the abscess again another day, and then extract a larger part, and then make many evacuated matters according to gradual evacuation until it is fully purged.
And especially if the patient is of fragile virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old decrepit person, because the animal spirit is much resolved to evacuate the sane matter, and strengthens the death of the patient, and you operate on them.
You should keep this chapter with great caution, and then make your perforation in which you perforate these abscesses, knowing that you will sterilize the wounds and consider therefore if the wound of the abscess is small, or is a plain section, then you administer the qualifications of oil or of antidote; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you know that you should pause in whatever tract until they come together again.
And if in the abscess a part of the codena (codename for a medical term?) has been cut off or has concaved in the circuit, then you know that you should complete it with much oil or with a fayt thread of drap from oil, thus as when you have treated pans or razizos, their humidity; and strengthen it until the third day; and then process it and cure what you know of the enguents until it is sanitized.
When you accumulate flux of blood at the time of your operation, then you administer fresh water and wine in those which mix a thread of oil, and pause that over the place of the fluxes of the blood, many evacuated matters.
When you preserve the fluxes of blood, then you know that you should administer regimen and cure and powder those which have been recommended in many places of our book and division.
When it is winter time, and the place of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you know that you should apply poultices in wine and oil, and pause those over the places.
And if it is summer, and the places are fleshy, then you know that you should pause poultices wrapped in water and oil or wine and oil, and all that should be fresh until the third day, as we have said, and then you know that you should dissolve the abscess and sterilize it and administer in its cure what is convenient for it to be sanitized.
And thus it is necessary to know the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction already said about each abscess in which manner it is possible to cure it by chapters separately.
Chapter 41. (assuming the text starts a new chapter)
The separation of abscesses which come in the hollow of the head.
In the hollow of the small head abscesses, and it is of special knots which contain tunics that are at their own doing; and the species of them are very moved.
And of them are swellings, and of those which contain moisture similar to lime. And of those which contain moisture similar to poultices, and they resemble them; and of those which are lumpy, hard.
And in the separation of everything, and in the extraction of those which is not fear, as one should not make the extraction of those which do not cause contradictory bitterness.
And the operation in separation of those is that you should prepare those with an instrument in the form of which you approach thus, which is called entromes, until you know what they contain.
Because if it contains moisture, then separate it from the separation according to its longitude for superficial separation according to this form.
And begin in the separation of the line .B. until the line .G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, then you excoriate it because it contains that moisture, and do not leave any of it for any cause whatsoever, because many vigorous returns come back, if not from some other cause.
And then submerge it in Egyptian inguent, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that plague and leave it there until another day, because I think that corrosion occurs to all that is removed from that skin.
And then apply it again on that spot with Egyptian inguent secondly and thirdly if you notice any signs of it, until you are confident that there is no other cause from that skin; then cure the plague with inguent until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you incise it according to this form: in the separation having form of a cross, and cut between two lips of the separation and scour that from all parties, and force your virtue in extraction of the tunic which contains it.
Perhaps if you make bitterness contrary, then do so that you may recount primarily at first.
And similarly do in the abscess separated from the separation and cure according to what you have said; and separation over abscess separated is less serious, because it is of little blood and little moisture.
And some old women know some of these abscesses which are in the head in old homes where there is none of that moisture; the cause is because you have separated over an abscess on the head of an old woman and touched the abscess thus with a rough, harsh, white, which could not be pierced, and if someone had pressed upon it, they would have made it worse.
Perhaps in the other abscesses happening on the head another chapter is not this chapter, thus like the abscesses that come to the heads of children and one must remove the roots of the ears, perhaps the separation of all these things should be superficial separation.
And stop the perforation of those from the lower party, because it is more suitable to alleviate the body of the patient in the lower parties.
And then cure them with what is convenient for that cure.
Chapter 42.
About the separation of scrofulas which occur on the neck.
Many vigorous abscesses occur in the neck and in the axillae and in the groin areas; and some vigorous ones occur in other parts of the body.
And those which occur in the neck, and many that are engendered between them, and all scrofulas of those have their own proper tunic, and thus like in the knots and abscesses of the head, as we have recommended.
And the species of these scrofulas are many, because some of them are lumpy, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant which do not obey cure.
Then in that which you have of good disposition in the Tocament, from which the color of it that is manifest is close to the color of the codena, and it is mauled to all parties, and it is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the bitterness, and it is not preoccupied, so that you incise it in superficial separation from the party above to the party below the body of the line .G. until the line .B., and scour it all over the parties, and extend two lips of the codena on one side, or many sides if there is need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more caution that it should not be incised into the vein or nerve.
And let the space not be too narrow, that it does not adjust to your hand in incision, or quiet the malaute, and that you incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised vein or bitterness and prohibited you from your operation, then pause in the plague of vetriol trissat or other powders which stop fluxes of blood, and strengthen the plague, and leave it there until the acuity of the abscess is repulsed and the plague is mollified and begins to be purulent. When the blood is drained away.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then investigate whether there are any causes of the other small scrofulous tumors, and dissect them and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofulous vein, then avoid dissecting that scrofulous tumor from its root. Be careful not to touch that vein with a double-edged scalpel, and avoid making an incision until it falls by itself without injuring.
And then fill the wound with a cloth soaked in Egyptian oil, and then cure it.
And if you dissect the entire tumor, then be careful to adjust the two lips of the wound and sew them up as soon as possible so that no superfluous material remains.
But if you see that there has remained superfluous material due to the greatness of the tumor, then be careful to understand how to dissect its root, and separate it and apply a suture, and do what is said.
And for those tumors that contain humidity, make a superficial perforation there where it appears to you the place of maturation, and stop the perforation of what seems to be the pus at the bottom of the body, just as we have said.
And then administer perforation, with calques in ointment and similarly to those, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And then when you see the wound is already cleansed, then cure it with ointment of generating flesh until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
About the section of the pilum of the accidental abscess in the groin area.
The ancient doctors made this section about the pilum in the epilhot, and we do not see anyone in our land who has done it.
And this is the inscription of the sermon of those ones.
But in the men who have had a relapse, be careful that the extraction of the pilum is avoided, because it was not done juvenilely for all the veins and major parts of the thigh are here.
But in those who have abscesses caused by wounds in the mouth or groin area or both ears, when the illness is not in the cane, be careful to use the section of pilum to flee from the loss which is done by perforation.
Then be careful when you want to do that, to dissect the pilum below three circles of the circles of the pilum, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in cipher, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for dissection, because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood from the son who are loud.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, then be careful that he extends the cord of the groin area with an onion, and then inserts the cord until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any of those causes.
And then dissect the ciplach according to what we have recommended; and it is significant about the section of the canal for the flux which is from that exit with water that is from the disruption and for the abolition of the vomiting.
And thus the wound will be open for some time.
Then when the hour is renewed in which the perforation is tempered, add the two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew it only to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh grow until it is healed.
And thus Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended is an exposition not only that you see that some of these abscesses have already operated on the groin area of the thigh, and the thigh has come to death, and its wing is between the legs, and some go to dissect the epiglottis so that the thigh breathes over the place of the wound for some respiration, and it is saved from death.
And for that command to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and it is the malice of it for three days; and then command thus the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen through my meteors, is that a servant took a knife and placed it in his left groin area and dissected one part of the cane of the lung, and I was called to the cure of it, and I helped the mugwort just as it helps the dying, and I discovered the wound and helped the blood which was coming out of the small wound.
Then I confessed that it had not dissected a vein or a nerve, and the wind was coming out of the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
And do not accuse the servant if he does not vomit, and then some days return to the administration of his own dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the pilum there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
The section about the abscess that occurs in the groin area beforehand, and it is called inguinal hernia.
This abscess, called inguinal hernia, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
And it is according to two manners, because it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, it does not require healing.
And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fat nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is made by obstruction of an artery, and in that there is fear. And it does not occur that the fat pushes through to the cum unless it is small. And you probe that and investigate what I have told you, and if you find it similar to fat nodes, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise thus with the nodes, and extract the water that contains the matter from the skin and bursicle; and otherwise, then it is thoroughly examined throughout the entire essence, and you cure the place where the healing occurs until it is healthy.
Chapter 45.
About the section on the species of nodes.
There are many species of nodes and I have already mentioned all the species of them in the division.
And it occurs that I recommend distinguishing the difference between node and evacuation, because it makes doubt.
So I say that evacuation is a quality and fever and vehement pains until the ebullition of the superfluity is sedated; and it is a complete putrefaction that then ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
But a node is not a quality nor fever nor pain, and it contains that cipher or secret which is its own proper sac.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a boil and it is made thus as a void, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, because some are fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, as I have said in the division.
So it occurs, when you approach the cure of a node, that you expose and inquire into its beginning with an instrument called introumes, according to which you will see its form in the chapter that is about to come.
And it is the manner of inquiry into abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and insert it into the place where you find humidity in the abscess, and you rotate the threads little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cavity.
And then you withdraw your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then you extract the instrument and consider what is left in the remains of it.
And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it in a superficial section according to what I have said about other abscesses.
And if there is no humidity in the remains of the instrument, then you know that it is fat.
And it cuts about it in the section having the form of a cross according to this form: Thus you will enucleate it, and suspend that which is cut, and excavate the entire cavity of the part in a facilitated way, and preserve the skin or sac, if possible, above it and extract that sanity from the node.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that sanity, and many veins are involved in that, and then you extract it by pieces until nothing remains of any cause.
Because if none of the causes remain, little or much, the node returns according to its nature.
And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the plague with some corrosive powders and strengthen the plague, and pause above that which is a cautious abscess, and cure it with another cure until it is healthy.
And if it is a large node, then you kiss the two lips of it and cure it with that which incarnates.
But if the pulse comes to the contrary, or is non-pulsating, then you bandage and fill the place with three triturated things that are vitriol and let it stand for two days or three until the plague is digested and the ebullition of the blood is restored; and then you return to incise what remains of the node.
Chapter 46.
About the forms of the necessary instruments in section and perforation.
About those are the forms of the intruments, and they are of three species, of which one is large, and one is medium, and one is small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
They are made of iron, of aluminum, with curved extremities decently, so that they fasten the instrument in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of experience, and they are named "altered", and one of them is called "feverish".
It is of three species, because two of them are great, moderate and little.
The form of great experience, the form of it:
The form of moderate experience, the form of it:
The form of little experience, the form of it:
It is suitable that these abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and boils occur because of those bones and other causes.
And these are the remedies, large, lion-like, thus with great needles in which they are treated with seatings, and they are remedies of iron, or of iron, or of silver, And the better ones when they are remedies of iron.
And these are the experiences of black lead, which ones accord that for those abscesses in the cavity of which they are reflected, that they are reflected with their levity in those reflections.
And it is of three species, because some of them are long, and others moderate, and others short, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the abscess and its constriction.
The form of great experience of lead:
The form of moderate experience of lead:
The form of small experience of lead:
The forms of the ulcers are from many species, because some of them are simple, which ones have a single curvature only, and it is of three species: great, little, and moderate.
And of them there are open ulcers, and it is of three species.
And of them there are ulcers having two curvatures, and it is of three species.
And of them there are those having three curvatures, and it is of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The form of a small simple ulcer, the form of it:
The form of a great ulcer having two curvatures: The form of a moderate ulcer having two curvatures: The form of a small ulcer having two curvatures:
The form of a great ulcer having three curvatures:
The form of a moderate ulcer having three curvatures:
And these are the forms of the scalpels which ones are used to cut and scrape the nodes and the abscesses, and it is of three species, because some of them are great, moderate, and little.
The form of a great scalpel:
The form of a moderate scalpel:
The form of a small scalpel:
The extremities of those which ones are made to cut so aggressively and the other extremities not aggressive, and not so paused in such a manner, but rather done gently in the excision of the nodes the fear of inscizio of vein or nerve, and for those which heal the patient and bring tranquil little per the adjustment which brings away the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of poultices, and it is of three species: great, moderate, and little, thus with true veils.
They are remedies of iron and similar to the ray which one is, and made with alum.
And it is in the extreme pointed instrument, hidden space and in that cord to the divided parts, and before, when you want, thus with vessels.
The forms of probes, which ones are hidden between the fingers to perform the perforation of the abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and it is of three species: great, moderate, and little. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of bloodletting which ones are absconding the flow of blood, and it is of three species; great, moderate, and little; the forms of it:
They are remedies of iron, rounded ones with some length, and they are subtle.
And it is that these species of bloodletting are your great, moderate, and little, because for those absconding the flow of blood with velocity in necessity, and then when you first administer it, it is not medicine.
However, they do not use those to abscond blood in every part of the body, and they only use them in fleshy places, thus in the muscles of the arms and legs, and in the muscles of the chest, and of the belly, and of the groin, and similarly to their fleshy muscular counterparts.
Some remedies are fashioned from those other small instruments resembling scissors according to this method; for which the saint is absolved when it is done for phlebotomy, or for making an incision in a vein or artery.
Some remedies are made into round pills according to this method.
Chapter 47.
On the treatment of men's nipples which are similar to those of women.
Some remedies are inflated into the nipples of certain men who lack the complement of sleep as if they were small children, and thus inflated nipples, and similar to those of women, and we Roman Apothelems leave them.
And to the one who has that, I advise that you make an incision in those veins according to this method, from line B to line G, and then totally remove the bitterness, and fill the wound with incarnated medicinal plaster, and adjust the two lips of the wound with a cosidura, and cure the one who enters so that he may be healthy.
But if the nipple declines to the lower parts and is mollified by its magnitude thus like in women, then it is divided into two lunar figures, each containing one in the other, so that the major line contains the minor according to this method from line B to line G. And then remove the codena which is between the two lips of the wound, and stop the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and powders that are necessary for the cure until it is healthy.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which I advise to make for the discomfort of the patient, and for the flow of blood, then I advise that you fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive oil and leave it there until it corrodes what is rough from the grayness, and thus cure the one who enters so that he may be healthy.
Chapter 48.
On the perforation of abscesses that come from beneath the tongue.
These abscesses that come from beneath the tongue are of the species of scrofulas, hard, which contain a skin that is sacred.
And of those some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity I advise that they be incised with a lunar figure: from line G to line B. And when everything is totally evacuated what is in the abscess of the shin, then you complete it with much cloth and leave it there until another day.
And then the cloth should be placed and be cured conveniently in a suitable ointment, until it is healthy.
And if the abscess is of the species of nodes, and of scrofulas, then you should section above it thus as we have said in the section on scrofulas, in an angular manner.
But if the wound is extended in such a way that it becomes purulent, then administer to it a cautery according to what we have previously stated about that.
Chapter 49.
On the section of abscesses that occur through arteries or veins.
When an artery is broken, and the codena is consolidated which is above that, then many remedies occur for abscesses and signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is through an artery it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and when you touch the abscess on the tender spots, you feel a stridor.
And that which is through a vein is round at the manifest of the body.
And the section about this abscess is erroneous, and it increases in that which is beneath the ribs, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very great, therefore I advise that its cure be eschewed, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, I advise that it be avoided.
But about that which is from the flow of inflammation of the orrific artery, section in the codena section at length; and then open the section with an uncis and then the artery, and remove the tunics until it is discovered.
And then place the needle above that agulha and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the artery with double thread in two places, — which causes you to have a double eye on the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
And then hold the place which is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it is evacuated, and thus dissolve the abscess.
And then administer cure in which it is generated poor until the ligaments fall; and thus cure the one with suitable ointments until it is healthy.
And if it is an abscess by section of a vein, then I advise that you hold with your hand what is possible for the abscess in the codena, and then insert the needle beneath the place where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double file until you extract it from the other side, and then bind the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have said to you about the ligament of Uva, which is on both parts at both extremities of the file.
Sometimes it is necessary to extract the thread, then insert the sharp point of the needle at that angle from which the entire aposterium can be removed with the first puncture, and strengthen the tight threads in four places.
Then you will cut the aposterium in its proper place within, so that when it is seen that it is inside, then you will incise the superfluous skin of the knee, and thus it will be free from it.
And then pause over the pulse which has submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with hot poultices and unguents until it is healed.
Chapter on the aposterium that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Thus it occurs that aposterium is caused by accumulation in the arteries and veins, and similarly aposterium occurs in the nerves when they are struck or affected by excessive labor, and by resemblance.
And it is done in the manner of it in the places of the joints or ankle, or in every place where the joints are weakened.
And it is a severe aposterium, and it is similar in color to the other body, and it is among the greatest of its dispositions, and when it is stricken with vehemence, it feels like the patient has a stuporous malady.
And it is not an aposterium that accumulates in the front of the body, and therefore it is below the knee, and it is weakened throughout and does not go to the anterior or posterior parts.
Therefore, since it is in the joints, it does not seem that it should be wrapped with iron, because strong contraction of the tendons would ensue.
Sometimes it happens that what is on the head or in the forehead falls to the knee through a spatulum. Sometimes it is a minor aposterium, then you have the forces and abscesses that arise from roots.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with an onyx, and excavate that, and then remove it; and adjust the wound with a suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 50.
On the section of aposterium that occurs from chill that reaches to the stomach.
It happens that some people have worn-out homes, exhausted and weakened in their stomachs and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal due to similarity with fungi, whose roots are subtle and the head of it is large; and already their lips are converse, and it is of those who are small, and it is of those who are very magnificent.
And I have already seen one, and in their stomach there were two fungi-like things, which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of minimal root.
And already their lips were turned inwards and were split, and humidity flowed from them all the time.
Therefore I incised those and extracted one from the weight of 18 ounces. and the other weighed six ounces.
And the operation on their incision is that you consider then if the malady is humid, and the color of the matter is white, humid, with subtle root; then you incise it with a broad spatulum, and thus in your presence you apply cautery to the focus, because many weakened things are expelled from the section of it, very sanctified; and if you want the sanctification, cauterize it.
And if the malady is pauruc and tender, beware of incising with iron; sometimes then take a sharp point of fresh pom, and strengthen it on that matter, in the manner which is what we have said; and leave it for two days.
And then adjust it in the structure of the thread of pom; therefore, do not cease strengthening the large pom grain that is in the matter, until it is abscessed and falls by itself through its own labor.
Sometimes it is of large root, then in its incision there is some cause of fear and of pain, and especially in that which is in the stomach.
Sometimes it is possible that you incise the worst part of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure it until the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to incise the matter that is of dark color, of little feeling, of light regard, because that is almost cancerous.
And I find myself remembering a case of cancer thus afterwards.
Chapter 52.
On the cure of inflammation of the navel.
Inflammation of the navel is caused by many causes; or by fissures of the ciphac which is above the stomach, and thus the fabric or intestine bursts according to the other ruptures; or by sanctification which flows from a vein or artery as has been said before, or by constricted ventilation in it.
Sometimes it is due to fissure of the ciphac and bursting of the fabric, then the color of the aposterium is similar to the color of the body; and it has a lion-like pain, and appears in diverse situations. If it is due to an obstruction of the intestine, then the situation is such that what we have recounted, with more vehement diversity, and as you press on those tied parts it becomes hidden, and then return; and for a long time it was so, and it is magnificently revealed by the introduction of a gentle and vehement treatment.
Perhaps it is due to humidity, then it is clear and not hidden when you press on your hand, neither is it constricted, nor is it created.
And if it is due to blood, then it appears that the abscess shows signs of black decay.
Perhaps it is due to bad flesh, then it is a severe abscess, thick and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity.
Perhaps it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is clear.
And the operation on it is that you consider then if the prominence of the navel is due to blood of the arteries, or of a vein, or due to windiness; then it is necessary to prohibit the cure of it, because in that there is fear and panic, just as I have written in the chapter where I spoke about the abscesses due to arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then it is necessary that you command the patient to hold their belly still, and be steady extended; and then place your finger in the circuit of the entire navel, and command him to stand bent over between his thighs above the back, and circle around with a spatula flat on the circuit of the navel above the area where he has felt the pain; and extend the magnitude of the abscess to the divided parts down to an inch or more; and place it in the circuit with a strong faith or trust in the decent manner of the liar.
And then you will open the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and insert the said finger into that indicator and explore the intestine; and if you have not touched or guarded by the ligament, then you extract the extraneous matter and push back the intestine to its proper place in the belly.
And if you have touched the membrane, then take that one out; and remove the excesses of it.
Perhaps it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle around that word, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two strong veins and insert the two needles into the circuit where you felt the abscess in a crooked manner, which makes them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess into four parts above the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area inside so that the extended flesh can fall back into place; or remove what is subtle and falls away, and then cure that which is necessary to heal the wounds inside so that it may be healthy.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to bad flesh in it or humidity, then it is necessary that you conquer the abscess as I have said and extract the blood or humidity, which you find in it, and then cure what is necessary and consolidate the area.
Chapter 53.
On the Cure of Cancer.
I have spoken, in the division, of a species of cancer and in what manner it goes towards the cure of it with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid the cure with iron so that it does not ulcerate; and I have said that cancer is engendered in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
And I will show that some excavated cancers are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, just like the cancer which is in the breasts or in the thigh and similarly with the members allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it begins small.
Perhaps when it is ancient and great, it does not seem that you can appropriate it to yourself, because you cannot heal from that ulcer nor have I seen another, nor has it been brought to that.
And the operation on it is that which is allocated as I have said, it is that you precede and leave the patient and purge with black bile some excavated, and then you will know that, if it is touched, a manifest repetition.
And then prepare the patient with preparation in which place is located for operation, and then prohibit in the truce of the uncis which are necessary for that; and then concave all parts to the good perexcrutation so that no roots of the causes of it remain. And let the blood flow, and do not absorb that lightness, and express the places, and abstain from the thick blood all to your hand or instrument with which it is possible to handle the instruments.
Perhaps if you have made opposition to the thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then cure it with another cure so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 54.
On the Cure of Hydropsy.
We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of hydropsy of water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not but the species of solitary altitudes, and it does not approach with iron to the species of timpanists nor to the species of hypochondriacs, because it is mortal.
When you have medicated this species of hydropic timpanistre with medicines and do not combine your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already achieved debilitation, or it is another hydropic malady, thus as if it is in the whole body or belly and seems similar to those, then beware that you do not medicate with iron, because fear is above all.
Perhaps sometimes the patient has an exuberant vertigo, and it is not another malady but only hydropic, and neither infant nor old, then the manner of the operation for him is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister places his extreme hand on the belly, inserting the water at the part below the navel, and then takes spathic spinning according to this form:
It is of two acute long parts, of acute extremity thus as spathic; perhaps however it is in some brief small brevity little by little, so that in the operation he does not pass into the intestine, and that leads him.
And then consider if the generation of hydropic is from parts of the intestines, because then it behoves that you have the section tied to the navel for the quantity of three digits below, in the direction of the belly above the navel.
Perhaps if the generation of hydropic is due to malady of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to the mixing, then your section should be on the right side.
And it does not behove that your section should be on the rib over which you want to transfer the malady so that the superfluous fluids do not flow to that free location.
And then perforate with the entire instrument the cisterna, and then insert into that section, and elevate your hand with the spathic between the cisterna and the siphac, and you excoriate it; and if the quantity of an ounce or around.
And then perforate the siphac until the spathic reaches the desired location, and it is the place of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to a subtle silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or golden lion, at the lower part of which there is a small tube, and on its sides there are three tubes: two from one part and one from the other part; and it is fashioned in the extremity of the instrument according to the manner of a feather, thus sometimes.
And in the extremity of the instrument there is a small ring, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it suddenly descends upon the instrument, and evacuates the water at that time in a moderate quantity, because if you evacuate more than that, it does not behove at that hour, for the evil spirit of the animal would be resolved, or it would hasten towards the fifth crisis which is approaching death.
Perhaps evacuate that according to the quantity of the vertigo of the patient and according to what the dispositions of the malady of the vertigo of the pulse of the patient and its goodness signify to you.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which causes it because suddenly it is retained by the cisterna which retains the tube that is above the siphac, of which I recommend to you that you perforate it according to this manner.
And then iterate the instrument another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do that for some days above fear, and beware of error so that you do not remain with too much water.
Perhaps if you fear about the patient, and leave a great quantity of water, then cure that one who is buried in hot sand, and move him to a bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until he is healthy.
And cauterize upon the stomach, and the mixing and the liver, according to the extraction of water, as I have recounted in what has been said previously.
The end.
On the cure of children whose urinary places are not perforated.
Some weakened children are thus from the belly of their mother and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or has a narrow tube or is not in its place).
Then it behoves to cauterize the perforation of the patient as soon as he is born with a subtle spathic according to this form:
And then pause in the tube a small key of lead and tie it, and you for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate, it is retained and held back; and then return that.
And if you do not stop the flow, it is possible that the urine which goes to the area will not be cleared from this closure.
Maybe that of which the stricture is straight should be medicated with key of Flow, thus as we have said, for thirty days until it is amplified.
Maybe those in which the stricture is not in its place, so led to, which causes because of those, that which is born and the trau is deprived of the end of the head of the rod because it cannot urinate at the divided parts, until it elevates the rod with its hand at the divided parts below; and it is not for generation, for thus because the sperm cannot reach the womb according to rectitude, and it is a great malady.
And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient should be seated on his back, and then extend the head of the rod with your left hand in a vehement extraction, and insert the head of the rod into the area of the perineum with a spatula, thus as it is inserted like a feather, or you do not touch any part, so that the mien of the rod seems to be at the head of the rod and the stricture falls into its proper place according to need.
And beware that in your operation of blood flow, because many times it happens to stop; and pause at the moment when it absorbs the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 6.
About the white ulcer that occurs on the perineum at the head of the rod and of corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the perineum at the head of the rod.
Many times it happens that this white ulcer occurs on the rod and it is a sign of great carnal weakness.
And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, it is necessary that you suspend with a subtle unguent and absorb it until it disappears completely; and then pause over the underlying skin, submerging it in Egyptian ointment; and then, cure the wound daily with finicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant, of bad color, then it is necessary that you administer cautery at the insertion of it and its root.
Maybe if the ulcer is on the perineum of the head of the rod in an uncircumcised person, and one part of the ulcer is inside the perineum and another part is outside, then it is necessary that you remove the ulcer which is inside from the beginning until it is consolidated; and then you cure the outer one, because when you cure the inner one, it is not assured that it will not be troubled.
And also it happens in the genitals and on the perineum with blackness and corruption, therefore it is necessary that you conquer all that which has been denounced and that which wants to corrupt or that which is corrupted; and then apply liniments over that with good millet flour of scorched wheat and of errors, trissatz and crivellatz.
And then cure it with another treatment until it is healthy.
Maybe if there is a flow of blood, then administer lunar cautery according to this form:
because juvenile cautery is in two dispositions at the same time, thus it is a flow of blood and a wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the rod is corroded and is destroyed entirely at that hour, then it is necessary that you introduce into the middle of the perineum a tube of lead so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the perineum to the head of the rod (and this adhesion does not happen except in those whose perineum is sound, and on it no circumcision is performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or apostema) it is necessary that you scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the rod is liberated from all parts.
And if it is difficult to disentangle those exquisite things, then it is necessary that you scrape with a spatula for some cause of the head of the rod and of the perineum, and thus it is because the perineum, when it is subtle, is easily perforated by its subtlety.
And then separate between the perineum and the head of the rod with a subtle drizzle of liquid, which has been softened in warm water so that they do not adhere again another time.
And then it is cured with a seven-step treatment until it is consolidated.
Chapter 7.
About the purification of children and the cure of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity thus as the other wounds: maybe emperor with our operation and our will, and those of that are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to them a better operation and a more gentle way to preserve their health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free laws, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experimentation, which causes the majority of artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with novacula and torores; and they used ligament with faith and insertion into the nail.
You have already gone through all these manners and do not get bewildered by the various mixtures of medicines, because in the mixture there is a similarity with the onguent, since many times the coding of the prepuce to two tunics, and Roman tonic is added afterwards, and it is strengthened by another inscription and sure pain. And in the mundification which is made by alphabetic, and it is digital, of which the saboteurs make use, it is not insured the inscription on the extremity of the virile member, because it enters strongly into its tract.
Maybe in the operation on the nail, you strongly obstruct iron and corrupt your operation. And the coding of the infant is brief by nature, and many times it is seen in such a manner that there is no need for mundification, and you have seen that.
Maybe from the mundification that is made with onguents and lamentations of fiel, goodness, experiment describes it to me, because the onguents are of proportional inscription, for which the acuitation that is below is also as the acuitation that is above; and thus as you press your hand so proportionally two acuitations, and inscribe them according to a comparison in one time; and it is made with compression of fiel in a figure containing the coding of the whole partition, in which there is no chance of error.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the infant stay in a major position if it is one of those who understand a little, so that you do not do anything but place the fiel on its verge only, and that you let it enter into another day.
And then make that rejoice in all that manner which is as much as possible for you to receive its intelligence. And then make that stay between your hands, well prepared and established, and do not let it be seen; and hide the onguents in your hand or near the foot, so that the infant does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into its verge and blow on the coding, and pull it out so that the head of the verge is seen, and then mundify that which is added to it with filth.
The form of the onguents for mundification, this is the form:
Some of the extremities are not-taloned and others are taloned, so that the branch of the nail is not seen, and it is the length of the two acuitations also as the length of two manual handles in harmony.
Maybe the error in mundification is because you strongly effuse the internal coding entirely, or part of it deviates from the inscription.
Therefore, I suppose that you extend that of your hour at your nail before the apostemation of the place and that you inscribe it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it at your nail, then extract it in a hook and inscribe it.
Maybe if three days have passed, and Roman water that is inflated below the apostematized verge, then you let it enter until the apostema is cooled, and excavate that which is facilitated, and inscribe it according to your preparation.
And beware of the head of the verge, because it will not hurt at that water.
And then care for that with water that the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is inscribed from the coding according to measure, and you obey the parts below, that does not bother at all.
And maybe care for that with water that we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On the cure of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is made by obstruction made by stone or by congealed blood, or by poisons or by wounds, and it seems similar to those of water that we have said about the manners of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved in water that we have said is vehemently made into the cause above the patient, then it is necessary to administer an extraction of it with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be of silver and its conical end should be subtle, like a thin cane of a reed, in similarity to a palm and half, at whose tip it should be subtle.
And the manner of examining the urine is that you should take the folded thread and place it in the extremity of the wool or cotton for good liaison; and insert the extremities of the thread into the rear part of the syringe, and push them into the forked tips if there is any superfluous cause in the wool, but introduce it into the cane with vehemence. And then place the syringe in a bowl and album of urine.
And make the patient sit on a chair, and enclose the bladder of theirs and the verge with olive oil and anoint it, and anoint it with olive oil and oils.
And then introduce the syringe to facilitate entry into the root of the bladder; and then double the bladder from below at the part of the naval; and then fill the syringe with that; and then fill it so that it reaches the bladder, and then the patient is reached by the cause, and it is not done in this order, but rather the meat on which it goes to tortuousness.
And then stretch out the thread into the small wool little by little, because the urine dries the wool.
Then extract that and make a cure for urine, and use a syringe, do not cease to evacuate the water and use the syringe until the bladder and the patient are greatly alleviated.
Chapter 6.
On the quality of evacuation of the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments which are adapted to water.
When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or it is constricted with gangrene, or it is obstructed by poyredura, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is necessary to make an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
but rather that at the extremity of it is a hole, so it is closed. And in it there are three channels: two from one part, and sometimes more.
At the beginning it is a concave place, in which there is water that is imprisoned, and it is according to the quantity that oppiles that, its addition, until when some cause is withdrawn from the humidity, it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled, with water it is withdrawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what makes the clampcedra in which there is phicated naptha in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, when you want to draw humidity into the bladder, introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and withdraw with that water which is imprisoned in the lower parts, because the humidity is withdrawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then introduce the extremity of the clampcedra into the bladder according to what we have recommended in the syringe; and then fill the humidity with that water which fills, because that humidity passes through to the bladder at once, and the patient feels it.
The form of the subtle crystallizer in which the bladder is crystallized, and this is its form:
And it is made of silver or copper, of which the head is so subtle that it seems like a small feather, and below it has a hollow tube.
And then take the bladder in motion, and pause in it the humidity that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong ligatures with a double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then introduce the extremity of the crystallizer into the bladder.
And then strengthen your hand over the bladder with the humidity in structured descent until the patient feels that the humidity has already passed into the bladder.
But if you are not present at the bladder, then take a piece of parguames and make it into that circle; and perforate it with all its returned totality; and then introduce a strong thread into those channels, as they are revolved; and then add the circle as it is added also to the softness, so that you pause in that water which you want from the humidities, and oils and waters.
And then you tie that to the instrument and make it as it is made in the bladder, and express it with your hand until the humidity passes into the bladder.
Chapter 10.
On the extraction of stone.
We have already spoken in the division of the species of stone and its cure with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said that the patient must be placed in a chair where they can operate with their hand, and assist them.
The chair prepared in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
And you already know how to make a clear and brief exposition.
So it is said that the chair prepared in the bladder mostly goes to the children; and of its signs are that the urine that is issued from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels his rod, and many veins are felt, and it is properly dressed; and I know for certain that the anus is open in many of those.
And it is the healing of the children's health from that age that they have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult to cure in the veins. More often in the young ones it is worse because it occurs among them.
And of that one whose chair is greater and the cure is more difficult; And if it is slight, it is contrary to that.
So when we come to the cure of that, it is necessary at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with Christ's cross, which extracts all the filth that is in their sick veins; because that filth prohibits the descent of the chair, and the inquiry of it.
And then be near the patient with their feet elevated and constricted, and held in a way that the chair descends to the region of the bladder, or that it jumps from place to some veins.
And then make that circle between your prepared hands, and his hands are placed under the hips of him, so that the whole bladder is made to decline towards the lower parts.
And then seek out that and all that defect.
So if you feel the chair in the space, then you will find it immediately with assistance over him.
And if you do not find the whole of it at once, then it is necessary that you anoint with olive oil the said finger of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said finger if he is a young adult, and insert it into his anus. And seek out the chair until it stays under the said finger. And convert that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press above that with the said finger, and expel it to the lower parts before you see the place where you will assist.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to stretch out his right hand towards the upper parts, and hold his other hand under the codena which is below the genitals, in the place where the assistance is made.
And then insert the spatula beneath the incident of which this is the form of it: and you separate it in the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place, beside the side of the left hip; and be the assistance on that chair and the said finger is in the anus, and make transverse assistance, so that the assistance from before is wide and direct, according to the quantity that you feel of the chair being possible, and no more, because you will compress the said finger which is in the anus the chair from which the assistance is forgotten, and it is often difficult.
And you know that of the chair there are some which have an angle and margins, because the evacuation of it is made difficult for that.
And of that water it is like a lion similar to a globe, and it is round, and it makes the easier evacuation.
So if it is that one which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not forgotten, then it is necessary that you lean over that, or that you strengthen over that with decent gestures, the extremity of which is like a lime on which you strengthen over the chair, and do not evacuate from it; or that you insert below the subtle instrument of curved extremity.
More often if you cannot reach that, then you amplify the tract a little, and if you see flux of blood, separate it with strong vinegar triturated.
More often if the chair is more of one, then at the beginning you push the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it over him; and then push a little more water; and similarly make many movements.
And if it is a very large chair, then ignorance is that you insert it with great assistance, because it harms the patient for one of two causes: either he dies or he becomes accustomed to the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not totally consolidated.
More often administer expulsion of it until it is forgotten, or insert into the fracture of it with the forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with enemas of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And stop on that damp cloth infused in oil and wine, or in oil rubbed with water, so that the postema's heat may be calmed.
Then restore the patient to their bed, and do not discharge the bandage until the third day.
And when the aura is discharged, anoint the area with water and much oil, and then take care to heal that wound with diamond-like remedies and dibasilicon remedies until it is healthy.
Sometimes in the plague, postema heat is accidentally adjusted, and corrosive, and of that same sort as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and therefore urine is prohibited (and that is known through the egress of the blood in the urine), so then insert the warm tieu in the plague and extract that blood, because it remains to provoke the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the plague with wine, water and salt, and apply opposition to all species, with that which is convenient for the cure until it is healthy.
And take care in all hours of the entire cure that you read to both thighs and adjust the medicines which are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and it is in the middle of the bladder, and it is fixed in it, and urination is prohibited, then cure it with what you have recommended beforehand so that you may pass through to section, because many times veiled passages are accused of section; and already you have spread out this, and it is that you take a perforator of iron alloy, of which this is the form:
of triangular extraction, pointed, fixed in a shaft.
And then take a thread, and tie it to that which holds the bladder beneath the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating with facility until the perforator reaches that stone. And turn the perforator with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you perform the perforation of it until you make that from the other part penetrate; because the urine will then be absoluted.
And then place your hand on that which is remaining of the stone from the part before the bladder, because it is triangular, and it is forced out with the urine, and the patient is healthy.
Sometimes this cure is not adapted for some cause that prohibits it, then tie a thread beneath the stone, and another thread above the stone. And then incise over the stone in that bladder between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then discharge the bandage and clarify the congealed blood, which is done in the plague.
And it is not necessary to have a bandage of thread beneath the stone, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other bandage above, because when the thread is discharged, the stone returns to its place and takes away the plague.
And therefore it is necessary to have the thread above, that you elevate the stone to the parts above, or that it returns with the warm compliment, and takes away the plague thus as we have said.
Chapter 16.
On the extraction of stone from women.
A stone in women is rarely generated.
Sometimes a stone appears in some of them, then the cure of it is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is because the woman's bladder is weak.
And the second is because you do not find a woman who knows how to describe her own measurements to the doctor when it is cast, or they are of the women having husbands.
The third is because you do not find a woman who knows this art, mainly the operation with her hand.
And the fourth is that the place of section over stone in women is longer than the place of the stone, because it requires a deeper section, and in that there is fear.
Sometimes it is necessary to provoke you to this, then take care that you find a wise woman who knows how to operate, and few are skilled.
Sometimes you are deprived of this, then seek a wise and subtle woman, or present a mature woman who is skilled in the affairs of women, or a woman who in this art has parted from the art.
Then make that present, and command to it that it does all that you will order, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; which cause is that it takes care if the woman is weak, then take care that you put the instrument in its rear and extract the stone.
Then if it is extracted, cut that beneath the instrument, and then command to it that it incises over that.
Sometimes if it is not weak, then command the matron to insert the instrument into the hole of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she places her left hand on the bladder, and comprehends that with good comprehension.
Therefore, when you touch that, then it is good to gradually evacuate the noxious matter from the bladder to the parts below, as it is a sign of its virtue entering into that through the narrow passage of the thigh.
And then place a compress on that affected area of the thigh, where it is constricted by the narrow passage of the thigh, and bind the stone in that part, and do not let it be removed from the stone, which is constricted below.
And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the rod into that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity which you think the stone will be extracted from there.
And you should know that the types of stones are many: some are small and large, and rough, sharp, long and round, and have ridges.
Then you know how many types of stones there are from that which you signify above what you want.
And if you see a flow of blood, adjust the vitriol-treated location and apply it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
And make sure you prepare yourself with the instruments which are necessary for the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be aided by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is injured, then you stop powder on the location and strengthen those pulverized and descending strictures, and do not iterate that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because you will strongly kill the patient. And then cure the wound.
Then when the bleeding has ceased, then apply some warm compresses, and the location will purify itself, then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On the section about hernia and cause.
Hernia is not only an accumulation of humidity in the white cavity which is below the codena of the genital area containing the humor, and it is called a cavity.
And some swollen veins are in the proper skin fold which prepares nature in the area of the humor, until it is known that it is another humor; and it is the codena of the genital area between the white cavity which we have mentioned, and it is not just a tumor.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genital area, so that to those it is fundamentally attributed, and some veins occur through percussion made on the genital area.
And this humidity has many colors, because the color of the humor is declining to citrine or sanguineous, or red, or it is black and filthy, or it is whitish and watery, and that is what is most prevalent.
And the signs by which it is known are these: because if it is in the white cavity which we have mentioned, then the apostema is red and declining a little in length, thus forming a figure of humor, and it appears in the genital area, because the humidity contains all that part.
And if the humidity is in the proper skin fold, then the apostema is red and appears in the area of the humor, and thus one estimates that it is another humor.
And if the humidity is between the codena of the genital area and the white cavity, then you will find the sentiment below.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you will spread the color of the humidity in the apostema in the innermost layer of the cavity whose form is previously described; and according to what is written in the vestige of the innermost layer, judge from that which is hidden within.
Then when we come to the cure of the iron deficiency, then it is good to command the patient to take flea-bane if that is possible for you, and sometimes the cost of the iron pleurisy.
And then it should be resupinated over the two seats above some cause a little higher, and stop below the word drops.
And then you should sit on the left side of it, and command the minister to follow on the right side of it, which extends its rod to one of two layers at the codena of the genital area and at the parting of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a spatula and separate the codena of the genital area from my place for the length until you reach the pentagonal line.
And make the section according to the rectangular engagement distant from the line that separates the skin of the genital area, until you reach the white cavity comprehending.
And excavate that, and observe, and guard yourself for thus you do not injure it; and your excavation is the one which that excavates by parting the humor more and subtly scrutinized in the excavation according to the quantity possible for you.
And then pierce the cavity full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the wound with an unciform instrument, and extend the siphach to the divided parts above; do not touch the codes that comprehend the genital area, and insert the siphach in that manner that is as discreet as possible. You insert that in its entirety or in pieces, and you increase the subtle flow of the sieve, because if you do not meticulously examine the insertion of it, it is not a safe guarantee that the water does not return.
Perhaps the fluid proceeds from that defect of its code in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the siphach, return to that, and then adjust the two lips of the code of the genitals with a suture, and then cure that thus with the other plagues, until it is sanitized.
And if you find the fluid corrupted by another malady, then it is necessary that you lift the vessels which are suspended above, and extract the fluid, and then cure that thus with water as we have said.
Perhaps the water is distributed in two equal parts, then you know that two are the hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done in the other engagement; and if it is clear to you that it is an operation, then do it.
And then you purge the blood, and enter into the sections of the submerged lane with oil or rose oil; and pause before another lane which you have submerged in wine and oil, and expand that over both genitals and the miracle of the belly; and pause above doubled drapes and pulvils, and link those above the liement which is according to this form:
And then press two drapes and fill the lane of the carmenade fabric according to this resemblance; and fill the extremities with those that are wrapped in cotton or humid lane, and add structure to the breeches of the breeches, and one of the extremities takes hold of the backside up to the two, and the second takes hold of the part of the peritoneum, and two extremities over two hips below and two other extremities over two angles, and all the structure is adjusted in the breeches of the breeches.
And some veguadas for this hernia are medicated artificially with a cautery in place of the section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cutellar cautery and insert it into the code of the genitals, and ignite according to what we have recommended until the white siphach containing water is discovered, and then you take the cautery according to this form: And it is assembled in a Greek letter.
And then pierce that siphach, and ignite until all the humidity is driven out.
And then extend the siphach with an unciform instrument, and scrape with an unciform instrument, and scrape with a subtle ignited cautery; insert that according to what is possible for you until you eradicate all of it; and beware of the fluid that the fire does not touch.
And you know that this operation is more salvaging and more remote from the flow of blood, and better than an operation on the section.
Perhaps you have made a counter-irritation aposteme in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then it is necessary that you cure what counter-irritation you make for water, with curative care that convenes to it according to what has been said.
Perhaps the patient is poor, and does not hope for the second operation due to its horribility, then administer piercing according to what you have recommended; and it is when it is certified by you, for water that we have said of the signs, that this hernia is watery.
Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on some elevated seat, then pierce the aposteme in the lowest part of it with a spatula lat, and pause the piercing according to the longitude of the body.
And it is the wide perception until all the water flows out.
And then pause on the cottony place and link that to it, so that the remainder of the water flows out. And then cure it until the plague is healed.
Perhaps the counter-irritation is at the origin of the water in that hour when you pierce it: and this is not done except for the reason that the white pantaloon in the orrifici of the plague makes a counter-irritation and prohibits the egress of the water, then it is necessary that you put in the plague a penal instrument or an instrument with which the water is extracted from the hydropitz, in the form of which precedes; or adjust on the opening of the plague a small one.
And you know that the water returns, and it is augmented then via six months or in those environments; and as it is augmented, then it is pierced according to that measured manner, because the patient will also pass the seven days.
Chapter 63.
On the section about fleshy hernia and its cure.
It seems that the patient knows that in the section above this hernia, there is a lost fear of perniciousness in the major dispositions; because it has been seen by me the dismissal of it and being saved for that better milhor.
And you will also remember the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
So, it is said that the abscesses are born in the bodies of those whose genitals are compacted and it is done for many causes: either for acute sharp superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or for percussion.
And it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body, and it is not detected in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And indeed it is a putrid abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not give a sensation to the body.
And some remedies are done for the swelling of the roots, and for the inflammation of those veins that have already perceived the memory of it, or for the inflammation of the veins.
But that which is for the inflammation of roots is recognized by the dispersal of the abscess when it compresses them in those same ties; and it does not cover that which touches.
But that which is done for the inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause unless it is compressed in those same ties.
And it is possible that above this species a section was made and above the other carns; and it is that you incised the codena of the genitals, and then stretched the skin to the upper parts, and extracted that from the white ciphac, and freed the suspensori of the veins, and ligated them, and incised the suspensori so that you freed that from all parts of the skin.
So if the skin is already consolidated in those carnal layers, then it covers that you extract the skin and incise that.
And if there is adhesion between some cause of the ciphac, or between that which is between the veins, then it covers that you free all that adhesion and incise that for a round incision.
But if there is a birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then it covers that you incise all that which is of it, and extract the skin as we have said.
So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin ointment and rose oil; and then heal that in another healing process until it is sanctified.
Chapter 64.
On the cure of hernia that comes from vit.
Vit is an abscess enveloped by some envelope-like broto with mollification of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercised movement and walking on the affected limb.
And in the cure of this disease, it is by fear for that which is preceded by memory.
However, I think that I should do an operation on that according to what the first ones did.
And I say that it is necessary to place the affected limb on an elevated pillow; and then apply the suspensori of the testicles to the lower parts; and then incise the codena of the genitals in those same ties in the veins that are probable to the verge; and hold those other ministre that you, and extend them with vehement extension.
And then incise in the spatium laterally to the transverse section in the right of the veins until they discover the hidden veins.
And then excavate all parts as I have said in the extraction of roots which are in the temples.
And then place in those an agulha on which is done double faith, and tie that to the first of the places where you find vit, and tie another remedy behind them. And then incise those in the middle place for a right section according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the fetid and corrupt humors.
And then heal the wound with a cure of the other wounds in which you want to be sanctified so that the veins which are not obstructed by one of the two genitals may flow, because it is not bad for that.
But if you find vit in all the veins, then it covers that the testicles are extracted or that the testicles for that are cut off from the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the veins, and that they are stabilized, or that they are cut off so that there is no juvenation in those.
Chapter 65.
On the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is by section that goes into the extended ciphac above the belly on the part of the anguinars of the miracle of the belly, so that by sending out the intestines of that rupture to some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the ciphac or of its excision, and it occurs in these two species for many causes: either by percussion, or by fall, or by shouting, or by elevation of some severe cause, or by similarity.
In this case, it seems that the water of the patient, when it is due to extension of the liver, is that it accumulates little by little over a long time, and does not accumulate suddenly, and it is an apostema that enters through the veins to compress the intestine.
And the urine of the patient is when it is due to dryness of the liver, because at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and it is diverse apparent symptoms that appear before the proper codena, and this is due to inflammation of the intestine, and his body is divided into parts before the liver.
And some evacuated matters are outside of the intestine, and this is called intestinal hernia that turns round.
And some evacuated matters are made in the ventosity, and some evacuated matters run into the intestine, and here it is retained, and it is a great pernicious thing of the patient, and some evacuated matters cause evil pain and worsen when it is premature.
And in the cure of the species of this disease at that time fear is iron, because it seems that it has been excluded from the treatment in that.
And the manner of the operation of that is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand at the inner parts of their cavity if they obey the return of the sieve, and then it is placed over the sieve between the two thighs, and raises their legs.
And then stop the codena which is the codena of the testicles at the lower parts, and insert the codena of the testicles throughout the length; and then fix in two labia of the section uncis according to what is indicated to open the section in those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that you can possibly make from that, the hole will be evacuated.
And then scrape off that which is beneath the codena of the testicles, until the white liver is discovered from any part.
Then you introduce the finger into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white liver, which is beneath the codena of the hole, and between the liver according to, and absorb with that adherence which is in the back part of the hole.
And then place the hand on the codena of the testicles at the front parts, and also extend the white liver with its hand on the left side, and raise the hole to the liver at the section part; and command the minister to extend the hole downwards and you dissolve the adherence which is behind in a complete solution.
And search with the fingers to see if there is any cause of the intestine wrapped around the white liver. But if you find some cause of it, then you will fill that into the belly beneath.
And then insert into the part beneath the codena of the testicles for sectioning of that which will run with health and sanity, thus as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then administer the submerged lancet in oil, and pause in the plague; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and some evacuated matters of the white liver are cauterized, which we have said to administer with the insertion of the tempered flux of health, because many evacuated matters accumulate there) and release the binding until it falls by itself.
But if the treatment of that is delayed, then the hot water should be applied, and pause over it until it falls according to what we have said.
And then cure the plague with another cure of plagues until it is healthy.
Chapter 66.
Of windy hernia.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that it has been hardened under the cure of that with iron.
And the first doctors said that it is done thus as we have recommended in the hernia that is with us; which is to place the veins near the section over that with facilitated flux of that; and then cut in the middle location around the apostema in that, until the veins fall.
Heal the wound according to what we have said so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 67.
About the disruption that is caused in the veins.
Some bruised areas end up in rupture of the veins, as we have said, and empty the area.
And do not attribute to the genitals any cause of the intestines to the genitals; and if you do, it is little; and return to it in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged in this way, an adjusted fissure is made in the sigmoid colon so that it expels the intestine from the sigmoid colon; and this occurs for the extension of the sigmoid colon which is in the veins, as we have said, which causes the sigmoid colon to be stretched out, and then it becomes soft and putrid at the area and empties.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery, as it was preceded by the narration of it.
And some bruised areas are cured in this way: the patient lies on their back between their two hands, and then dry the area of the rupture of the abscesses empties itself by draining according to the quantity of three digits.
And then strengthen the white sigmoid colon that is above the codeine until it is discovered.
And then take the radish and place it on the prominent area of the sigmoid colon, and apply it to the navel of the belly.
And then kiss the two prominent areas above the extremity of the radish of the sigmoid colon, and adjust one to the suture with the other.
And then extract the extremity of the radish, and do not insert into the entire sigmoid colon, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause, as you will know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then heal it with the cure of wounds, and as you insert the threads, purify it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; because the sigmoid colon is constricted and not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more suitable for health.
Chapter 68.
About the softening of the codeine of the testicles.
Many bruised areas of the codeine of the testicles in some men are softened by this, because the flesh that is between them is softened, and it is necessary to observe their condition.
Therefore it is necessary for the one who is engaged in the cure of it to make the patient lie on their back, and insert the entire codeine which is softened over the natural codeine; and then adjust both lips to the suture.
And if you wish, then at the beginning of the treatment, remove the excess of the softened codeine with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
And then insert between the stitches; and then heal by healing of other wounds until it is healthy and the threads are cleared.
Chapter 69.
About Castration.
I know that castration is forbidden in our law, but because of the cause I am forced to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that it is in the science of the doctor when he is expert in that, who knows the cure of it which occurs; and the other reason is that we often need castration of other animals for our young ones, such as of horses, and of goats, and of pigs, and similar to those animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by making a fissure for drainage.
Moreover in that which is done by attrition, the method of the operation is that we make the animal drink hot water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang down. And then take them with your hand until they are resolved and do not appear below the touch.
Moreover in castration done by making a fissure and drainage, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press the codeine of its testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the supporters, and insert above each hole in one drainage until two holes are processed.
And then insert them with a tube so that some excretion is purified. And do not leave any cause on the sigmoid colon, but rather the subtle sigmoid colon which is above the veins.
And in this way of castration it is better which is done by attrition, because attrition strongly loosens any cause of the testicles so that the animal desires to mate.
And then heal the wound until it is healthy.
Chapter 70.
About the cure of Hermaphrodite disease.
Hermaphrodite disease in men is according to two ways: one is because it appears in that which occupies the space in the codeine of testicles, in which there are two testicles, forming a figure like a woman's flesh.
And certain evacuated matters of that corr urine which are in the codes of the testicles.
In women, it is a species: and it is that the womb of the woman over the perineum is also like two testicles of a man, a little smaller in all miniatures, beforehand like the perineum of a man and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three species: of two of men and of one species of women. And it is that you should cover those adjusted meats within so that they expel the impression of that, and then that you cure them with the treatment of the other plagues.
And in the second species of men, from which urine is made that is in the codes of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter 21.
On obstructions and prominent flesh caused by women's affairs.
Obstruction is adjusted over natural causes so that it is tightened and made firm by observation; and certain evacuated matters are magnified in certain women to the extent that they spread also like in men, and are perceived during coitus.
Then you should have the abundance of obstruction with your hand or on a hook and adjust it.
And do not ultimately insert it, rather in the region of the root, so that there is no excessive flow of blood.
And then heal it with the treatment of the wounds so that it may be healthy.
Born flesh is flesh that grows in the horrific womb of the mother so that it fills it, and obstructions are placed on the divided parts beforehand according to the resemblance of a snake (and for this reason some primary authors called it "caudal badness"); therefore you should insert it thus as we insert obstructions, and cure it so that it may be healthy.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of gout.
Gout is when the womb of the woman is not perforated, or has a small passage. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to badness which has preceded, and that is made or for flesh not adjusted or for subtle or specific ciphers.
And it is made or in the region of the mother, or in its ribs, or in its upper part, or in its lower part, and prohibits from conception and from pregnancy, and also prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by observation of the uterus, if the obstacle is apparent, certainly; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with the threads or with the beam.
But if the obstacle is due to subtle ciphers, and it is proposed to the two labia, then you touch and disrupt that.
And it is that which pauses over the two pubic labia, and then pauses the threads or indices of both hands in the midst.
And the woman is on her back, her extended thighs, and then extends the two labia inward so that the subtle cipher is broken and the obstacle is opened.
And then take an ointment and anoint the four oil holes, and pause that over the place, and hold it for a day so that the place is not consolidated.
But if the cipher is large and specific, then you should insert it with a broad spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstacle is due to flesh, then suspend it with a hook, and insert it.
And there are your medications that stop the flow of blood with their bite, like ahacatia, and dragon's blood, and essences, adjusted with the white album of Hou.
And then administer a wide lead pipe so that the wound is not consolidated too quickly.
And hold it for some days and administer lukewarm water of the dry season.
And then it is healed with another treatment of consolidation so that it may be healthy.
And certain veins are born in the native birth of other flesh, and then you should insert according to this manner. But if it is for cancerous aposteme, to the cancerous aposteme which is in the womb not made contrary with iron in any manner.
Chapter 23.
On the cure of hemorrhoids and of tile and of red botch that are born in the womb of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the orifices of many veins so that they corrode blood continuously; and how ancient hemorrhoids are, and they are made tiles.
And I have already said in the division of the species of those and their signs, and I will say thus about those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and tiles when they are in the region of the womb and do not appear to the senses, then in those there is no treatment made with iron.
Those which are in the orifice of the mother above those which feel sentiment, are those that are cured.
And it is fitting that you place the woman in a warm bath and then extend the thigh to the forearm, or grasp as an assistant, and thus you will find those which are at the roots.
And then powder over those which have the flow of blood from one of the hidden vessels, thus causing numbness and seeming to be similar to those.
And then soak the sick feet for an hour, and then pause that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that into a decoction of herbs and roots of millet and of wheels and of similar things.
And then take flour of barley and mix it with honey and wine, and make an emplaster over that on the back of it.
And if the blood is abscessed, well; and if not, make adhere to two ventoses, and to the nipples their scarification.
And then take wool and submerge it in juice of colic root or juice of arnaglossa or juice of guarrivier with wine, and make adhere to the place; and then cure the place until it is whole again.
And cure that until it is whole again.
Chapter 74.
On the accidental perforation of a hernia in the mother.
Various special types of abscesses that occur in the mother, such as cancer and malignant apostema, and ulcerations and adherences and eruptions and hemorrhoids and ragworts and thigh and other abscesses. And I have already said these evils and the species of those and their signs and their cures in the division.
And it is fitting that I should speak in this treatise on abscesses about the one which occurs in the mother when it is among those abscesses that collect sanity, and if you want to know how the operation of it is made with iron.
Therefore it is fitting that you consider if the pain of the abscess in the sick beginning is acute with percussion and fluctuation and fever, and sometimes it increases and feels sentiment upon it, then do not touch the perforation of it, and cure it with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
And then it is fitting that you make the woman sit on a chair that has two chairs; and recline on her back and adjust her feet at the partition below the belly, and her thighs are expanded, and place her arms below her knees, and tie something with a ligament to what is convenient.
And then the midwife follows the straight path and administers the instrument with which one opens the orifice of the mother, in the form of which you will find in those causes that will be done properly.
And it is fitting when you want to administer this instrument that you place it in the radius of the mother's womb of the woman, and what of the instrument enters into the mother should not be more than the radius of the mother's womb and leads to the malady. But if the instrument is larger than the radius of the mother's womb, then it is fitting that you place pads on the texture of the radius of the mother's womb so that the entrance of all instrument into the radius of the mother's womb is prohibited.
And it is fitting that you pause the vertebral column that runs in the instrument from above and that the minister holds the instrument and revolves the vertebral column until it is opened into the orifice of the mother.
And when the extraction appears, and it is touched by the hand and it is gentle and soft, then it is fitting that you separate that from the head of it with a spatula flat.
And when the sanity is evacuated, then it is fitting that you place in the wound a submerged medicated oil or green oil on which there is some stipulation; and place the calcium in the section into the radius of the mother's womb.
And then before the mother and on the entire clean wool submerged in water in which there are swollen mumps.
And then it is cured after two days with whole treatment that converges to what is convenient until it is whole again.
And some vegetables are washed with the mother and the wound in such a way that it is crystallized in water and honey, and then in water in which there is infused root of iris or long aristology, and then returns to whole treatment.
And if the wound is deeply rooted in the mother's womb, then it is fitting that you are prohibited from the cure of it with iron, unless you have cured it with what we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To instruct the midwives in which manner they should medicate the unnatural embryos according to a non-natural figure.
A necessary cause is that the womb conceives at the beginning of the figure of natural childbirth through sensations of it, and it is that when you feel the woman expressing desire towards the lower parts and wanting to smell the air, and above this is entwined for that which is part of it, and fastens the sentiment of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to natural figure, and it is the sentiment of it upon the seventh month, and the second one is that which hangs or depends from the navel.
Then, when you feel those sensations, then it is necessary that the woman's belly is compressed so that the embryo descends more lightly, because it presses upon the seventh month, it presses on it the second one, and it is freed from those superfluous fluids with good mondification.
Maybe that which is another part is unnatural and not-laughable, because when the embryo is situated upon its feet and the body of it is situated before its head and its feet, and its hand is one, or at its foot. or it is situated the head of it and its hand, or at its belly, and it is strongly converted upon the seventh vertebra, and it seems like the unnatural figures of it.
There is a necessary cause for the womb to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that it guards against error and deception.
And you show the entire figure of those, and what engine is in those so that it is signified by that and is established upon that.
When the fetus is situated upon the seventh month by natural growth, and it is vehement against the woman and makes a difficult part, and sometimes its virtue is already debilitated, then make that separation, or so that women have it, and evaporates the congealed humor of it with fenugrec oil and olive humits.
And then introduce the measuring rod between the seven small fingers of the spatulum, and find that second one, or dry that on its own nail until it corrodes that which is in it of humidity. And press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
Maybe if it doesn't descend, then it is necessary that the woman be crystallized with a poultice of powdered ptilli and powdered fenugrec with cizami.
And then command it to her, then crystallize it, so that it is compressed and makes that stormy turmoil with condiments; and close its mouth and nose for an hour, because the fetus will be forced out soon.
And if the two parts of the fetus are not yet fully forced out at the beginning, then it is necessary that you reduce those with facilitated small steps. Maybe if it doesn't obey the instrument, then stop the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then settle the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she doesn't fall from the concussion.
And if the parts are not yet turned and the fetus dies, then cut those and extract the remaining part of the fetus or lift the body to its mother with a drag and extract that with equality, because it will be forced out.
When the fetus is upon the seven feet, then it is necessary that you impel those in themselves, and then convert the small fetus, and then impregnate that, and then take one of its feet and extend those small steps.
Maybe when they are situated between the thighs, then you command it to come out, and make that external turmoil with condiments, because it will be forced out if God wills it.
And if it is not forced out in that which we have recommended, then return the small fetus to its natural figure, because it will be forced out later with a lighter sentiment.
And if it is prohibited in all that we have recommended, then take a poultice of altaea and dissolved goma, and percussionate everything in the mortar for good percussion, and then line up with the humor of the woman, at the bottom of her belly. And then make that mixture in warm water, until you obtain the hypochondriac remedies.
And when the lower parts of it are purified, then make for it the sub-fumigation of myrtle and pause that at it. And when you do the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make it settle on a chair, and then make that turmoil and extract its mouth, and lift from that, and press the lower part of its belly with lighter compression, because the fetus will soon be forced out.
Examine the foot laterally while holding one of its hands. Be ingenious in the reduction of his hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her go there.
And if she cannot go, then place the matting on the bed, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous concussion, and gradually administer remedies that you have recommended for softening.
And if the inflammation has come, then place the seizer on the affected part, and gradually study the reduction of the hand, and bend the foot according to its natural shape, and make the woman stand upright and order him to compress it until it is forgotten.
Examine the foot on the expanded joints, his hands, and the surface of his feet, which are at the back of his mother. So that the midwife holds the foot's hand and gradually turns it little by little, and thus facilitates it.
And when it is bent, and then pause on the joint of his foot that we have recommended to be treated with oil and softening remedies.
And gradually order him to massage it little by little, and when you have done that, then place the seizer on an affected area and order him to incline it over the right side, and gradually order him to be compressed; and make him stand upright in a convenient condition. The prepared fetus is turned onto its side.
When you diagnose a horrific condition of the mother according to this method, consider, and then you insert your finger into the second finger of your hand until it is evacuated of humidity.
And if the foot is suspended above the face and neck of his, then you insert that of the naval, so that it is not retained and dies.
And gradually employ the foot to the divided parts until it pauses according to what is necessary, and order the woman to compress herself in some intervals, and it will be forgotten in the examination of the easier, if God wills it.
The outcome of twins or many fetuses. You know that many twins are born naturally, and some times three or four, but that is strange and Tartarus' end; but I do not understand the causes of unnatural birth, and it is not living.
And count them, yes it is that they are multiplied, a second one, and are separated by a cipher, distinguishing those that enter the ligament of each umbilical cord; some intervals are forgotten thus as one fetus for natural examination easier, and so some intervals are treated for unnatural examination thus as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to deliver because of their deviations from natural birth and come to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you cure them thus as we have reported.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what facilitates and subtlety, and tardiness, and be ingenious according to the whole figure as it is prepared for the ingenuous birth to health.
Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some wounds are formed in the matrix one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more, and I have already verified that a woman who has aborted seven times will have all types of wounds, and another total formation, which causes fatigue from measuring the glorious wise men.
And all that is necessary for the science of the midwife to be strong enough to reach that small part of it, and therefore stop there as I know.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus in what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not before examined, and you are forced to use operative action on the hand, then it is necessary to consider if the woman is of sane virtue and not among those accidents for which she is threatened with loss.
Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on a bed with her back supported by two pillows, and her head inclined downward and her thighs elevated.
And the minister holds that of two parts or is tied to the bed so that the body of hers does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And gradually you humidify the mouth of her womb with oils and softening remedies of altaea and of fenugrec and of sesame seeds.
And gradually the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and softening remedies, and gradually inserts her hand to facilitate in the womb, and gradually seeks the hand in the place where the fingers are on the fetus.
It looks convenient to you: then consider if the feet are prepared that you should place them on a high seat, and afterwards fix the toes in the heels, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or also in the beard, or in the armpit, or in the proper places of the ribs, or also in the hypochondria.
Maybe the placement is on the soles of their feet, then on the little toe, or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary to hold the toe with the right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and meanwhile facilitate the hand and fix the toe in some of those places where the fingers have held, until you reach the underlying cause.
And then pause and fix in the application of another toe, or the third if it is necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not extended according to its straightness as much as possible.
And massage the whole affected part, so that the efflux of it is alleviated thus as it is done in teeth to achieve the eradication of it.
And it is necessary in that water which is between them so that the extension is mollified; and if some part of it is retained, then it is necessary to massage some of those fingers with oil and meanwhile entwine those expertly and revolve around that water which is retained.
Then if the part of the foot is forgotten, then the toes are permuted into the place where it was previously put; and do so until the whole foot is forgotten.
Maybe the hand is exhausted beforehand, and it is not possible to reduce that due to its contraction, then it is necessary that a wrapping is enveloped over that; and then extract that until it is completely forgotten, and insert it either in the joint of the hand or in the elbow.
And thus it is necessary to do similarly on the other hand and on both feet.
Maybe the head of the foot is large, or it reaches its contraction in the efflux, or it is at the head of the adjusted water, then it is necessary to entwine between the fingers spatulum spinos and break the head and extract the water, or that discovers with an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will be seen in the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that is about to come.
And similarly it is done if the foot has a large head by nature: and then it is necessary to insert that with an algemat, or that takes that with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is effluxed and contracted from the armpit, then it should be opened until the humidity which is in the pit is eliminated.
Maybe if it is not complicated, nor does it obstruct the efflux, then you insert the head as soon as possible according to your skill.
And if the space of the belly is apostematized or is in the hydropic, then it is necessary that you perforate that until the corrosion of the humidity that is in it.
Maybe if the feet are on the high seat, then the attraction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is lighter.
Maybe if it is contracted from the belly and pit, then it is necessary that you extract that with a wrapping which you have enveloped over your hand, and that you open the belly and pit until the corruption of what is in them.
Maybe if the other members are numb and the head is turned, then the metrona inserts the left hand; maybe if the mouth of the mother is opened, then insert the hand in the prison of the liver, and seek with that the head, and thrust that with the fingers until the mouth of the mother, and then insert into it one toe, or two toes, and thrust it with those.
And if the mouth of the mother is contracted by apostema because it reaches the one which accedes to the u, then it is necessary that it not be troubled over it; beforehand it is necessary to administer effusion of humid and greasy causes. And administer emplasters; and follow the patient in waters that mollify and humectate.
And if the feet are on the high rib, then if it is possible, it should be agitated: and it should be administered what we have said in the old foot.
And if that is not possible, then it should be inserted in patches, and it should be extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave any underlying cause of the second fever.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of the apostemas caused by the ones which accede to the mother.
And if it accedes to flow of blood, then it is necessary to place them in stipitic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in the belly of which was dead foot, and then on that same focus another pregnant wound, and then the dead foot is the other foot. It happens that for a long time an abscess has been forming in the patient's swollen belly; and it has inflated inward, and begins to take hold of the arm.
And you have been called to care for him, and have treated him for a long time, but the wound is not consolidated.
Then you should place upon him some plaster of strong attraction, and extract from him a bone, and then you will pass some few days, and extract another bone; and you have been too marvelous, since there are no bones in the belly.
And then you should think that they were from the dead foot's bones.
Then you should heal the wound, and extract from him many bones, the woman existing in the numerous milk-like dispositions, and already you have seen it in such a manner for a long time, correcting one small arm.
And you do not find it strange, but rather that it is science and help to arrive at the artificial hand by which the doctor performs administration of care.
About the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the foot.
Form of vertebrae in which the matrix is opened:
This is the form of stretcher on which the books are placed, to which stretcher two vertebrae are joined at the ends of two feet. The emperor ordered this vertebra to be made more subtle than the stretcher, and it was made of ivory or of wood from trees.
And it was the width of each wood that two fingers and a margin of each hand that one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of two woods there are two adjustments of that same wood which are already fixed, of which the length is a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the matrix so that it is opened when you revolve the two prescribed vertebrae.
Another form similar to that one, but more subtle and more lightweight:
It was made of wood from ivory or trees according to the resemblance of forceps. The emperor ordered that on the extremity of him there be two additions thus at times, and the length of those additions is a palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the matrix, then you do seize the woman above the lying feet, pending on opening what is between his thighs. And then you will hold your hand on the instrument thus as you do with forceps, according to the quantity that you want of the aperture of the matrix's mouth, until the meter makes it so that you want.
The form of vertebrae which the ancients described:
Form of propeller in which the foot is propelled:
Form of amputator in which the big head is cut off:
And it is assembled like a forceps to which the teeth are attached on the extremity, thus at times, and some veiled ones were made long thus as forceps according to this form, thus at times, to which the teeth are attached thus as the teeth of resection in which they are incised and cut off. Form of small amputator:
Form of a hook having a spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities at which the head is absorbed:
Form of two wide spatulas:
All those instruments are exceptional, and when they are multiplied, the species of that are prepared by the artisans, as it is lighter in their operation and more autonomous from the men for their quantity.
And you do not lack those instruments, for it is necessary that they be there, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
About the extraction of the second [or secondary] one.
When the secondary one is retained by the enfantament, then it is necessary that you command the malady to retain its own ale, and then you make that stornudar in condition, and strengthen your hand over its mouth and over its nostrils, and if thus it is deformed, well it is.
And afterwards, then you take a cup and perforate in the covering a hole and pause on that herb which opens the mouth of the matrix, thus as calm and rough and aniseed and camomile and Arabic scammony and cassia lignea and santal. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cup, and pause that over the fire.
And then you pause a cane of cane in the mouth of the matrix, and hold it until the vapor comes to the concavity of the matrix.
And then you will make that treatment thus as we have said, and the second one will be rapidly forgotten.
Perhaps you will perform this cure and it is not useless, then you order the midwife to submerge her left hand in warm oil or in a mixture of other herbs, and then you insert that into the womb and search for it with the second one, and when you have found it, take it out little by little. Perhaps it is annexed to the womb of the mother, then you insert your following hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little so that the mother does not feel vehement attraction. Before you proceed, make sure your right and left hands are facilitated.
And if the mother's womb is constricted, we have not recommended the treatment with stirring and medication of the opening with herbs.
Perhaps it is not forgotten among all the causes that we have recommended, then beware that you do not fatigue about that in iteration of abstraction, perhaps however it is certain that what is ejected from her to the womb of the woman lies in the space of the female, and then crystallize that with enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it dissolve and be forgotten in a few days.
Perhaps when it is purified, it rises to the head, and to the stomach, and that leads to the illness; and then it is certain that they have been administered subtle fumigations and conveniently adapted to that.
Perhaps some of the Ancients already knew how to prepare subtle fumigations from narcissus and dried figs.
Method of instrument with which the woman is subtly fumigated to prevent the retention of menses and of the second one.
It should be made from iron or copper.
And the subtle extremity is placed in the womb and the wide extremity is above the focus, and the subtle fumigation is placed above the arms of the focus.
And hold that in until it is consumed by that subtle fumigation and then another.
Of the treatment for the birth of an unperforated infant.
Born infants are like that and their births are not perforated, which have subtle signs and are covered over. Then it is certain that the midwife will perforate with the finger mentioned that sign; and if not, she will perforate with a sharp spatula, and beware that you do not touch the liver.
And then stop on that woolen pad in vinegar and oil; and then cure it with an ointment until it is healed.
Perhaps you fear that it is covered over, then pause with a tube for many days, and wait until the infant wants to expel.
And then you hasten the covering of the birth for consolidation of plague or of abscess; then it is certain that this consolidation is incised, and then it will be cured with what we have said about the treatment and of the lead.
Of the treatment for fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur below in the lower part then swell and become thick, those which occur near the birth beforehand or in the space of one part.
And it is a fistula or many.
And when that swelling is old and corroded by the acidic white humidity or subtle putridity, and some vegetations grow from these fistulas, some penetrating.
And those penetrating ones are known through what is ejected from them for the exit and for settling; and some veins use the badness of exit, and they are ejected from those worms.
And from those fistulas some vegetations grow in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the meat of the vein; and from those penetrants into the joint of the hip and into the node of the coccyx.
And that which is known as a penetrating fistula into the womb and non-penetrating, it is that you put the mentioned finger end in the womb, and then you insert a subtle probe of iron or copper into the fistula when it is not twisted.
Perhaps if it is twisted, then insert the subtle probe of lead or horsehair into that until you feel the probe or hair in the mentioned finger.
And if you do not feel that at all and it does not proceed from the tube for any cause of ejection or worm or windiness, thus as we have said, then you will know that it is non-penetrating, and then you should resort to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the vein, then the sign of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it from being thus, so that the place in medicine is consolidated.
Perhaps if it is penetrating into the joint of the hip or into the bone and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe penetrates here if it is not twisted into the bone, and causing pain in the circuit of the part; and that sometimes there is putridity; and that this medicine is of no value, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all those ulcers penetrating not is the total cure, and the cure of those is the trouble and evacuation of foolish doctors above the one who stops them.
Perhaps in that which does not penetrate and is not ancient, health is iron fence spread according to what you have recommended, and that which has already been and proposed.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands above his back and raises his legs inward towards himself, the thighs being inclined towards his belly, and you insert a probe of lead, or of iron if it is in the ulcerated tumor, until you feel the place where you perceive the probe.
And if the patient feels around the neck, then it is necessary that you insert your finger pointed into the neck.
And if you feel with your finger the probe already penetrated to discover if it has met, or if you feel between your finger and the siphac or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not trouble yourself with it, because it is not in it a cure, as we have said.
Perhaps the emperor's physicians claim that it is healthy in some homes to be bitter.
And the medication by which you expect to cure the patient is that you apply subtle cautery according to the size of the ulcer, as it has been described, and you insert the ignited part into the ulcer until it reaches around the neck; and then you iterate this two or three times until you know that all those adjusted ulcerated flesh resembling a bird's plumage are fully cured.
And then you cure that wound by enveloping it in bandages until all those adjusted flesh is fully healed, and then you cure that wound with medicines that engender and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healthy, good; and if not, then it is not healthy at any time for another cure.
And if the probe goes in, and does not penetrate into the finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is only a space of flesh or of siphac, and sometimes the ulcer is in what is the surface of the codena, then you drain the codena from the beginning of the ulcer, and you see that it is drained with the probe, and it is in the ulcer until the drainage reaches the place where you feel the extremity of the probe, and by the probe it is freed and extracted.
And then you cleanse those ulcerated flesh which resemble a bird's quill and do not remain with any of those ulcers for any cause.
Perhaps it is necessary to cleanse many times what comes between you and your operation when you touch those flesh, then the thousand times it is good and of the less proud instrument is to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because cautery with fire adjusts well two good habits: so it is the adjustment of those adjusted flesh, and the cutting off of the blood's excessive excretion of humors.
And then you cure that wound by enveloping it in bandages or in stitched causes until the place gets strength, and then you cure the plague with medicine that engenders and consolidates hard flesh.
And these medicines are those which stop the putrefaction and excess; when then it is restored, it is already healthy and does not fear relapse.
Perhaps the ulcer has already penetrated into the groin of the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then you insert your finger into the anus and examine it.
And then you feel the probe and between you and it is only a space of siphac or of flesh, and it is ready for penetration, then it is not an operation on him unless according to the way of confidence and of hope.
This cause is to be administered in him in one of three ways: either to cauterize it as we have said; or to drain it until you reach the cavity of his body so that it is possible for you to insert the fistula and the proposed cure; and do not process more than one drainage so that you do not irritate the contained bowel, and that you agree upon the patient's consent; and then you cure it with what we have said because the strong sir is healthy; or you elongate the space and wound that you drain until you reach the anus, as we have said, either with a probe or another instrument of acute extremity, and then you cleanse those ulcerated flesh which are in the drainage until one can percuss; and then you strive to make the restoration of all the plague in the drainage, and if the horrid pus is not consolidated, and the ulcer remains open in the part of the anus, and it will be less proud for the patient. And the ulcers are finished according to this way: it is when you insert the probe into the ulcer, and it is in the width of the anus around the surface of the body with the codena and in the margin of the anus, then you take a perforated extremity probe, which is like a needle prepared to pierce the flesh according to this form.
and you insert into that ulcer enveloped by five ulcers or around those; and then you insert the probe into the ulcer until you reach the cavity of his body.
If the penetration is in the margin of the anus because of dentition, then you extract the thread of that trauc thus that you introduce the finger into the anus; and extract the extremity of the thread and adjust both extremities, and strengthen each one, and let it be for a day or two, and when you have inserted the thread in the flesh, strengthen well that entrance so that those fleshes are not inserted between the two extremities of the thread and fall.
And then heal the wound so that it is consolidated and cured.
If the orifice of the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared, but not so much in the groin, because it is not up to you to do that so that no laceration occurs; and then make that entrance be cured.
The shape of the spatula is such that it is divided into a fistula: the curvature of which is very acute and the other part is not-acute, so that nothing unnecessary occurs, just as sometimes happens.
About the stitching of hemorrhoids in which a blood flow occurs during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are treated in two ways, because either they are between the buttocks resembling a carbuncle, or those are like a layer of rough skin. And those are small and large, and the blood flows from them at times and it is one, and they are many, and they are outside the anus, and on their extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are treated according to the method of little humidity, from which flows yellowish water or a little blood continuously, and it is according to the color of the flesh.
And the cure of that which is dentition in the anus is that you command the patient to sit down and to exert themselves so that the anus opens up and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take them with your fingers and suspend them in an uncus or hold them with your nail, and then cut those roots with their roots.
If the uncuses are not held by them due to their humidity and softening of those, then take them with a rough cloth or a knife or a flannel of wool, and extract them from the fingers, and then cut them and powder over them some warm powders, in order that they be in place of cautery; or cauterize them according to what is written in the chapter on cauterization. And then heal those with another cure until they are cured.
And if the anus does not obey to excretion, then you clysterize the patient with a clyster in which there is a small amount of mild potion, and wash them with that water that is in the anus and it obeys to excretion more easily when the patient strains themselves.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is ease, and it is that you take them with your nail, or take them with an uncus, and cut them, and then heal those with what we have said until they are cured.
And he who has made an incision, must administer stitching of them according to this method: take a thread wrapped around and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids from the top parts, and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap both extremities of the thread around the part below the needle, and thus latitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid in a strong structure, and then cut the thread and extract the needle.
And make it all whole, and let one of those be not bothered, so that the superfluity of the blood flowing from that one.
And then pause on the anus with a cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate; and pause that on the anus and command the patient to rest. And then let it be until it scars; and when it falls, heal those with an ointment or another cure until they are healed.
And since they are antiquated and of no value in that medicine, then it is necessary that you root them out with the point of a spatula or with your nail until they are made humid and held back by the scab that forms above, which prohibits their consolidation; and then heal those until they are consolidated.
Then you remove them with a razor strongly that the first way until much blood flows and they are excoriated; and then heal those until they are cured.
You know that wounds, it is clear, and it is not so if you do not notice the redness according to the color of the body resembling a head of nails, and it is made in all the body and mainly in the parts below the feet and fingers, and it ends for those who have pain in their limbs.
And then it is necessary that the doctor should inspect what is in the circuit of the vein, and hold the forked ends or hook, and eradicate the root; and then take care of that.
If you want, cauterize the gangrenous part that is located in the following chapter.
More of a true wart appears as a small, rough, rounded fistula on the surface of the body, and many ulcers come in the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is to extend or insert that, or to stretch it with a file or a pellet inside the box. And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or acute medicine.
More often a formica (insect) appears as a small, hairy or fistulous growth on the surface of the body, especially in the groin area, and when it touches that, it is said to be similar to the bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
And the treatment of it is to take a hollow needle of peacock's feather or of vulture's feather, and make it strong, and place that over the formica until it encircles the area of the skin; and then revolve your hand around the needle until you insert what is in the circuit of the formica, and place that in the groin area of the flesh, and eradicate the formica from its root.
And if you want, make that with a needle of iron or of steel according to this form:
The part beneath the hollow needle should be subtle, dull (not perforated), enveloped so that on the said part the absorption of it is abolished and the revolution of that.
And if you want, cauterize the formica according to what has been said previously in the chapter on cauterization of atheyl.
In the shape of instruments that are administered to give crusts.
Some ulcers are treated with crusts of silver or of gold or of iron fondue or molten; and some ulcers are treated with those small and large instruments according to those which are administered, because that which is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and of those whose wounds are fresh or dolorous, the crusts of those should be small.
The shape of large and few crusts:
The head of the hollow needle beneath which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and it should be distinguished at the point where the bag is tied, thus at times.
And the extremity of the pus beneath, which is inserted into the anus, should be dull (not pointed) like a lion, with subtlety; and on one side of the groove there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track is according to the size of the rays and a large pus is small.
And the bag in which are placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of wool of sheep, and the root of it is a palm.
And it should be perforated by many small tracks, thus as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the tracks is very large.
And then insert into those tracks a strong file of crude iron which is of many sharp points, or around those; and adjust to that the bag; and when it is placed in the body, it should be tightened at the head of the crust between two distinct and strong constriction points, and then cauterize on each track: More the quality of cauterizing on that is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be resupinated on the two Siege, and elevate their legs up and place one cord above which already has holes or a lantern; and then anoint the extremity of the cauterizer with oil or album of Huou or mucilage of fenugrec or of similar things; and then insert that into the anus to facilitate, and then the minister takes the bag and extracts that in two masses and seven times with vehemence until it is evacuated from the intestine all that is in the crust; and then extract the crust and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces that to evacuate, hold it as much as you can; and if you sleep on that for a whole night, it is more direct in juvenation.
More if you cauterize that in the illnesses of solution of belly and evacuation of the intestine, then you iterate the cauterizer until it is sanctified.
And if in the anus there are emorrhoids or apostemes of lenient nature, then the crust should be subtle and gentle, among the crusts which children are treated with.
Of the treatment of plagues.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of plagues what is convenient to the book, and I will say thus the treatment of those with me and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, it is said that wounds are diversified according to whether they are caused by cold humors and according to the location on which they occur.
And the causes by which many wounds are caused are cold humors, so it is also with a treatment of foot pain, or incision of the skin, or cutting of the vein, or percussion with a lancet, or with a needle, or with a scalpel, or similar to those of many causes.
Many wounds that are in the parts of the body are also like a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the cure of some wounds because it pauses that rational thinking and rule over the other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds, for the remembrance of the compounded treatments will come to the beginning of the third capital chapter.
Therefore, it is said that when simple head wounds occur and there is no fracture, then consider: if it is due to foot pain or similar, and you have already trampled the code so much alone and it is a great wound and fears about that patient having apostema catch, then you should take away and remove the cephalic inflammation as soon as possible, and do not delay; and extract according to the quantity of the virtue of the blood if there is no prohibitive cause for removal, especially if the blood is exhausted from the wound, little by little.
And it is the removal of the contrary part of the wounded area; and beware of the patient's relapse and of vicious and coarse habits.
Many times, if a minor prohibition occurs, then it is diminished by the diet and does not approach to flesh nor to vices.
And pause on the wound, if it occurs with apostema catch, where it infuses in oil rose solute or in wine on which it is stipulated.
Many times, if it is sure of apostema catch, then pause on the wound, if it is recently with healthy blood and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply little by little.
And if the air has already changed that, then pause on the excessive ointments until it is healed.
Many times, if the wound is large or is due to incision of the skin and similar, and the lips of it are not adjusted for pustules, then adjust them with a suture according to how I recommend the suture of theirs.
Many times, if the wound is already discovered in the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by it except for a small suspension, then incise that and apply proper cure to the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of the code, and command the patient to be moderate in vices in which there is grossness: take capsules and form a mixture similar to theirs, until it is compounded.
And if you find putrefaction in the code and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that purulent matter and evacuate it, and apply proper cure to it.
Many times, if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which flows healthy blood that may come out, and it is not abscessed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find it not incised, then you incise it with a spatula, or ligate it; and if it is necessary to provoke what we have said does not conflict, then you cauterize until the blood is abscessed.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; thus you powder on those with this powder, because consolidated then, so that the air does not change them.
And the preparation of the powder is this: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, three parts of non-extinct earth; let it be well-triturated and crushed, and of that, let the wound be filled, and let it be constricted by good constriction until it be on that adhering surface, and let it be coagulated with the blood.
And apply strength to that beneath the pustules and lift it up, and do not dislodge it while it is thus that it does not become apostematous, because it is not eradicated from it by medicine until it is healed.
And some wounds only require solute cautery, when it is not at your disposal in the present of olive oil and dragon's blood.
And I do this medical operation on large wounds when it is convenient to pause over them and they are strengthened, and thus recent wounds with their healthy blood, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then it is not intended for the position of this powder, but rather cure them with what we have said, thus you pause on those excessive ointments digesting, or you pause on those pores of the flour of the ordinary bread with water and honey until they get purification; and apply proper cure to them with another cure until they are healed.
More often it happens that a broken fracture in bone occurs, and it is small, then you extract what you have handled.
And I will teach you the treatment of fractures of the head in that which is coming.
Of the sores of the neck.
More often the sore happens in the neck, then it is not different in medicine, and between the sore of the head when it is simple.
More often the nerve of the neck is cut or artery, then if it is a nerve, it does not engender in the inguinal region but rather evades cure of the one who makes vehement strictures, thus like zinc and gypsum that seems veteran and similar to their quarrel, no other than the nerves and contradicts that. And it does not stop upon the sore for any total cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation to it is in the brain, which is the pus most high above all the members.
And if it is that which is cured by gentle medicines, thus like the cause washed with warm water, some infused oil in rose-water or non-rose-water, and thus when it is washed with warm water and other small pearls, minorant according to this manner, and gently humid.
More often the sore is great, then administer a suture, or stitch the lips of it, and then care for that with powders entering until it be healed.
More often the sore is deep or happens in the lowest part of the purification, then perforate that in the place most premiered.
More often in the sore an artery is cut and a flow of blood is consequent, then separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if necessary to provoke to stop it.
More often you have cut the vertebrae of the gullet or all, and so saved the veins of the neck, then you adjust the lips of the codena with a suture over the cane of the gullet and do not touch that; afterwards equalize that and return it to its natural figure, and then strengthen that in a decent structure, and leave that for some days; and then care for that with gentle humidness in which there is strictness and excitement until it be healed.
More often the sore is in the bone and has made an impression, then pierce that, and then if there are fragments of bones, extract all those that you can from them; and what you have not appareled, leave it until the sore closes itself, and it be separated and the edge of it be alleviated.
And if the sore is recent then powder over that with the powder which I have recommended to you. More often in the sore a fistula is made, then cure that with water of which the remembrance will come to you properly in the following chapter.
If it is a percussion of a lance or of a knife, and sometimes of its depth, then consider more often if the sore has been venomously infected when the patient is in a bad state; then you will know that the sore is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the sore is recent in the healthy blood, then you stop in it of the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so the blood is not retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and helps the patient, more pause in it with gentle attraction, and dissolve that two times a day.
And if the gentle attraction is not present to you, then pause in the orrifici of the sore as much as possible so that it sucks out what is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleeps on the sore so that it runs what is in it adjusted.
More often if the sore has passed three days or more and does not happen to the patient spasm nor tremor of bad heart nor stricture of wing, and sometimes the other good dispositions of it, then you will know that the sore is saved; and then care for that with warm waters and another cure until it be healed.
More often if the healing of it is excessive, and already all time is overcome, then you will know that a fistula has been made; care therefore for that according to the following chapter.
And if the sore is by incision of a span or of a knife, and is simple on the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure that with water that is preceded by suture, if it is great, or with powder, if it is small.
More often if it has made an impression in the bone, and then of it you cut out pieces, then you twist the sore and take care to extract those pieces, if they are separated. More often if they are not separated, then leave them until the sore closes itself, that the extraction of them is alleviated.
And of the other sores accidentally happening in the other members, the treatment is the treatment of what we have said.
From the wounds of the belly.
The indisposition that occurs in the belly is great, or small, or mediocre.
And the small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and it seems that the reduction of theirs is more difficult, if you do not take care of their introduction to the right place at once, because it becomes inflamed and is grossly engrossed, making the instrument's entry difficult.
And therefore the moderate disruption is better, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two species mentioned beforehand.
And it is known that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are convenient for sutures of the other wounds of the body.
And two other proper sutures communicate with the other wounds, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
And I recommend to each one an exposition and declaration.
Therefore it is said that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine appears for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of two manners: either by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine has been inflamed by the coldness of the air.
And therefore when it is so, then you should scald that in this way, that you submerge a humid sponge in lukewarm water only, or that you cook in boiling water, and cyperus, and spikenard, and embroilas, until the inflammation of the intestine is resolved.
And some worn-out veins make it clear that in which they have stipulated, and it is better than lukewarm water alone for resolving the inflammation.
And therefore when you see the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which there are decoctions of altaea and malvas, because for that reason it alleviates the instrument's entry with little cause.
But if the instrument's entry is excused by this cure, then it separates the disruption with a small instrument in which you have inserted emollients.
And the primary cure is better, when it is properly done so that there is no setback, and there is no occupation to setback again with necessary defeat.
About the instrument, see its shape:
One part of it is sharp-pointed, and the other part not-acute, and the extremity subtle, and not with the subtlety of a spatula, but rather it is obtuse a little.
And therefore when the wound is amplified and is outside the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the natural form of it, in its own proper place, if it is possible about that, because better it is.
But when the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you place their head and feet higher than the other parts below.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you place your attention and consideration at all times in this way so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other.
And thus it is necessary that you administer this in great wounds and in moderate wounds.
And in small wounds, place this that is prepared for you, and make it so that the minister is between your most skilled hands, which hold the disruption totally with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and thus uncover from that to whom it is necessary to suture some cause for another.
And this is the common method of suture: one that takes the needle, or counts of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the wound; and thus you leave the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and stretch the needle once, so that you do not put faith in the two extremities of the code, with two extremities of the ciphac which is below the code of the divided parts, until you make it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the code and two extremities of the ciphac, and so four orders are made.
And thus you stretch with double faith in the circuit of the needle, and some worn-out veins of two parts together, and thus add the two lips to the wound for decent addition; and thus leave the thickness of the finger and fix another needle there, and thus tie it with faith as it was tied with the first needle; and do not cease from doing this if it is necessary among the needles until you have completed all the contraction of the wound.
And thus the moderate needles are between grosness and subtlety, because the subtle needles move with ease into the flesh; and the large ones are of difficult entry into the code, and therefore it is necessary that they be moderate in subtlety and grosness.
It is not suitable that the needle be fixed in both extremities of the spine, so that the flesh is not deeply incised and the wound does not hinder the consolidation.
They should not be prolonged with suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then insert the extremities of the needles so that they do not loosen the patient from his sleeping bed; and place pillows expanded on the entire affected part, which hold the extremities of the needles; and thus you will know that the wound has already consolidated.
And in these species of suture with needles, it is more convenient to use them in small wounds, for you will need only one or two needles around those.
The second suture is common: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, of the spine and two extremities of the hip, at once, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that same part where it started, so that the thread retracts and comes out of the subcutaneous part to the wound, so that the suture is according to the suture of the fabric in which the fabrics are strongly stretched.
And pause between each suture the amount of thickness of the little finger's mending.
And in this suture, wise men are knowledgeable.
And in such a suture, I have often closed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his own belly, which had been wounded by a knife, and it was the disruption of a major wound of about a palm, and it was situated around two palms from the intestine in the middle place, and it was the disruption in the middle of the limb; and then I have often reduced that swelling which the intestine had been outside the wound for 23 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in a space of 15 days or around, and I cured him and he is healthy; and then I visited him for many years, and he is converted into his own dispositions.
And the other doctors had judged that he could not be healed; and by a miracle it was done, for I did not heal him with an ointment, because it was in a place where ointments were not effective nor any medicine, but I placed a compress on the wound for many days and nights, and I washed assiduously with honey water until he was healed.
Moreover, I will describe two species of proper suture according to the narration of Pareula.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the spine, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And thus when the needle penetrates into the spine and in that same place it is rectified according to the straightness and length of the entire body, and there is the extremity of the hip where you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate into the other extremity from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the thigh.
And thus when you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate another time in the same extremity of the thigh from the front part to the back part; and there is the extremity of the hip which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
And make it penetrate to that point your penetration, which you make penetrate into the hip in the extremity of the mirror, which is in the part of him within, so that all that penetrates.
And then begin with this same method and sew up the extremity which is of the hip on the other side, and extract the needle from the spine that penetrated, and then return it to the spine and fix the extremity of the hip which is on the other side in this same extremity of the mirror; and extract it from the spine which is part of him.
And do it one time and another, and do it one time then another time until you sew up all that is before according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew up the skin with the suture in which you sew up the skins, thus that you sew up the hip one time from the part of the extremity of the spine, and then leave it another time until it is completely healed.
Moreover, the second species of proper suture is that which Gualia recommends, and this is to be done with sermons and for his recommendation, it is that you sew up according to similarity in which some doctors sew up, thus that they add all the part to its comparable part according to natural convenience; and apply the extremity of one to the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of him, and this is done according to what I have recommended to you.
It is fitting that you place the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your own front part, and make it penetrate to the back part on that sole, and leave the two extremities of the hip; and then revolve the needle and make it penetrate from the front to the back in the two extremities of the hip.
And then return those bladders, and make them penetrate certain parts of the divided dentition entering into the part before in two extreme mirrors of the other side that is not in the opposite lateral.
And this manner of suture is better than the common ligature, and it is a suture about which preceding memorization.
This is the serum of Gualia
And the dissector Alcus, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so it is that you introduce into these a filament, and begin with an introduction of a needle of water that is what you need, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suture of those which sew up the hollowed-out veins.
And you know that when disruption is in the middle location of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than those of other locations of the belly.
The judgment of medicinal treatment of plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
This cause is because when you constrict the recent plague with a holy blessing, then the air alters it, and reduces the intestine and sews it up decently, then pause over that incarnative powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that needle that sews up the ones which are present within so they make hard and strong tissue, and thus consolidate the ciphac and mirat; and then cure it in this way as is the cure of the other plagues within so it may be healthy.
But if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that instrument, because it begins to take hold quickly, very well, and exchanges those two veins of the day, thus as you and instruct, within so it may be healthy, because you do not need another medicine in many dispositions when the plagues are simple.
But if you fear that the plague communicates to the principal members, then cover that you submerge the woolen thread in oil of tremulous quality, or in oil of rose, and pause it in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and the joints.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the holy veins, because many veins are ending there, then crystallize that vein with a black stippling tube, and majorly if the purification is pervading the vein and making an exiting penetration into its cavity.
And you know that the one which is of the large intestine is of less ligature sanity than the one which is in the subtle intestines.
And it is of difficult sanity because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive sanity from plague that falls into it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and due to its magnitude, and due to the subtlety of its body, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if the process of the plague is the fabric, and you obtain that recently, reduce it according to your correct treatment with which you reduce the intestines harmoniously.
But if it has passed to the space and already is green or black, then that you stretch it with a filament over the place that is denigrated of it, so that healthy fluxes come, because in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And then you inscribe what is another ligament, and pause two extreme filaments pending from the part below the plague outside of it, so that on your part may be alleviated the attraction of it which needs the cauterization of the fabric and emission of the arm of the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some homes, thus because you saw that which was afflicted in the holy belly with percussion of the lance and it was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and thus from its governance and ventilation.
Then you think about the cure of it, that is, that it was not confused in its sanity, but rather you continue to make it more subtle until it is healthy and the place is consolidated.
And you then saw that the place was consolidated, and you thought about the patient who suffered an evil accident in the holy belly; and you did not find any remedy for that evil accident and remained in their many dispositions mangling and lamenting, and then you entered into a bath and exercised in its uses.
And you experimented with many experienced remedies that when plague occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then cover that it is bound according to this manner: and it is that you take fragments of large capsules; and then adjust the two labial lips of the plague and pause a fragment of those that have the open mouth over the two labial lips of the plague; thus when you take hold of them and stretch their mouth, you remove the head of it, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then pause another fragment of the primary shape, and do not cease until you make fragments of one according to the quantity of all the plague.
Then return the pillow and clothing; and remove those adjacent caps from the intestine inward so that the intestine may be healthy; and do not hinder the patient from recovering.
It is possible that the intestine may be lifted with a subtle thread which is made from the intestine of a beast annexed to it, since it is in the vein; and you should take the extremity of this thread of intestine, and make it not too fleshy, and return it to its place in the vein, wrapped, and return that thread into the vein and body, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this manner of suturing is not based on anything except the way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, because then it is not only subtle, and there is no healing of the whole.
On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
You know that every wound and abscess, when they become inflamed and old, is called an ulcer, and it is not consolidated and healed for a long time, and does not dry up, then, in whatever member it may be, it is universally named fistula and we call it that abyss.
And fistula, according to truth, is a nodulous, hard, white swelling which does not hurt and in which there is a cavity, just as it is conquered by pain of the same kind; and thus it is named an ulcerative abscess, that is, pain.
And it is in a moist wound which heals slowly; and for this reason the moisture is dried up in some hours. And some of these moistures are thick, and they are few, and they are coarse, and they are subtle.
Now I have shown all those causes, and the signs of those and their cures with medicines in the division.
And it is fitting that you know how to make the cure of fistula, which is done by way of operation with hand.
And you know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for some of them are fistulas that penetrate to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the composite joints composed of the hand and foot; and some of them are those that give proximity to the principal member and similarity.
And so those of these fistulas that are according to this manner are among the maladies of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with them is trouble and ignorance.
And if it is one of the fistulas at a depth which does not penetrate to those places that I have said, and you hope and confide in its cure, and want to come to knowledge of it, then take hold with iron or with fire, and if the fistula goes according to rectitude, and you acquire it with hand.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle point of lead, because lead in the elevation of the dry body is alleviated and curved away from the twisting.
And if the fistula has many horrible things, it is not possible for you to signify about it with hand.
Then crystallize the horrific things for their horrific things, because the moisture through which you crystallize it goes away from the other horrific things and corrects them.
And inquire exquisitely, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and it is the conquest of the long-standing or propounded fistula, or it is a fistula in which there are many horrific things and this is about all your strength, with your entry into the wound, with which you enter the malady, and the invention of pain away from your compression on the hand over the place, and similarity of signs and accidental causes to the abscess.
And since you have stood upon all those causes in the station of truth, then go to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is an apparent fistula close or in a salty place, far from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places which you have said.
When you touch the fistula according to what is said in the narration of it, and observe that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born from the orifice of the flesh, or of the ulcer and of similar things, and cure that within so that it may be healed.
Perhaps the fistula is of long-standing profundity, and it is according to rectitude, then you should cover that in the preon as much as possible, and thoroughly cleanse that of all its corrupted flesh; and administer well-enveloped medicines acutely, and introduce them within the cavity of the fistula, which has comprehended with bitter ferocity.
And do that the sharp points are inserted so that the acute medicine corrodes all that which is rough in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it by applying those that generate healthy flesh within, so that it may be healed.
Perhaps if it is not healed by that, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
Perhaps the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary to certify that, then you should investigate it and dissect it according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member, as we have said.
Perhaps the bone is discovered by you and it is in some corruption and blackness, then you should scrape that within so that the corruption may be wholly removed; and then take care to enshrine it with what will make it healthy.
And if it is not healthy and throws out arm thus as it was doing, then you know that you have not achieved the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again secondarily and exquisitely the reason for it and the purification of it with the last strong fortification, and then restore it.
And so if it is healthy, good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the profound depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you do nothing but leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible to extract it, then you should extract it with subtle forceps that are suitable for that.
And if there are many bones, then you should exquisitely make the extraction of all those, and from those you should not leave any cause in your strength.
Perhaps if you have made opposition to some cause of the humors, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then you should incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and extract the bones.
Perhaps if you have not prepared to remove the bones of your hour, then pause over the plague that pierces the plague there, and leave it within so that it is in the environment of those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard against the plague being consolidated, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
Meanwhile, if you fear, pause over the submerged bone in the above-mentioned oil, or submerged bone in Egyptian anguent, or in some of the green vertebrae, because when they pierce those ligaments, and the bones are separated from their abduction, and from those attractions is alleviated.
Perhaps it is a large bone thus as the bone of the chamber or of the thigh or similar to those, and what of it is corrupted is the face of it only so much, then scrape that with resolution thus only in the end so that the blackness and corruption may be removed, and then restore the plague.
Perhaps what of it is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and to incise all within the place where the corruption has penetrated, and then take care to consolidate it.
And I recommend to you that you endeavor to go to a man in his thigh for that pauses it and helps and assists over your operation.
A young man of around thirty years, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and from the divided parts it is evident that the matter has gone into the body so that the matter has penetrated the thigh, and it is a matter of abscess in a great abscess, and I do not find an external cause.
And then I found extended time in that for the error of the doctors so that the abscess was opened, and I gathered the motive matters, and its cure was then paused until the thigh was fistulated, and they were in the motive orifices which all had poured forth pus and humors from the body.
And then many doctors were consulted for around two years, and I did not find in those wise men any knowledge of the art, until I was called.
And I saw the thigh of it and the matters that flowed from it through those orifices for a great body; and already the body of that man was wholly stabilized and the color of it was citrine.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices and penetrated the probe to the bone.
And you have examined and scrutinized all the openings and thoroughly investigated those that come from all parts of the leg.
Then you have touched and felt inside one of the openings that enter to reveal a part of the bone, and you have probed that corrupt and rotten place, and it was already decayed and rotten and blackened; and it was already corrupted a part of the leg that had penetrated into the marrow.
And then you have cleared away what was covering the exposed bone and prepared it.
And you have cut away that which was not of the bone but rather that corruption which you had uncovered and cleared away, and you have already destroyed it.
And then you halted the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it was not consolidated.
And then you have iterated and uncovered the bone again according to the primary discovery, and you found continued corruption in the bone.
And cleared away what seemed to come from that corruption, and then you have tried to make a perforation to cure it and restore it, but it was not restored.
And then you discovered it again on the other side and didn't cease to incise the small bone little by little particularly and perforate for its restoration, but it was not restored until you incised around a palm of it, and that extracted marrow from it, and then you restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated gradually and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation on it and to section it except for the disposal of its fluid and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it will hasten in all hours to overflow with bad evacuation synchronously.
And so it is healed entirely, and there is nothing in the place of hard flesh; and it is well done the disposal of it in its own body and returned its strength to it; and it is converted into its own dispositions and does not oppose ambulation nor harm in any cause.
But if it is an eminent bone in the place of the body already traversed, then it is necessary that you section it according to this manner: and it is that you take a ligament and strengthen that in the extremity of that eminent bone, and command it to extend itself into its own; and pause that ligament of wool which is thicker than the primary ligament; and then tie it over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you attract the flesh to the parts below, and you discover the flesh over the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not hurt the flesh.
And pause or place a table below the bone decently, because when you do that it is not prohibited to saw without sectioning the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the sawing be on the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the cavity of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its appearance to the sense, and forces the sawing from the other side.
And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, before it is one continuous part with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you discover the flesh of all parts entirely; and then pause below, and then saw that from the primary part where the corruption is until the sawing of the other part is continued.
And the sawing is according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but rather in its ingenuity.
And if the corruption is in the thickness of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, it is necessary that you inquire into the corruption in whatever manner appears to you, and that you grasp that, and modify that according to each disposition which is possible for you, and in case something ingenious can be rectified for you, when it does not do contrary to your vein or nerve.
And you know that the incisions and saws to incise these bones are very subtle according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, and their thickness, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so it is necessary that you prepare a total species of operation and convenient instrument for that operation.
And you know that this operation means to you about the species of instrument which you need; when you have great study and long experience with knowledge of the manners of this art, and testimony of manners of illnesses, because then you had them for your metrics, which is convenient to all maladies.
And you have formed in the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will pause with, as simples as those which proceed to your prohibition, which you experimented on the others. Form of sawing:
Another type of serration:
A larger form of another serration:
Form of a stripe: The head of this stripe is according to the form of the head of a star-shaped claw, and its points are according to the form of the points of a steely instrument.
And it is not suitable unless you confound those heads with the joints when they are corrupted, or it is a large wide opening.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another decently made serration: it is made with an arched curve and the sharpness of its iron, and the member of its handle is decently made in a descending manner. Form of it:
Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Form of a small razor resembling a lancet:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a stripe, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ratio of the bones:
Form of a stripe that is suitable for a ratio of those that are perforated by the bones:
And its extremity is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of iron from India, and similarly it covers all the causes that we have mentioned about razors, incisors, and saws.
About incision extremities and the sawing of bones.
The extremities are weakened either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic cause, or as you have medicated that corruption with the cure of those medicines and the cure does not concur, or sometimes the corruption worsens and the member which is not perceived by any cause, then it is necessary to incise that member within that honor, so that the evil may escape through the mouth of the corruption, because the malady would flee from death or from great damage to the member.
And the sign of that one to which it happens, is that the member becomes black within until it is understood that fire has already burned, or it weakens next to the blackness until the weakness reaches that member which is his and takes all the body; and thus you should make an incision of that.
And similarly, if it is a cause of corruption from venomous blows, such as those of the sea scorpion or of the viper or of the rhutel and of similar things.
And if the corruption or blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not spread to the hand.
And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you incise that from the root of the finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the finger of the arm.
And if you surround that, then incise the arm up to the elbow at the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause in cure is to quantity the virtue.
And similarly, it happens to the foot when corruption surrounds the toe of the foot, then you incise that up to one of the nails.
And if it takes hold in the skin of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. Moreover, if it reaches into the ankle, then you incise the leg up to the joint of the ankle.
And if the corruption has already spread over the ankle, then in that case it is not possible to cure it except by dismissing (it) and leaving the patient to death.
And the manner of incising the member or of sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part below where you want to incise, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and extend the minister one ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments, even spacing them apart until all the flesh is discovered; and then it is incised or sawed.
And it is necessary to place a bandage on all parts so that it does not touch the area, and that the patient's lesion is adjusted and the abscess is cauterized with caution.
Moreover, if there is flux of blood when it works, then you cauterize the touched area carefully, or place above it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
And then bind the injured member with a ligament at a convenient time, and cure it until it is healthy.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his sick foot, this meets with an accident which you and I have recommended, which is to burn the blackness in the sick foot with adjustment that was assembled for combustion of fire.
That corruption occurs primarily in the dry season when the whole foot tends to be affected.
And then that man prepares himself to receive the treatment with anxiety, going to the member with vehemence of his, which attracts more pain and distress of his, and he incidentally puts his foot into the joint, and it becomes healthy.
A long time ago, that corruption occurred in the hand of the mother indicated.
And then it came to me, and I thoroughly performed the removal of that superfluity on the hand of the medicines, with the purification of his body; and not being receptive to the superfluity, it began to go into the other joint until it began in the hand.
And the patient asked me to inject his hand, and I did not want to do so, fearing the repercussions of that superfluity, and more than anything I feared the injection of the dead hand, because the virtue of the malady was above suspicion.
And since he despaired of me, he returned to his land and it happened to me that the man prepared and injected his entire hand, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narration except to be an aid concerning that which is said about this disease, and that it may be significant for which it is signified and according to which it is worked.
About the treatment of joints and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When abscesses occur in certain carnal members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and it is evacuated from him, and one clears the area where it was like a vase, and the cord that is above him like a subtle drapery, and no posterior corruption is generated, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption begins in some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment of it is that one injects the entire cord thus as it is revolved, and mainly when it is subtle and made like a drapery, and they fix it so that it does not adhere to the area for its corruption.
However, if you fear that the cord will adhere and that corruption will not have been achieved by posterior consequence, and on the cord has passed away from the face, then you treat that member with aclyster.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the arm that you have is of fetid odor, then youclysterize that member with Egyptian medicine which is of oil and vinegar and zinc, and receiving equal parts, and they are adjusted in a vase, and they are cooked over the fire until the medicine is made red and penetrates to the specific melancholy.
And then you take from him what is necessary and dissolves the member in water and honey; and clysterize that member into the sinus, and strengthen its orifice, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
And then extract that member with precision; and do so for many days until the sinus is purified and the putridity is removed.
And some vegetables are clysterized with water of cinders, when you do not have this medicine present; and it is that you take the ash of vitriol, and mix it with the water; and then collect that and clysterize that member into it until you confirm that the sinus is then cleared.
And if the disease has no tolerance for the Egyptian medicine or the water of ash, then clysterize that member with water and honey mixed with zinc trissat, and clysterize that member with wine and honey mixed, because the property of honey is that it purifies and cleans, and the wine makes adhere to the sinus, and mainly when in the wine there has been an excess of sweetness and dryness.
And when you do this with some vegetables and you confirm that the sinus is already cleared, then clysterize that member with water that makes the flesh grow in it.
And it is that you take from the Greek dyaphinicon and dissolve that member in oil of rose and wine stipid; or that you clysterize that member with some medicines and other Greek things that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on Greek things.
And if the orifice of the sinus is straitened in which the cannula of the clyster cannot be received, then you amplify that member by ferrum little by little, and pause in the warm water enveloped in Egyptian medicine or in basilicon medicine until it is amplified.
And similarly if the orifice is ample, then you join the lips of that member by suture and leave a quantity of it in which the clyster is added.
And if the orifice of that which flows to the arm is elevated to the superior parts, then dry it in the pus below the place where it is in the arm, so that the arm may flow into it, because when the arm is constricted at the entrance of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered in it.
And if it is not possible for you to extract the sinus into the outer environment of the bone, then perforate in preparation for the limb, so that the leg can be treated according to what appears and what does not remain in the retained cause of the arm.
That which is above the orifice of the sinus, which remains there for a whole hour so that it can extract what is adjusted in the arm. And to know if what comes out of the arm is much or little, whether it is digested, or not digested.
And thus you should consider the place of that sinus, if the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And when your medication is prolonged in such a manner, and you see the material that is gathered above the orifice of the sinus is adhering, or it is proper adherence, then you may dissolve it on the third day, and when you dissolve the plague, then change the liquid for another and renew the poultice.
But if the sinus has a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it will be proper, because some homes are in those which delay the generation of flesh in those plague wounds, and of those which are done contrary to them.
And if the sinus is motionless for many days and the arm is indigested, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and is a prolonged cause, then you adjust in the desiccation of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dry also as a poultice of diffusion, when it is above the adjusted superfluity of addition of zeal.
And the last thing that is cured, it is that you take a poultice of diffusion and dissolve it in rose oil, and put it on the area where you previously applied the poultice, and thus comfort that member, and use it.
And it seems similar in that action, when there is no arm, poultice of diffusion, but rather it is contained within so that it is gross, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and grind them, and sprinkle everything and powder over the gross thing that is under the focus, and thus line up over the liquid and strengthen it over the sinus; and thus line up over the gross thing that has been contained within so that it is gross, and powder over the liquid and strengthen it.
And some times it is administered in the long aristology and roots of celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and powder of errors and centaurea, and use those simples or adjust them, sprinkle them and powder over the gross thing that has been recommended; and thus use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged, and it is not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the prono of it, and it has made inquiry into the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you should treat it with a fistular cure, as has been said above.
Of the cure of gouty hands and worn-out nails and incision of toes added to the section.
Gouty hands are an abscess that usually occurs on the finger or toe of the hand or foot, and it often spreads to other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less considered, or it is an abscess of a cautious abscess, or it is corrupted, and it throws out arm inside so that it corrodes the root of the nail, and it corrupts all, and it pierces through to the bone inside so that it is at the fetid odor, and it makes the extremity of the finger lame, and its color becomes dark.
And therefore when you have that on hand which we have said in the division and does not conform to your cure, then it is necessary that you insert iron throughout the entire superfluity that has remained from the nail and cauterize the plague properly, because the cautery is not juvenile in this way.
But if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, and the additions of the nail are already comprehending the flesh at the divided parts, and they begin to pain and lead thus, then it is necessary that you pause a subtle ray below the angle of the nail that pains the flesh, and impel it under and insert it into the flesh to facilitate, and pause over what remains of the flesh from the corrosive medicines that burn within so that it may be totally removed; and thus cure that which is gathered within so that it may be healthy.
Most often if corruption has already taken hold in the bone, then it is necessary to cut into the bone and extract it, for there is no time when a corrupted bone will heal itself.
And if corrosion and decay are in the finger, then you cut into it according to the preceding memory, and afterwards heal the inside so that it will be healthy.
Most often if there is an ingrown nail or attiture, and it causes vehement pain, then it is necessary to begin by removing the flesh of the affected part, and afterwards cut around the nail with a transverse section from below upwards, and be careful that the section does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, lest you aggravate the affected part's vehement pain, and it will cause superfluous nativity of the adjusted flesh in the area; and then heal the area with water that stops the pain.
Most often it is adjusted, which is born in the hands of many men, since they are entirely flesh, and entirely in their bones, or entirely in their fingers.
And many of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is the nativity of them in many joints of the fingers. Most often that which is born in many joints of the finger does not become bad, and this which is born in the strong joints is not much afflicted.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is easier, and it is necessary to cut into its root with a broad spatula.
Most often of that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of its amputation.
Most often in that which is born in the finger with its nails, it is necessary to cut from the beginning the flesh of the affected part around the bone, and then saw with one of those convenient saws suitable for that, and afterwards heal the inside so that it will be healthy.
Most often consolidation occurs when the fingers are held among warm wraps or due to nativity of the man who was injured, or due to consolidation from plague or combustion by fire, or by semblance; therefore it is necessary to cut out that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural form.
And afterwards pause between the drapes of the enfused oils roasting so that they are not consolidated easily, and separate them among those, or pause among those a thin layer of lead until it is consolidated according to what is necessary.
And similarly if consolidation occurs in many fingers on the palm, then you cut out that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
Of cutting into veins, they are variable.
Veins are variable, and so are enveloped gross veins full of superfluous melancholic humors which come into the members of the body, and the greatest incident of them is in the legs, and especially in the legs of travelers and laborers and carriers.
Therefore it is necessary to administer purification of the body from black bile with certain warm wraps for strong expulsion, and afterwards bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
Most often the cure of iron poisoning is in two ways: one is that it is cut into and the black blood is attracted, and the other way is that the vein is elevated and all of it is extracted.
The section of it is according to this way: begin by pouring warm water into the affected leg until the gross blood is resolved, which is filthy in the leg, and afterwards strengthen the affected leg at the upper part above the thigh towards the lower part of the knee with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide section, and afterwards elevate the black blood to the highest point above the affected leg, from top to bottom, until the amount of blood that you want is released, and which tolerates the virtue of the affected part.
And then leave it, and command to him that he abstains from black bile-inducing foods.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and water does not benefit the affected part.
Most often the elevation of them is according to this way: you raise the affected leg, if there are many pels in it, and then place it in a bath and pour warm water into the affected leg until it becomes swollen and the veins are extremely full; or exercise strongly, if a bath is not present at hand, until the member is scaled.
And then cut the cord in the right of the vein for sectioning in the loin or in the back of the affected part near the knee, or at the lowest part of the affected part near the ankle.
And then uncover the cord with an incision and excavate the vein of the entire affected part until it appears to the sense, and it is necessary for the appearance of that which often declines into blackness.
And therefore when you evacuate and of the cord, you often find that white thread which was a cord.
And then you place that finger inside so it is elevated and separated from the spine, and suspend it in an inclined position with a golden hook.
Then you section another section, and then you section that section for three digits, and then you scrape the spine of the affected part below the vein until it appears.
Then you elevate it and insert it into the rear section of the heel, and then you extract it and elevate it until it is guided by the second section, and then you extract it from the section that is above it.
And make it so that you extract it from the section that is above or below all the sections, until everything is guided; and then you insert it.
And if it does not obey you to extract and elevate, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie it up and extract it, or insert the finger into the radius and turn your hand to all parts until it is set. And beware that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate the limb and it will come back over the patient's thigh through that injury.
And when the whole limb is reset, then pause over the place of the hidden wound, anointed with wine and oil, and rubbed and not-rubbed, and cure it until it is healthy.
And if life is opposed to having twisted the wrapping around the parts, and it is not according to the rectitude according to what we have said, then be careful that you bind over that entire twisting of it and the places of its wrapping, and then suspend it with an uncircumcised band until it elevates the whole.
And beware of your section that you do not insert the vein and that you do not harm it, because it will be difficult for you to elevate it; and preserve your prudence in that.
The form of the incident is one which has cut off life:
It is not to the one who is circumcised thus with uncircumcised ones nor of acute extremity so that they do not harm the vein; and it is of gross flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would insert into the vein by its subtlety; having been in superfluous grossness thus as we have said.
On the extraction of a varicose vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs on dry and cold lands, just like in the land of the Arabs and in the dry and arid lands of few fertility, where there are neither herbs nor trees.
And it is often generated in other places of the body besides the legs.
And the gesture of it is of putrefaction that you see below the spine, just as venomous dents are piercing the body, and serpents and worms and vipers are generating between the spine and the flesh.
And the sign of the suspicion of the advent of it is from this vein that suddenly inflames the leg with vehement inflammation; and then the place becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that blistering, which seems to resemble a plant's root.
And then it appears from there the extremity, then you will be covered with a piece of lead weighing as much as the weight of a denarius, between two denarii, and place that suspended from the leg.
And as many times as the flow of it comes from some cause to the affected parts before, wrap it in lead and apply it. And if the motion is prolonged, then you insert a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not insert it by root until it is fully guided, because if you insert it, it is opposed and enters into the flesh and causes apostema and putrefaction in the place and ulceration badly.
Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and be extracted little by little, until it is fully removed from the back of it and no remainder of it stays in the body.
And of this vein it is said that it is in some men who are in its length of 5 palms and of digits, and already it has reached me that it is one of 20 palms.
And if it is inserted at the time of its medication, then insert the radius into the channel of it and perforate it with a long channel in the body, until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medications; and then cure it by curing apostemas.
And this vein sometimes has many ramifications, and it increases especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to its many horrific roots, and it is said that each horrific root.
And then cure it thus as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
On the section of worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is named in some land as our bovine disease because many ramifications end in the veins and it is a worm that is born between the spine and the flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, destroying and weakening, and shows the sentiment of the sick animal from member to member until it dismembers the spine and comes out.
And the generation of it is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, thus causing an accumulation of worms and serpents and roundworms in the belly.
It is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and reaches the head, and pervades the whole, then it strengthens the ulcers in it and destroys the whole, and thus produces many evils.
And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then you cannot do so unless you have the certain ambulation and application of it to the sentiment, and thus you perceive that you strengthen what is above it and what is below it with ligament and constriction, and then you dry above it and extract it.
And if it has penetrated into the flesh and does not come out, then you apply a cautery iron to the spot within where it hurts, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of the flesh with which it corrupts the spot as we have said.
Perhaps you have sometimes experienced it pervading the head near the belly, then strengthen above the eyebrow with a strong structure, and then dry above it, and extract it; and know that the patient uses a remedy of evacuation from the bad body with evacuating medicines that expel putrid humors, and beware of foods generating putrefaction.
About the treatment of ague fever.
This sickness is named ague fever in our land, and it is the pain that appears in certain members, and then spreads from member to member.
And I have already seen that according to what I recommend to you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her swollen arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been rubbed for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away like a worm disappearing, more quickly than it would have been possible, as if it were silver, I saw when it was cleared from place to place.
And then the pain moved from that place and fixed itself in the muscle, and then I stayed there for an hour.
And then I ran to the other side of the body until I reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to myself that it revolves throughout the whole body according to what I had seen; and I was very marvelled at the permutation of it and at the velocity of member to member. And I had already seen that in my own veins, according to that manner, although I had not seen many of those which are painful being permuted from member to member. But I did not see it in my veins as it was in the woman.
And I did not think it was that, but because the woman was old, with dry body and uncovered veins, and in this way it appears to the sentiment that permutated wickedness.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backward curvature in those who are delicate and have humid bodies with veins that are weakened.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not for you to appear at the vein as we have said, then you strengthen above it and let it be loosened gently and dried above it until that wickedness is driven out, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not have those good veins, then you cure it with evacuation of the body and with that which expels wickedness, and cleanse those foul pills and those of serpent-like appearance.
About the extraction of arrowheads.
Arrowheads are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they occur, because their diversity is that of those that have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and rough ones, so they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have aster-like shapes.
And of the senses of the brain it is when you cut into the arrowhead, and pierce the bone, and it is situated in the cypress-like place which is above the brain, because it accedes to the vehement pain, and scotomia, and vertigo, and rigor in the veins, and inflammation and rigor of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding and vomiting of cholera, and very strongly the speech is abolished and the voice is destroyed, and it is situated in the place of the plague humid whiteness resembling palsy, and you see it similar to being affected by the flesh.
And so it appears to you in this sign, then you abstain from the cure and extraction of the blood, if it is not outside.
Perhaps the signs of the blood when it falls in the heart, so that it is close to the mamilla on the left side, and it feels as if it were fixed by a hard cause, and not a vain cause; and the movement of the blood seems similar to the movement of the pulse, and it corrects the plague of black fever, and it knows that coldness of the extremities, and dry fever, and syncope; and so you know that death descends all at once.
And the signs when the blood has infected the lung so it expectorates bloody spumous phlegm of the plague, and the veins that are close to the neck so apostematize, and the color of the patient is changed, and it expels great spirit, and demands attraction of fresh air.
And if the blood falls in the veil that is on the chest, and the pain then is close to the small ribs, and it makes great anger and vehemence with a great sigh, and not all the members of the muscles are numb.
And if the blood falls in the stomach, then it strongly affects the eyes of the plague with some indigestion.
And if the blood falls in the abdomen, and it is fixed in it, eyes some fissure of the plague, or the web, or hernia that is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure by extraction of the blood.
And if the blood falls in the bladder, and it is excreted before urine, and it processes some cause to the parts before, and it strongly affects the pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Perhaps the other members are like the face, the neck, and the gullet, and the shoulders and the adjutants, and the vertebrae of the back, and the fork, and the hip, and the leg, and their similarity to the members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the blood does not attract vein or artery and it is not venomous blood.
And I recommend to you that you have seen the essence of these bloods, so that they signify something about your cure, tied to it.
The cause is, because in one case the blood fell into the lacrimal duct of his eye, and I extracted it from the other part, leaving the gray matter of the aurelia, and it was healthy, and did not happen in the eye of the document.
And I extracted another blood from a Jew whose blood fell into his eye, behind the eyelid and it was hidden and not obtained from there except for a small extremity that adhered to the wooden stick, and it was a great blood of the sharp bloods of the Turks, like a iron nail in which there were no aurelia.
And the Jew was healthy, and it did not happen to his eye bad accident.
And I extracted another blood from a Christian whose blood had fallen into the gullet, and it was Arabic blood, and it was that which had aurelia; and then I wrote about that between two guides, and it was submerged in his gullet; and then I subtly examined that, and carefully extracted it, and the Christian was healthy.
And I extracted another blood from a man whose blood had fallen into his abdominal cavity, and I thought he would die from that; and then, since he passed thirty days and did not change regarding any cause of his dispositions, I wrote about the blood and engaged with it, and he was healthy, and no bad accident happened to him.
And I saw a man in whom a blood fell on his back, and the plague was consolidated over him, and since he received proper care for seven years, the blood was extracted from the root of the hip.
And I saw a woman in whom blood fell into her abdominal cavity, and the plague was consolidated within her, and it did not change in her dispositions, and the woman did not attract document in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man in whom blood fell on his face and the plague was consolidated, and it broke out the blood, not attracting much pain, and many signs similar to these.
And I extracted the blood of the man of the prince's men who had fallen into the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right part a little, and all the blood was hidden.
And I was called to cure him by properly treating the fall of the blood within three days.
And then I attracted the plague of the blood very strongly; and then I inquired into that with a subtle intent, and did not feel it; but I felt it a little behind the aurelia on the right, and then I suspected that the puncture was due to the extremity of the blood.
And I plastered the place where I had placed an attractive and digestive application, trusting that the place would be affected by me so that it appears to me as the place of the blood, so that it succeeds over it.
And do not touch the affected area significantly where the arrow has already reached; and you will continue to apply the plaster over it for many days without touching the accident; and consolidated is the wound meanwhile, and removed the patient from the extension of it for many days within which a day feels the arrow in his own blood and recognizes that I am a doctor.
And then you will apply the acute corrosive medicine over the wound for many days until it opens, and meanwhile you will assess that, and you will treat the subtle extremity of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then you will adjust in the aperture of the wound for that acute medicine until it appears to me visibly the extremity of the arrow, and I will take my time about that for the space of time within four months.
And then because the wound has become amplified, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, and I will remove that, and do not obey the symptoms, then you will no longer subtly and ingeniously work on that in many ways of engineering, until you start a day on that in many ways of engineering, hanging them down with forceps descending slowly, according to how you will find the form of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract that; and then you will restore that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you will restore that and the wound is consolidated, and it is healthy for complete sanitation, and it does not become inflamed in any case.
And you will recommend to you the quality of extraction of certain arrows for which pauses that rule and significance about what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of that are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend those freely.
And the skilled artisans know how to compare little about much; and I am what is present about what is absent; and they find new operation and novel instrument, which descends from the external causes of the art when they are accelerated.
And therefore you say that arrows are not forgotten in the members where they are fixed, but rather in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by contrast with the other part.
And that which is forgotten by the place where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy place, and it is attracted and forgotten.
And if you do not obey the symptoms of the hour when it hurts, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes tender, and its attraction and egression are alleviated.
And similarly if it is fixed in bone and you do not obey the symptoms, then leave that for some days and try that with attraction and movement on any day, and already it is forgotten.
And if you do not obey the symptoms for some days, then it is necessary that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow in that bone of the entire part with subtle travel until the place is amplified by the arrow, and then extract that.
Maybe the arrow is already embedded in the place of the body, and it is embedded in the sentiment, then you will inquire about that tentatively, and if you feel that, then you will attract that with some instruments which are convenient for the attraction of it.
And if you cannot operate on it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the instrument, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you will feel over the wound until it is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if you have the instruments which are held, then you will deliver the flesh in which it is fixed from the entire part with all the ingenuity that you can do; and engineer about that, if you cannot operate on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the aurelhas and in twisting of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you will use your hand with forceps at all parts until it obeys; and subtly use dereliction of subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and it is made difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
If you cannot stand on that hour of yours, then you will lie down for some days until the parts that are in your circuit can be purified, and then return to that hour when it is alleviated. Perhaps you have made a contrary flow of blood, then you will administer what we have said about the cure in the seventh chapter.
And look at your virtue of incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer ingeniously in every manner possible to avoid the eviction of the sagitta; and do this so that you facilitate and tranquillize and slow down and firm up, thus as you are recommended.
And then make counter-figures to the sagitta so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you will remove the bad humour from them, because it is more jovial. Perhaps that is not possible for you, then you will administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Perhaps the sagittae that are forgotten for the contrary of another party, or that already proceed from some party outside, or have made gibbosity on the extremity of the sagitta by sentiment of the party above the codena propenda and several times that eminent; then you will section about that; and let it be the section according to the quantity in which they take the forceps; and then return to that, because it is made lighter for easier removal.
Perhaps it is retained in the bone, then you will twist the lame according to counter-pressure until the sagitta penetrates into the bone, and amplify its measurements, and then extract that.
And so, you will lie down for some days, and then return to that until you are cured.
And if the foundation of the sagitta is in that, then you will impel that into the bone.
Perhaps the foundation has fallen and you want to administer impulse, then you will introduce that into it, if it is dull, stir with caution so that it enters the concavity of the bone in the cavity of the sagitta and then impel that into the bone.
Perhaps the sagitta is concave, then you will impel that into the bone with strong stirring entering into it, because the sagitta is alleviated by that.
And if the sagitta is intoxicated, then you will hollow out all the flesh in which it is true, if it is possible for you, and then cure that with what is convenient.
And if the sagitta falls in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is near so that you touch that with the tent, and it is possible for you to section about that, then section about that and beware of incision of vein or nerve, and extract that, and then heal the wound if it is indigent, and cure that until it is healthy.
The form of forceps are those which are adapted to attract the sagittae:
Thus the extremities of theirs are like the beak of a bird which are made sharp when they take hold of the sagitta so that it does not escape.
And of those are made many special types, large, small, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the greatness of the sagitta and of the small weakness, and of the amplitude of the wound, and of the constriction of it.
thus like a radius so that it alleviates the intrusion of it into the concave sagitta and is impelled into that.
On the flebotomy of the veins.
The veins of flebotomy, which are customary to flebotomize thus... of those that are in chapter 16. there are two pulsatile veins which are near the aurelia, it is said by Galen; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyes that are called aspicientz; and the vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guide veins that are at the neck; and two veins that are above the lip; and two veins that are below the lip; and — these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. Perhaps the veins that are flebotomized in the arms are thus. because among those is a cephalic, and it comes from the wild lettuce; and the people call it "the vein of the head", and it is dull, and it is a medium-sized vein, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that "vein of all the body", and the basilica is a vein which is placed in the domestic lettuce, and is named "citillar", and the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and it is the end of the arm, and it is placed above the focus, and it is that which appears above the pulse for manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein which is between the aforementioned auricular and the small digit, and so in the two branches.
In the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is that which is beneath the curvature of the thigh of the wild beast; and the second is subtle, and in its place it is beneath the leg of the domestic beast; and the sciatic vein, and in its place it is beneath the leg of the wild beast; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The youthful vigor of the veins that are near the ears is affected by chronic and migratory and saharatic and ulcerous evils of the bad old head.
And the quality of bleeding from those is according to what I recommend to you: it is that it should be near the head of the patient, and it should be rubbed on the head of the patient in the occiput, where both veins are found in a good friction; then strengthen the patient's neck with a bandage around so that both ears appear near the temples of the head; and if you feel the pulse of those in the said digit, and if you sense the pole of those in the said digit, here it will be tense.
Then take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is incident, and then introduce it beneath the vein in the codeina so that the flebotomy comes out at the bone. And then lift your hand on the vein and codeina to the separated parts above and incise the vein in an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the quantity of two digits adjusted or around that; and make the blood flow out as much as you want.
And then strengthen with poultices and apply it to the wound so that it may be healed.
And now I have preceded in the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
More of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the youthful vigor of phlebotomy is an ancient and evil migratory and sorrowful and chronic eye disease and a body full of acute overflowing fluids towards the heels.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck with a motive towards making both veins apparent at the sentiment for manifest perception and demonstrate the pulse of those in the said digit; and then you will sense it tense.
And then lift the codeina above the vein to the separated parts above in the said digit indicated, and introduce phlebotomy incidentally beneath, and lift the vein upwards; and incise it thus as you have done on the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then release the constriction of the patient, and pause for an hour on the vein with the digit, and then pause above that spot with poultices and strengthen it from above with a strong constriction, and apply it so that it may be healed.
And now I have preceded the remembrance of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
And so the youthful vigor of phlebotomy on the vein of the forehead is near to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient evils of the face and migratory and rough and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what I recommend to you; thus it is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage around so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named fossor, of which this is the form of it:.
Pause at the prominent point which is at the head of the fossor above that vein and percuss on it with a pin or another cause in the manner of it, and make the blood flow according to the quantity you want; and then release the perforation of the patient and strengthen it so that it may be healed.
And some veins are opened in phlebotomy at a distance, however it is not covered that phlebotomy is of acute extremity thus as the other phlebotomies, except it is of lazy extremity, and phlebotomize it according to the transverse, because the bone is propitious and strongly supports the tendons in it when the phlebotomy is subtle.
More of the youthful vigor of the two veins that are in the lacrimal ducts of two heels for scabbing of the heels due to roughness and sebum in the heels, and at the evils of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient strengthens their neck with a bandage, and then phlebotomize those, and you stand still above the head of it.
And it is done the phlebotomy according to the transverse at a length of a little in phlebotomy a little, because in that place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, strongly the extremity of it is torn.
And then make the blood flow as much as you need, and pause above that spot, and strengthen it for a night, and then release it.
More of the phlebotomy of the vein of the nose is conducive to acute fever and violent sweat, and at the evils of the face and migratory roughness that occur in the face, and it worsens when it is ancient.
And the quality of the flebotomy of the patient is that the patient's vein strengthens the blood and you will take the subtle flebotomy instrument in your left hand, and place it at the correct location on the nose bridge according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the sentiment here, and because the blood starts to flow soon.
Cover that you ultimately hold your hand on the small flebotomy instrument little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then leave it there for a new night, because it is restored lightly.
Moreover, the juice of the flebotomy of the two guiding guides constrains the flow and begins to expel the leprous matter and many evil humors and corrupt ulcers, also with herpetic wounds.
And the quality of the flebotomy of those is that the patient strengthens below each one in the blood with a lien; and it is the artificial application on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then flebotomize the vein at length with a small flebotomy instrument little by little; and then extract blood according to tempered quantity or according to what times of need that is added to it; and then make it resemble the other vein.
And then dissolve the lien and strengthen the two veins with a mild stricture so that the patient is not overwhelmed, and lay it in the mattress because the plague is healed.
And the juice of the flebotomy of the Algerich veins confers small apostemes and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and evil ulcers and fissures, and to evil ulcers that are in the nose and in their circle.
And the quality of the flebotomy of those is that you make the patient cease within you, and strengthen their neck with a bandage, and then revolve their lips and regard the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each one is for the blackness of each of the two, and it is more because in the circle of those small black veins; and then you will insert each one for a sudden insertion.
Moreover, if you have doubts below you, and do not know which one of those is, then you will attend to the insertion of the larger one of those, and of the most manifest pustule of those.
And make them resemble the two veins that are on the lips above.
Moreover, of the two veins that are below the tongue, the juice is to apply the flebotomy of the cephalic to prevent those that are in the throat, to the evil of the uvula, and to evils of the mouth.
And the quality of flebotomizing those is that it follows the patient between your hands within the sun, and raises their tongue, and regards below the tongue, on one side of their vein and on the other side of their vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
And then flebotomize each one; and beware that you do not ultimately hold your hand on the flebotomy instrument for those, because below those are arteries.
And the veins that are flebotomized in the body are those which usually correct in all homes, and the flebotomy of theirs is done according to two manners, or they put on the flebotomy instrument miraculously or with olive oil at subtlety declining; or they section with the flebotomy instrument cuticularly, and apply it skillfully, and this is their form.
It is the side of it also with times, and converges to open the concave full veins apparently gross, and to those that contain gross turbid blood.
And this flebotomy is of lesser latitude and of more subtle extremity, and converges to a flebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle citrine blood.
Moreover, the juice of the flebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: because it extracts the blood of the evils that are below the throat and neck, and of what descends to the feet and belly.
And it converges to the flebotomizer, when flebotomizing that one, that he should beware of that and be above-trembling on that, because below it has an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy instrument, he will insert that artery and cause fluxes of blood, so that he knows not to flebotomize with a pungent flebotomy instrument, unless he is skilled with skillfulness.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is known that you should leave that one and move to another, or seek some other vein; or that you flebotomize at the end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and you will section that with a skilled flebotomy instrument as we have said.
If you want to perform phlebotomy on the patient's thigh, then place a cupping device below the structure of the arm that touches the area inside so that you can collect the area of the pulses, and place a band above them with tension; and place a ligature on the arm and section the concave vein in the phlebotomy process as we have described; and be careful not to cause bruising during percussion at any point in the artery.
And when you perform it, with strong ligatures, the swelling occurs at the point where you have placed the cupping device, then that swelling is a sign of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if the blood flows in the phlebotomy as it does with the urine of a child, and the blood is subtle red, then you know that it is from the artery's blood; and then you stop and pause the tie above that point for a long space; and place the tie above, and if the blood is absorbed, because many veins are absorbed, then you tighten the arm and release it.
And beware of the patient's mood, and be above their temper, and do not annoy them for several days until they are healthy.
But if the blood is not absorbed, and it seems that you do not have present medicine for this, then you incise the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of the patient is constricted, and the blood is absorbed; or take a thread of floss, and finish with that, and take one vein and tighten above the point of the concave vein in the structure descending into the ligature and into the pulvis until another day.
And then if the blood is absorbed, it's good; and if not, then cure that wound with the remedy which is preceded by the remembering of the place where the powders are absorbed to stop the flow of blood.
And the absorption of the patient's blood is difficult in many dispositions for the small place of the wound and the possibility of the ligature of the arm.
Moreover, the dark vein in phlebotomy is a youthful thing that extracts the blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; therefore, because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have described.
And beware the phlebotomist who is above-temperament in the phlebotomy of the patient, because below that is a nerve; and then if you adjust to the puncture of the phlebotomy and touch the nerve, it will cause stupor to the patient, and it is difficult to heal them, and far from being completely healthy. And this nerve appears many times at the sentiment; and if it is hidden for several hours and is subtle and does not show, then beware that you pause the phlebotomy at the point where you are performing the section of the vein, and avoid the nerve with your forcelessness.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you open the vein in length.
The youthfulness of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and comforts the ailments of the eyes.
And beware in this property, if you want the phlebotomies to puncture with olive or myrtle phlebotomy; because it is the safest of all the veins, since it is neither an artery nor a nerve.
Moreover, it is strongly necessary for them to be apostemated in several hours, when they are not phlebotomized on the primary percussion, and do not touch anything in that apostema.
The first thing is that you should know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the conservation of health and for the hope of the patient's safety and caution against the occurrence of ailments, and that it be performed on one of the veins that are in the body, such as: cephalic, dark, and basilica; and that phlebotomy be performed at the beginning of spring, above all in the morning of spring and autumn, and in winter near mealtime, when appearances of repletion appear.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at the first hour after three hours have passed since the sunrise of that day.
Moreover, phlebotomy that is administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity to that, or of night or of day, at any hour and in any time.
And beware that a child should not be phlebotomized until they are 14 years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be phlebotomized except for the fourth month until the seventh, and the old people should not be phlebotomized whose age has passed 60 years.
And since it is necessary to cleanse the veins in some manner, so that the mondified intestines are freed from obstruction in the fleubotomy, if there is a motive for retaining the superfluous humors, so that the veins do not attract the purulent humors in the fleubotomy of the intestines, which are principal members.
And do not perform fleubotomy on patients who are nauseous and suffer from cramps, nor those who are affected by malautia or ebreta, until it is remedied that they are free from it, nor those with hydropic malaute, and more because fleubotomy is delayed by colic passion and vomit, and the pain in the belly, and the multiplication of coughs and troubles and exercises of fasting or vigilias and all causes that dissolve virtue, whether it be a bodily or animal corpus.
And then consider the subtlety of humors within if the blood is thick, with wines and beverages, and with medicines if it is possible to make it more subtle at all costs.
And then enter into a bath if some cause does not prohibit it, or is excited by some exercise so that the blood may be subtled.
And pause the fleubotomy of it in the chest during the day, so that it is around the hour of tierce, thus as we have said.
And perform it so that the chest of that one is guarded on that day from all evil accidents and animal anguishes, thus as there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all corporal accidents, thus as there is trouble and excessive pain and cough and similar things to them.
And at his seat, let the causes be present in the use of that which customarily costs with the aromatics and odors of the balms and similar things to them, according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the fleubotomy operator on a cushion that is placed above the cushion of that one who must be fleubotomized.
And then extract the diseased arm, and rub that with his hand the fleubotomy operator does two or three times; and then strengthen the ligament in the corset and involve that for two days.
And let the structure be tempered, because the structure when it is not engorged, or the structure is overly full, then it prohibits the flow of blood; or it is mollified, and then it prohibits the body of the blood from being assuaged.
And then the structure, because that one who must be fleubotomized rubs his hands together between them until the veins are inflated and declared to the sensation.
And then the fleubotomy operator anoints the diseased fleubotomy with a little of anti-inflammatory oil properly; and then pauses the diseased finger of the left hand over that vein, below the place where he wants to perform the fleubotomy, so that the vein is a little puffed up, and the percussion is seated because one of the veins is the one that is obstructed, thus as if it were a cord fleeing from the fleubotomy, and of those it is full of windiness; and when he pauses the fleubotomy over that, it is contracted away from the fleubotomy, and it is discovered by the fleubotomy operator; and the fleubotomy does not overcome the vein, and if it overcomes, that one is stretched.
And therefore, for this reason, the fleubotomy operator must be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
And then pause the fleubotomy, more if the vein is opened in one way, then it is good; and if not, you iterate another way below that place a little, or above the festination, if the place is not apostemated.
And if the place is apostemated, or the malaute spreads, then you leave it for a day or for two, and do not strengthen the ligament, because you would strongly attract an apostemated caution, nor enter into a bath.
And then iterate the fleubotomy if it is loved.
And if the perception is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it does not reach the quantity that you want, then you iterate the fleubotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust the perception a little, and make festination within so that the place is apostemated, because the place is apostemated in many homes for few perceptions.
More if it has already been apostemated, then do not iterate over it, because you do not excuse any cause; and pause on that part of the wound with oil, because it alleviates the body of the blood. And it is better in this place with oil and that the other oils.
And similarly administer the wound with oil in all fleubotomy where it fleubotomizes the veins from the prohibition of bodily blood, and make a tyrical and sagzenous effort when it is paused on one of those over the place, because the blood is subtled and revolves when it is thick.
And if in the place of the fleubotomy a great apostema is engendered, because many veins accumulate, and mainly to that one which has not been bloodied except for that vein, or in the perception of the little vein, and then you touch, and pause on the place, soaking in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, because it is dissolved.
And it happens that it makes one approach the sentiment of the blood from that vein in order to complement it with another vein.
And if you find a spot on the area for several days with some blackness or greenishness, do not touch it; and if you want to, pause over that cause of alopecia or mirroring dissolving, or some cause of sugary mentation or calming semblance of it.
And many gathered accusations and emissions of evacuations from the flea-botany of the basilica.
And then pause your hand over that, and if then you find softness from your compression on that, then that emission is bad and evil; and therefore beware that you pause over that cause of what we have said, because the flow of the arterial blood is strong.
And make an implant in that which is stipulated, so that the area becomes hardened, and then cure that with another cure within, so that it may be healed.
And it happens that you extract from the blood all human secrets according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the colour that appears over the blood, as it seems.
Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow in so that it may be red; and similarly if you find it thick, then you let it flow in so that it may be subtle; and similarly if it is bitter, so that the sharpness of it may be stopped.
And it happens to that one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in a vein, that the flea-botany of the vein may be amplified and the flea-botanists are wide.
And in that one who is weak, the opposite of that should be done, and it happens that he extracts it in many ways, and that his tract should be straight.
And the best administration in flea-botany of a vein is that it should be cross-sectional, not punctured.
And this manner of flea-botany is safe from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than flea-botany according to latitude and longitude.
And at the one that is accustomed to overcoming syncope from flea-botany, and it happens that you cure it in the meantime with flea-botany and a small infusion of milk or simple oxymel scalfatum; and extract the blood in three ways or four.
And if it is complicated by completeness, then take beforehand the flea-botany to infuse in essence of mirrhetic or essence of aromatic melissa, with species also as pepper, cane, ginger and similar, or in aromatic essence and much odorous.
And if it occurs syncope from flea-botany, and it is the cause of much blood issuance, then it happens that you take in drinking water of flesh and essence very odorous and subtle; and use aromaticity with algae, and be limited to the seven feet in that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
And who wants to evacuate the seven veins and dissolve the seven bloods in a second way, it happens that the flea-botany is for much evacuation, and its virtue is weak, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of virtue in the continuous days.
But who wants to evacuate the seven veins, and throw out the seven bloods in a second vein, and the seven body is strong, then make that approach for seven hours or nine of the first flea-botany.
But who wants to attract the blood of the seven body to the contrary of the part where it declines, it happens that it is evacuated on the second day or the third.
But that body in which much blood is scalped and is sharp and makes fever occur, it happens that it is thrown out of the blood at once and is of great quantity and is amplified the perception within so that it may syncope; then pause your hand over the pulse of the one who has the body of the blood, so that no death occurs in place of syncope, because many times it ends there when the flea-botanist is ignorant and negligent.
And it does not happen when you want to dislocate the vein and evacuate the blood in a second way, since already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult to issue the blood, that you press below with vehemence and encumbered extension, because that is too bad.
Having let it flow in so that it may be flea-botanized secondly; or remain with the sharpness of the flea-botanist who coagulates the blood at the orifice of the vein; or pause over that of Tyriacal Alfarach, or of Sagizenia, and compress it lightly in so that the blood may flow out.
And if the vein is apostematized, then let it flow and do not touch it until the apostema is settled.
And if you need to provoke evacuation of the blood in a second way, and there is no excuse, then you will bleed that over that place or on another arm in another vein.
The vein called "arm veins" is blocked in the area of the forearm or basilic vein, when they are not swollen or varicose, because it is composed of those.
The quality of the blocking of it is that the patient inserts their hand in hot water so that the vein appears manifestly.
And then stretch it out over that same ligament with a narrow structure; and then block according to the small transverse, not latitudinally nor according to the length.
And it is a broad perception and it is your blocking, which you block there over the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you put your hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you perceive your need.
But if you were in the summer days, then you are exempt from the iteration of putting your hand in hot water, and it is customary to pause the flow of blood in hot water during winter.
And the blocking of this vein is more saving than all the other veins, because there it has no pulsating vein, nor nerves.
And the blocking of the little vein of the right hand is convenient for the diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the blocking of it is that you stretch out your hand in the ligament or with your hand, because you have put it in hot water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated to the view; and then block it transversely; and if you inject there all the same, you will not feel anything in return.
And be careful not to ultimately block your hand with the blocking, because there it is the nerves of the fingers denuded of flesh.
And then put your hand in hot water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not iterate this in hot water, the blood will congeal in the orifice of the vein, and its flow is prohibited.
And as you extract the blood according to the quantity of need, then you pause over the vein with oil or salt, so that it is not consolidated too tightly; and similarly, it is customary that you do this in all straight lines.
But the benefit of the blocking of that vein of the left hand is that it is convenient for the diseases of the spleen.
And do similarly in the blocking of it as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of the Sephena vein in blocking is for the diseases that are in the lower part of the body, as well as diseases of the mother, and retention of menses, and for the diseases of the kidneys and ulcers of thighs and legs ancient, and their semblance of diseases.
And the quality of the blocking of it is that the patient inserts their foot in hot water and makes friction over that spot until the veins appear; and he puts it on the joint of the foot with a cord; and the place of the vein has an apparent digit, and from there it ramifies into the face of the foot with many branches.
And then block more widely around the leg from the digit to the aggregation of it, because it is better and more healthy.
And if you block it on the face of the foot, then you guard against the nerves that are below there on the face of the foot, and pause your blocking where you blocked for the crossing, lest you want to inject.
And it is a visible blocking.
But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you put his foot in hot water and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated.
And if the blocker makes a mistake in the first blocked place, then make a new blocking in another spot, because the place is healthy; and do not fear his malice, but rather guard against the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same with the Sephena vein of the other foot in equal manner.
And of the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said, from the digit below the hollow of the wild or wooded part.
And the benefit of the blocking of it is to alleviate pain when it is caused by bad blood.
And the quality of the blocking of it is that the patient enters into a bath, and tightens and strengthens their skin from the waist to the ankle below the four fingers in a long subtle band, because it does not appear except for that.
And then when it appears, then you block it according to each engine that is possible for you and according to the transverse, and it is better; or inject there for injection or section there for sectioning, because the place of it is healthy.
And it is in many homes very ambiguous; and if you atrophy there, and it does not appear to the sentiment of all, then block some root of it, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot in the auricular and anular digits.
And observe the nerves, and make the blood flow in quantity as you wish.
And release the constriction and pause at the site of the phlebotomy wound, and tighten the site, so that the bleeding is healthy.
From evacuation and from the qualities of using those remedies.
Evacuations are made with clysters, or with scammony, or with enemas.
And evacuation is done according to two methods: one of them is scarification and blood extraction, and the other is evacuation without scarification.
And this evacuation without scarification is done according to two methods, because either it is with a hot iron or without a hot iron.
And the evacuations that are administered with scarification and blood extraction are 14 places of the body, among which one is where pauses are made on the ankle; and it is the last part of the head; and the middle place of the neck in two parts of the collarbone; and evacuations below the jawbone just below the mouth; and evacuations of two spatulas; and evacuations of the alohoster, and it is above the end of the hip; and evacuations of two focal points, and they are of two arms; and evacuations of two cavities; and evacuations of two thighs.
And evacuation does not extract blood except from the small, sparse veins in the flesh, and therefore it does not receive virtue through them, just as it is received through phlebotomy; nor is it believed that evacuation should be done with a hot iron or without a hot iron in any illness done for replenishment until the entire body is evacuated.
Moreover, if it is necessary to provoke an evacuation for illness or for a continuous flow, administer it at every hour from the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of it and at some time.
And thus when it happens in any of these causes, and especially if it is on the third or middle day of the month, then we command that evacuation should be done after two or three hours have passed from the day.
And the benefit of evacuation from the neck is that when it confers gravity on the head and descends to the eyes; moreover, it is believed that this should be an evacuation of the entire body.
And this evacuation is at the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it is not lawful to use that evacuation on him who has a complete fracture, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
And therefore it is not believed that the use of those evacuations should be on the old people, and in the heads of which there are frequent illnesses.
Moreover, to the one who continues to do that on him is done forgetfulness; and therefore it is believed that you command the evacuator to pause his hand a little at the site below, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Moreover, evacuation of the ankle is at the site of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilica: and therefore it confers an asthma, and constriction of the ale, and scission of the instrument of the ale, and to all, and replenishment.
And it is believed that the evacuation of the ankle should be impeded a little, because if it is paused below, it generates debilitation in the body and in the stomach.
And the evacuation of the hagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and opthalmia, and emigranea, and prefocacio, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the basilisque.
And it is believed that you command the evacuator not to press his hand on scarification because it may not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And evacuation below the chin confers a bitter taste in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and a resemblance to those illnesses that are in the mouth, and it is at the site of phlebotomy of the alihelic vein that is in both lips.
Moreover, the evacuation that is done on the two spatulas confers a captivation, which is done for replenishment of heat.
And the evacuation of the two divisions of the inner parts of the focal points confers benefit from the phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, dark, and cephalic, because it attracts the blood from all those veins, as well as those small veins of the other gross veins, until it pervades the attraction to the three veins.
And command the surgeon to not cut too deeply in the incision, because the area is deprived of flesh, and afterwards you will find the nerves and arteries.
It is a wound that is treated by operating on the hips and confirming the wounds of the buttock and the ulcerous pus that comes afterwards.
And beware that you command the surgeon to make a large wound, and it should be of iron, because the area needs strong suction; and strongly sew up the subtle wounds with subtlety in the incision.
More wounds on the smaller limbs manifest for minor injury, because they attract the blood from the whole body, and confirm the ancient pains of the joints and of the matrix, and of the bladder; and provoke the menses, and confirm the bother and admiration; and stay in place of a flebotomy of two soporifics, and alohorn, and of two cavities.
However, I do not want to weaken the whole body and make it fall into syncopes in many homes.
And from the wounds alohorn is the youthfulness that proceeds to the youthfulness at the wounds of two limbs.
And the quality of the position of the wounds is that it stops the wound at the beginning of the void and sucks for timely suction, and does not prolong the position of the wounds, but rather pauses those lightly, and remains quiet, and that the humors come to the area for a favorable event. And do not cease iterating this and continue until you see the area already red and swollen and that the rigor of the blood appears.
And then you scarify and iterate the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
Because that man who is of tender flesh and rare pores, beware that you scarify him gently and not too much, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the surgeon to amplify the scarification and make a little deeper, and temper the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thickened, then beware that you scarify two gentle ways, because in the first way it opens the path of subtlety to the blood and its circulation. More in the second, to the precise inspection of the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very filthy, then make a third scarification for cleansing, so that it reaches the bottom.
And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or in small amounts, it is enough for us to make one scarification.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we make many scarifications; and if we know that the blood is thick, then beware that you scarify deeply by scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the hollow tube only so much.
And if that one whose tube is thick, hard, dark, and the pores are so constricted, beware that the places of the wounds should be anointed with lenitive, resolving oils; if it is in summer, thus as oil of aloes or oil of violet, or oil of gentle massages, or oil of camomile; and if it is in winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of chamomile, or of blood, and to those that seem similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, cold, then the oil should be of marjoram, or oil of balsamite, or oil of aloes, or oil of anise, and to their similars.
More if the surgeon is of large pores with tender flesh, then beware that it is prohibited from oil, and beware that to those places of wounds their own proper ventilation should be washed with warm water or cold water of solatrum, or water of camomile, or water of bordolaguas, and similars to those.
And that one whose blood is of much humidity, wash his wounds with warm vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similars to those.
And that one whose superfluities are thick, wash his wounds with warm anticy, or water of sansuc, which is majorana, or decoction of anise, or chamomile, and to their similars.
And beware that the wound should be kept away from bathing; however beware that it should be administered properly in front of the bath for an hour or two, and beware that it sleeps properly with the wound.
What is it that one should regulate the wounded person from phlebotomy before wounds.
Beware that you consider from the beginning: then if the surgeon or he who should flebotomize is choleric and wounds above the blood agitated and inflamed, then beware that you take causes of infrigidation, thus as milgranas acetosas, and endivia in warm agreement and laytuguas, and secanabin, and julep, and to their similars.
And pause their wanderings thus as poultices, and flesh of ausel's serbiges, and wanderings condensed with agrimony, and to their similars.
And if the patient's complexion is cold, it is likely that they took in bad air or ate foods that are heavy and difficult to digest, such as sumac, and there was a great smell of putrid matter between the veins and the Christmas season; and it is commanded that they use little of the purging medicine and of mangier, and pause the wandering of their loins and kidneys and small intestines.
And it is likely that on the day of ventosity and flebotomy, the drink should be stronger than the food.
And it is likely that it should be given in drink at certain hours to certain men tyriac alpharac, or medicine of musk, so it is musked, or alcilite during ventosity or flebotomy or thereafter, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is subtly purified; and it is not likely that they take that scalping.
Maybe the ventoses that are their scarification are ventoses that are paused on the feet, and on the worse part of gout, and on the navel, in the hollows of the joints, and the pustules of the ankle, because these members do not suffer from scarification above them.
And it is not sought for those but attraction of blood from member, thus as one pauses a ventose on the mamilha in bad flux of blood of the blood of the veins; and they use that so that the ventosity is dissolved, cold and viscous of the member, thus as one pauses on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and clears it and removes the pain since it resolves ventosity.
And already it is paused on the roots when they accumulate in their opilation or pus, because through virtue of strong attraction the humble opilation and eradicates the pus from its place.
And similarly it happens when it is paused on the feet and worst part of gout, then ventosity is enclosed in those.
And these ventoses are administered with sweet juice only; and some vegetables are administered at the fire.
And some vegetables are administered full of warm water treatment in the bad humors of gout.
And that is why the ventosa should be full and should be bigger, so it is warm water alone or water in which suitable herbs are cooked for that convenience.
Form of ventosa administered at the fire: let the amplitude of the orrifici be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon should be the width of a palm; and let it be in the fat of it, in the place that is in the circle, the width of it, the hole should be small according to the quantity that enters into it through a needle.
Let it be made of iron rod or citrus, with thick margins, lion, hinges and ties so that the member does not leave its position on it.
And let it be in the middle of the iron or copper crossbeam, where a candle is paused at the fire.
And already this ventosa is greater than the one we have recommended; and the lesser pause of that according to the bad humors and the state of the one who uses it.
And the ventoses of the old men are weakened, so others than the ventoses of the young and of thick corpulent bodies.
And the quality of pausing this ventosa at the fire over the member is that it extends the meca at the fire decently within a pause of a candle of wax, and pauses it on the middle of the crossbeam in the middle place of the ventosa, so that the fire is kindled around the partition below, lest the body of the patient be burned.
And then it is paused on the member of the patient, and the finger is on the hole that we have said, until when we hold the ventoses and do not indicate that they open the finger and that the vapor escapes over that hole, then the ventosa will be almost dissolved.
And they ignite the meca according to its manner, and then they indicate that they are freed from that.
Maybe in ventosa that is administered in the bad humor of flatulence, with water, in which there is no crossbeam nor hole, and it is not administered unless it is full of water, and it is paused on the member only warmly.
And this is its form: And this ventosa, the more it is big, the better it is, because it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter 148.
Blood-lettings are not administered on many members unless on the members in which it is not possible to position ventoses, due to their smallness, thus as the foot and gum and similar to them; or on a member denuded of flesh, thus as the finger and nose and those similar.
And the quality of using those that have been found to be blood-lettings that are in the waters of muddy worldly affairs.
And then they are laid down during the day and night in muddy water until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated at the beginning with flebotomy and ventoses; and then the member of the patient is cooled until it becomes red-hot; and then they are paused on it.
And when they are filled and case.
And if it is possible to suck from the place where the wind comes out, it is better for juvenation.
And otherwise, then wash the place with warm water and add a lot of water; and it should be frequently washed and squeezed out.
And if the body is prolonged by the flow of blood vessels, and it is resolved, then you soak a cloth in cold water, and pause that on top until the resolution is absorbed.
And if the blood is multiplied, then powder with triturated vitriol, or gall and similar things to their stippling causes, until the blood is dried; or place on the area the crushed heads of roasted faba beans, and they will dry until the faba beans adhere to the area, and the blood is dried.
And be careful, if it is necessary, iteration of blood vessels, when it is possible to move them around.
And if the blood vessels are prohibited from suspension, then frequently wash the place with recent blood or stick a needle in the areas until it gets blood; and then pause, for they will feel some blood as soon as they are touched.
And when you want to calm them down, powder with a little of triturated aloe, or salt, or cinnamon, and it will soon be so.
Thus begins the third part: of restoration. This chapter is many very necessary things in the art of medicine; and it is restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and vulgar people, who for a long time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason it is done that this manner of the sciences in our land is private; and I have not forgotten anything from everything at all times; and I have not abandoned what came after, but only through long study of the books of the Ancients and reflection on their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
And then I added experience and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and about which I have passed my experience; because I have abbreviated it for you others and freed it from the occupation of prolixity; and I have abbreviated it at the end of abbreviation; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed it in many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I did in the two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collections from being fractures of bones, from which the necessary premises are, before we begin the remembrance of broken members and diverse things, each one by one. I will therefore set out in the prohemium of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of those whose beginning is forced by the craftsmen and stationed on the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt that they may know or learn this noble art better than you.
And then I say that when accidents occur, such as fracture or dislocation or twisting or breaking, then it is fitting that you begin with flebotomy or alleviating that, or at least sometimes, if no cause prohibits, thus as debilitation of virtue, or it is the one to which accidents happen frequently, or in decrepitude, or it is a time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And then I am content with a diet of fresh herbs and of lean meats and of game birds; and I prohibit gross meats and filling up on diets and all diets that fill the veins with blood, until you are secure from apostemic caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first regimen, in which they were accustomed to customary corridor.
And then since the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is fitting that the patient should be nourished with nutritious diets of much and gross food in which there is viscosity, thus as their diets made from wheat flour cooked in water, and rice, and caps, and feet, and stomachs of cows, and ewes, and fresh peas, and gross and similar things to them, and at this regimen it is done a coagulation of fracture by means of ligament and marrow.
And you know that the broken bones, when they are in the old people who are in the first weakness and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they can be continued and consolidated according to their nature through the desiccation of their members.
More, imperial nature adjusts and connects above the broken bone of all parties any similar cause to glue in which it is gross that adheres and strengthens until they are sometimes conglutinated and sometimes released, until they come to the end of fortitude and firmness, thus as a focus at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its own works.
Because of this cause it is necessary to pause the veins of the patient, veins in which gravity and viscosity and thickness have accumulated, as we have said.
And we know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the variety of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I will come to a remembrance of each species of fracture, explained in its own distinct chapter separate from the others.
Many varieties of fracture in the same bone. And the species of fracture of the bone are diversified in their meteyssas; because there is made an arcuated fracture other than that which occurs in the stars; and some veiled ones are made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and so the fractures of the sagittal and stellar and proceeding and not-proceeding, as it is made in the pain when it is prepared to be written, and it is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and it is a fracture with small fissure.
And to each species there is generated or tormented proper in restoration of it according to what will come to remembrance of it distinctly in its own places.
Many signs of fracture of the bone. And because of this it is known as a fracture of the bone: it is a twisting of it, and of that prominence and appearance of it to the sentiment, and so of it when it comprehends with your hand.
And then when it is not in the place of apparent twisting or it does not feel deviated from its usual touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
It is possible that it is a twisting or small fissure, therefore do not cover that you manipulate it with your hand and compress everything; pause over it from the medicines of which I have remembrance at that moment which convenes to the place; and then it will be straight for subtle structure.
And we know that the place where it is arcuated and not divided into two or other than that which does not occur in the sagittal, as it is remembered by all part of its comparison, then it covers that you begin from your hour to rectification of it before it occurs an apostemic cautery.
And if it occurs an apostemic cautery, then it will leave that for some days within which the aposteme ceases; and then it will be wrapped according to whichever manner you can of elevation and of generation.
And we know that restoration of it and reduction of it is less burdensome than that of the bone in which they occur sagittally.
And then it will strengthen according to what will come to remembrance of it.
But if in the bone there are sagittals, then it is necessary to extend this broken member into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
And it is your position in which you pause the member in its natural figure, while the extended parts of the broken member, then you will perform that you make them return to their positions and according to whichever manner you can in their places.
And beware according to your force that you do not operate on the patient for your operation of their limb or lesion; and perform according to your own power that you apply one bone to another as a companion according to their best forms.
And it covers that at that hour you will profitably touch with your hand then, and if sometimes here is some diverse cause, rectify it and wrap it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid vehement extension and compression, as if many foolish doctors make veiled ones that make them occur apostemic cautery for their operation, or make them occur in contraction of the member, as we have seen this for the operation of their veiled ones.
And the quality of the structure of the tranquil member is that which I recommend; because we know that broken members are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small such as the arm and the finger and the foce and similarly to those, then it covers that the envelopment should be of very subtle wrapping.
Those who have thick ankles like a cushion or the chest, cover that in which there is a hard and lasting wrapping, because the binding connects the large member and strengthens all parts equally, so that in it there is no spot.
And then begin, make your evacuation of equity, place a suitable bandage on that, over the area of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to whether the member is more meek; and strengthen your hand a little on the bandage.
And then see if you can apply it to the affected part above the area of the fracture, and strengthen more than you don't force your structure on which you have strengthened the area of the fracture. And then extend your wrapping around the area of the fracture a little, and soften the structure little by little, until you take hold of the area in a great part.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other way over the area of the wrapping, and then see if the wrappings are on the affected part below the fracture; and be your operation in the structure of the wrapping and in softening according to what we have said in the first wrapping above.
And then pause between the layers of wrapping to stop the Leon's bandage or cloth on which the twisting of the fracture is engaged, if there is twisting; and otherwise, do not pause in it for any reason.
And then pause over the other bandage, and engage on these wrappings decently and fairly, if in the area there is no inflammation or aposteme to be cautious, and then pause over the one that settles the aposteme and removes the inflammation; and let it be for some days; and then strengthen over the same wrappings.
And let the wrappings be of the marrow of a good cane, and be formed skillfully; or let them be of fir wood; or of palm branches; and let each wrapping be ample according to this form and figure.
However, it is necessary that the wrapping which is placed over that fracture be thicker and a little longer than the other wrappings, and the length of the stick according to what is proportionate to the member in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the wrappings with another bandage according to your first structure; and then tie it below decently as we have said about structure, and it is that your structure be according to the area of the fracture itself, and when more is removed from the fracture, the structure is mended.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and subtlety, and be of soft wool; and if the threads are thick, like when you have seen through the operation of some foolish people who pause the threads of twisted cords on the tort, and it is a great error, when you cut the structure without equality.
And also thin threads are not very convenient, because you do not conserve the structure for those who want it, and it is necessary that between wrapping and wrapping there be more of a digit.
And if the patient is led by the extremities of the wrappings to the structure in those places, then pause below those of the Leon's bandage or the Carmen's wrapping until it does not cause harm.
Some wrapping fractures are a plague, and they cause disruption in the cord, and you will find a reminder in that chapter according to singularity.
And you know that all torn members are not straightened with wrappings on the first day; which causes it because the member, when it is large, does not allow pauses over the wrappings unless for five or seven days or months, according to your careful consideration of the advent of aposteme caution.
And this is the method of the implanters among whom the Ancients restored, who were placed over fractures and dislocations and torsions.
Method of implantation as an abbreviation of restoration of fracture, convenient for complex and major fractures in women and children, because it is about that on which there is no heat nor cold: and it is that you take powder of millet, and it is the marrow of the flour that gives movement to the mill in the walls of the millet.
And it is comfortable like that, but you should filter it through the album of Huou, and pause the compression of it not being spacious or subtle; and then use it for that.
Another manipulation for implanting fractures and dislocations: recipe of assafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is made from millet salvage, all one denarius; of myrrh and aloes one denarius; of alochil one denarius twenty; all these are triturated and mixed with water or album of Huou, if the complexity of the patient's wound is scaled; and then use this implantation, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones very well, and confers many homes.
Another manipulation for implanting which confers a fracture and dislocation: recipe of migrach and a half denarius of white alta, one denarius; of myrrh and aloes one denarius five; of acacia one denarius six; of Armenian bol one denarius twenty.
All are ground in a mortar with crushed Motay constricting stone, and are sieved, and are mixed with water or with white of egg and shall be administered.
Manual of plastering for joints and separated bones in their places, and then accidental pain occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take a soft cloth and submerge it in warm oil and wax, and place it over the area.
Moreover, in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, but rather a cauterizing postume that expels pains properly.
Another manual of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves of a dry kind and papaver savings; mix all together and make an plaster of them.
Manual of plaster abbreviated administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of the remaining postume: recipe made with wax, chamomile and violet flowers, of barley flour, of all in a part. all are ground and mixed with wine, if the member is not scaled.
Moreover, if it is scaled, then make a compress with water of sweet marjoram or with water and use it there.
Another manual of plastering very strong in resolution that this first, when it happens that a postume is hard to restore the member: recipe made with wax and sesame oil, and balaustia, and mellilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, all in a part; all are ground and mixed with water of sage or water of dew or wine, all as suitable according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
Moreover, Hippocrates does not disagree in the free text that it should be placed over the trembling member for its restoration, unless a certain type of wax and oil is made, and no other cause; and he recommends that it should be moderate between thickness and subtlety.
Moreover, Galen has seen that they are placed over the broken member for its restoration and the causes in which there is exsiccation with little heat, thus also with myrrh, and similarly to those causes that we have recommended.
Manual of plaster that competes with lesion and pain: recipe made with migat, of cezès, of shaved homespun or pennyroyal, and of wax, and salt, all mixed together; all are ground and sieved, and all are mixed, and make a plaster.
Moreover, the quantity according to which one covers the lesion and approaches being dislocated, is that you consider if no pain or swelling nor the bone is broken nor is moved from its place, then you do not delay for many days. And if a vehement pain or swelling or inflammation occurs at the place, then you touch or remove it at that hour, and lift off the plaster from there.
And take a cloth of linen and marine sponge humidified, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the place until the swelling and pain are calmed; and then lay it to rest for an hour; and then place on it a soft cloth submerged in warm oil or rosated oil, and leave it on for a night until it is secure from cauterizing postume, and that the inflammation of the member is rested, and the pain of it is alleviated.
And then apply that subtle structure and small plaster, and do not strengthen it too much for your primary constriction, and subtly add to that until it is healthy.
And if sometimes the postume and roughness and pain and inflammation and all accidents are completely alleviated, and you have become skilled in plaster and structure, then you will apply that also as you have done from the beginning of the treatment.
And if it does not occur to the member any of those causes that we have said, then do not delay but apply it for three days or four or five. and some treatments all together are left on for 20 days according to what appears per the dislocation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the structure more than in your primary structure altogether, and settle in the thickening of the wine of the patient, according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it.
Moreover, if you sometimes find the place of the fracture is dried and extended more than it should not cover, then you know that the nutrient is prohibited from reaching there; and therefore embrocate it with warm water altogether, which delays all treatment; and it is in all three days; and loosen the structure a little, and for this operation correct the member to receive the nutrient, and it is healthily restored.
It's more likely that the fractured limb is not restored to its original state when it's not properly set, according to their conviction, and it's restored with twisting, which is an error according to the operation, and there's great fear, and if it were a director who would increase the ancient writings and would obtain authority over those books.
And you have not seen anything like it before, because it's more reasonable that it doesn't happen.
Chapter according to: The fracture that occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct, because some fractures occur due to percussion of the spine, and the percussion goes through the entire bone into the ciphac, which is below the bone, just as it does in the fist, and for this type the species is called ascial; or the spine is divided into some part of the bone, and divides the flesh of it and doesn't pass into the back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute levation.
And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attrition; and the cause of it is percussion on the ground or fall onto stone, and its symptoms are similar.
And this fracture is penetrating that almost reaches the periosteum which is below the bone; or it's in the surface of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small.
And the fracture is that which is diminished in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like [fiber], and for this reason it's called this type of fracture capillary.
And it's a fracture that is made or by fall or by percussion of the stone and its symptoms, which makes some layer of the bone enter the divided parts, and it occurs in the concave place just as it happens to the roles of the brain when they occur due to their percussion and are divided into the entered parts.
And mostly it's made in the bodies of humid bones, just as they have fragile heads.
And all these types of fractures are injuries, so they are weights just as they are separate stars. And you will find a remedy for all this in its proper place.
And I will discuss all these types of fracture by detection over those and by inquiry into their tents and signs of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary type is recognized by this that it's discovered on the bone, and it's cleaned, and limited around its tents, because the fracture appears black.
Moreover, in the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see per the accidents that signify for manifest significance over fear, just as it's vomit of cholera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and absence of will, and syncope, and acute fever, and dislocation of the veins and rigor of those, and symptoms similar to theirs in the major dispositions, if not healed.
And if you see non-coherent accidents, then you hope for health, and then you begin the cure of it.
The cause is that since it has come to you the plague at the beginning as it's a plague and this is in the days of winter, then it's believed that you should study in the osteument of the bone within the 14th day according to all disposition.
And if it's in the days of summer, then it's believed that you should touch or starve the bone within the 7th day, having that which is below the bone be corrupted by the periosteum, and that the accidents we have recounted happen.
And if the fracture has reached the periosteum covering the brain, and it's in divided parts and attrition, then it's believed that you should cut the divided part with comminuted and attrited, according to what you have recounted to yourself.
And it's that you shave the head of the patient plagued, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner possible for you according to the figure of the plague, and that it be lighter on the patient.
And if it happens to you to make the detection of the bone, whether of blood or aposteme cauterized, then you oppose yourself to what is believed, and it's that you fill the place with draps infused in wine and rose oil, and make repose the plague until it's sedated by the aposteme, and be secure from fluxes of blood; and begin in the circulation of the bone and in its ablation.
And that is according to one of two manners of operation.
And one manner is that you cut the bone with an incision of straight style, and this is its form: And then administer another incision like this, a little wider than that; and this is its form.
And then administer more incisions wider than that, according to the need.
And it's believed that you should give a different name to diverse incisions, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are in the rear of the affected extremities, and are of iron or steel.
And use of their arm is facilitated by percussion on the incisors so that it does not constrict the head and neck.
If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to perforate in the dental circuit of the teeth while you administer the incisors with trolleys, which are called non-deep trolleys.
And it is not called thus because those do not touch the term of the bone of the tooth to what is near them, so that the trolley is rounded at the extremity or margin over what appears to be a small circle or margin, which prohibits being submerged and passes the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these trolleys which almost converge at the specificity of each bone, until they are present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity being according to the quantity of specificity of this test.
And this is the form of three species of trolleys: The quality of perforating in the dental circuit of the broken bone is that it pauses the trolley over the bone and revolves around it with the fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; and then permit the trolley to pass to another location, and pause what is between all the tracks of the quantity of the thickness of the root or environment.
And then you insert the incisors into the incisors that are between each track of the bone, and make that very subtle push on what is at the end of levitation, thus as we have said, until you radiate the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause to stir up the instruments which will be applied to it, thus with delicate forceps.
And it is necessary that you keep total caution so that the incisor does not touch any part of the cervical region.
And thus you will have circumvented the perforated bone, and it will be separated from the cervical region if it is continued in it, and you will have extracted that, it is necessary to reason and equalize it in the roughness of what is on the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but more precise, because it was made thicker and more subtle than the other incisors.
And if you find some small bone fragments and splinters, then take them out in a way that is facilitated by what is your instrument; and then cure the wound with liniments and unguents which we have mentioned.
And the other manner of operation is ligature, far from pain, which Galen and others have written about for great healing; and this is the sermon of it: necessary is it to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most vehement and most manifest, until when you have discovered that part and placed beneath it the extremity of this gentle and light incisor, which is the form.
And it is that the lenticular part is smooth and does not insert any cause, and the acute part is of it in two layers beforehand in length, thus as often; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the cervical region on the face of the incident acute bone.
And then you percussion over the incisors of a part with a small hammer until you have inserted all the bone in a facilitated way, thus as it is revolved, and you will be secure from the panniculus that does not happen in any manner, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their own; certainly, and if he was dormant.
Then if you find some annexed cause to the bone of the panniculus in certain locations of the bone, you will insert that part with the extremity of the incisor, that lenticular one, and you will deliver it facilitated, because it is delivered from its nuisance and its pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is absent or removed from the bone is its face, and you find it in the roughness and subtle splinters, then it is necessary to reason that roughness and radiate those subtle splinters with subtle instruments for which you have prepared the number, of diverse quantities so that it is possible to administer them at every location most convenient for their administration and most direct according to what you perceive in your operation on the broken bone and its figure.
And it is necessary that you administer in your reason with which you radiate the bone at the beginning of the most latent of those instruments, and then use it for the most subtle part of it, and do not cease from what follows according to continuity until you reach administering the most precise and subtle part of all.
Moreover, in some of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fracture, it is necessary that you administer cure according to what you perceive for rectification of it.
And it is a cause that has not been diminished concerning all those who have studied in this art. And you will see about what we have written and shown in great fractures.
And if the panniculus is restrained when you radiate the bone, then it is necessary that you take a drap of oil according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another doubled or tripled drap and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the primary drap, making it very smooth so that it does not irritate the cervical region; and then administer over that liament late, and do not strengthen it except for the quantity that has the wound as solace.
And that treatment should be given for one or two days among which it is certain to avoid excessive caution; and then dismiss that and administer medicines as needed, avoiding excessive dryness, also with linseed oil and farina of barley, and powder of essences and aristology, and similar to those.
It is that you make from these powdered medicines to be sprinkled over the plague, also with dry things; and universally, administer in this entire medicine of proprietary nature which is that it should cleanse and not bite.
And beware that your virtue in the treatment of the plague is clean; and it should not be in the surdity of deceit nor another; nor do you add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted over the panicle of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and adds malicious malice to the patient.
And it settles in the ciphal of the head, as if it is mondified by the bone and majorly when the treatment is misrepresented, and it is blackened on its surface; and therefore consider then that it settles on the patient with accidents that we have said, knowing that it is a pernicious total doctrine.
And if it does not settle blackness but from the medicine that is paused above, and it is in virtue of that medicine which makes that blackness, then it is necessary that you take a mild dose and rub olive oil on the affected parts. and apply those liniments as a bandage, and then pause that over the ciphal; and then treat it with the species of treatment that converge within so that it may be healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is bruised.
You know that it is not bruised on the nose but two parties similarly placed above, or one of those hollow veins, because in it there are two bones, because the party below is cartilaginous, and it is not bruised and does not settle on it except with atrition and tortuosity and sinewiness.
But if one of the two parties of it is bruised, then it is necessary that you introduce the small finger into the nasal sieve, and that you adjust that fracture with your index finger, and with the small finger beforehand, so that the nose returns to its natural figure. And do it in a way that is facilitated for you, and beware that you do not fall into that pitfall of operating on the patient's malady.
And if the fracture is in the upper party of the nose, and the finger does not reach it, then it is necessary that it be equalized with the extremity of the file on which it is slightly thickened.
And if the fracture is in two parties, then you make a similar thing to that.
And try to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then place the seventh or eighth day of rest for the post-treatment caution.
And then insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth of linen, if the fracture is in one party, or mix two calves, if the fracture is in two parties, and let it be in the thickened calve of as much quantity that fills the tract of the nose.
And thus some of the ancient restorers said that the calves should be infused in borax, and should be permeated all day, but it has not been seen by me; however, I have found that the piece should be infused in a mixture of egg white as comfort with powder of moly; and then let the calve enter so that the bone is firm and the cartilage is indurated.
And some hollow veins are inserted into the nose, in place of a calve, pain of anguish because it is enveloped by a cloth of linen lion; and it is that already you have the fracture of the nose very violently and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, do calves.
And if it settles into another hollow post-treatment caution, apply the nose with cerate or cotton stuffed in vinegar and olive oil, or in diaquilion.
But if it does not settle into post-treatment caution, then it is necessary that you apply beforehand farina of sizami and powder of essences cooked in egg white; and then pause on the lion's paw, and do not lift the nose for any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are bruised with a small fracture or comminution, then it is necessary that you separate them, and extract them with instruments that converge on them; and then close the separation, and treat it with what encarnates and consolidates, and applies to what is convenient.
And if it settles into a plague within the nose, then it is necessary that you treat it with calves and administer pipes of lead so that it may be completely healed.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is bruised.
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not plagued, beware then that the fracture is beforehand so solitary, and it is not bruised in two and is curved to the parties within, then its cognition is lighter.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you introduce your index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then introduce the index finger of your right hand; and impress upon them the glibosity of the fracture in order to facilitate the parts that were dislocated before, at the level of the upper bone; and thus you will equilibrate the disjointed parts.
And if the fracture of the mandible is separated into two, then you must administer extension to both parts according to a straight direction until it is possible to equalize them.
And if it happens with a concussion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those that you hope will remain in a thread of gold or silver or cedar; and place a pause on the fractured mandible, and place a pause on the duplicated cloth, and a pause on the great stellar splint, or a small peg at the length of the mandible; and thus you will bind it according to how you have prepared the ligature and so that it is convenient for application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and tranquilize, and pause the food of their voracious appetite.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in some manner, then you will count and dissolve it on the third day; and place a correction of what has been altered from it and apply a poultice of soft millet, or album of egg white, or farina of chickpea, since you have stopped the corrosion of it, and pause on the applied lanolin.
And then add and adjust that poultice on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, thus, do not remove it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; for many times this fracture is stabilized in three weeks.
And if another occasion an abscess occurs cautiously, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed, and remove that abscess.
And if the fracture is in a plague, then consider whether it is a separated piece of bone or splinters, then you will subtly remove those splinters with what is convenient for the removal of those instruments.
And if the opening of the plague is narrow, then you will amplify it with a fleobotomy according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then when you have removed those splinters, and none will remain, then you close the opening of the plague if it is wide; and otherwise, place one of the poultices that are convenient for it and incorporate it, until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the furcula when it is dislocated.
Many times the furcula of the joint in front of the foot is broken, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
Because it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not touch splinters; and it is easier to restore it; or it happens that they touch splinters, and it is difficult to restore it; or it happens that the fracture is in a plague.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is in a plague, is that you have two ministers present, so that one has the assistant and holds the broken furcula, and the other extends the vein to that part.
And then bind the fracture with tight bandages until it is formed according to how it converges, and it is not in a slight prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is convenient to place a small cloth or wool under the patient's bed, and its size will be according to the quantity of your necessity; and stretch and elevate the furcula and shorten the splint with your hand until it binds the fracture according to how it converges.
And if you cannot stretch the extremity of the furcula to the previous parts, because it is perverted to the prong, then it is convenient that the patient be resupinated on their back, and place a large cushion under the muscle of one side, in greatness.
And the minister presses the muscle of it to the parts below until the bone of the furcula is elevated as it is in the prong, and then you correct the fracture and bind it with tight bandages.
Many times you feel splinters of the furcula and they are removed, then it is convenient to place a poultice on that and extract those splinters to facilitate.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you ingeniously make an incision of it with one of the instruments that you have prepared for it, since you had placed under the furcula the instrument that serves the ciphac; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form:
And it is similar to a curve of which this is the concavity; and its width will be according to what you have needed from it, according to the greatness of the bone or the smallness of it.
The greater the length of the patient is, the more possible it is for you to perform the operation; so that you have two extremities alike, one extended and the other stretched.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have inflicted when you have extracted the sagittal section of the bone is large, and you are sure of a post-operative abscess, then adjust the two lips of the wound under suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a post-operative abscess, then fill the wound with drainage and poultices according to the quantity of the section of the wound.
And if an abscess forms, then pour in warm oil and rose water, and apply a poultice over that.
And thus, that the sheet should not be moved away from the broken bone; and for this reason, you will see the patient every day, so that when the ligament is mollified or the sheet is already removed, then you correct it and strengthen the bonding.
And place the patient's sleep on their neck, and place beneath the title of theirs, so that in the night, a small servant will support theirs; for thus, the assistant of theirs from the side of that will be elevated, and therefore the fracture of the furcula will be elevated by the muscle lift; or the arm of theirs will be tied to their neck.
And do not loosen the ligament unless it forms in the location of the pus or abscess, until twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of theirs up to that point, and adjust it in the structure and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some vegetables are cooked in some homes, which is done in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The scapula bone is broken in the lateral location and does not break unless at the margins.
And so when the location of theirs is broken — and it is broken in the middle location of theirs — and it is not recognized unless by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture you will prepare theirs and reduce it according to its natural shape in every manner possible for you.
And then apply over the location a powder of millet flour in album of water and stop it with a lion's paw; and apply a double-layered poultice of cloth; and apply over the thin sheet of table board according to the quantity of the entire scapula or a little more.
If the sheet is concave in some of the locations of the scapula, then you will bend that concavity with a lion's paw, and apply the sheet according to equality.
And then strengthen it from below with a long humectant, and bind the sheet firmly until it is not moved away from its proper location.
And consider the ligament every day; and all vegetables that are mollified, another vegetable is strengthened, and equalize the sheet if it is moved away from its proper location.
And place the patient on their side in a straight position.
And the scapula is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
And so when this number is completed, then you will dissolve the ligament, and you should be assured that for those bones which at the beginning were not tempered nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed to the location of the bone's step and place beneath the codena, then you will divide over it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said about the fracture of the furcula with caution against abscesses if they form here.
Chapter 7.
On the restoration of a foot fracture.
The foot, some vegetables are broken in the middle location of theirs and that ends there; if the extremities of theirs are very bent and comminuted.
From the accidents of the patient when their waist is broken, it is declared that there is a decline in the internal parts and an acceleration to great pain, and difficulty in the breathing, and coughing, and strong vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and does not hide from the sentiment.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on their back, with a cushion between their shoulder blades; and then press also on the muscles of them, and adjust the ribs to the two rib-cages, and subtly proceed in the operation and in the equation according to all manner possible and convenient, until they return to the shape of the bone as it was.
And then place on the plaster and stopper and place underneath it a subtle layer of sawdust or of lime and of its similar levitation, so that you envelop it in a wrap; and then subtly proceed to bind it around the broken bone so that it is not dislocated; and go with the binding according to the return of the back to certain veins, and strengthen it with strict structure; and then consider the binding at all times, and when it is mollified, strengthen it.
And if it is necessary to provoke the dissolution of that which corrodes or inflames, or pain, or abscess that accelerates in the area, then you cut and separate it and eradicate the plaster and rectify what accelerates through it by manner of cure of the patient; and then return the plaster, if sometimes it is done on the face; and adjust to their structure until they are sane.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
You know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places that follow the back; and of the extremities of their part from above do not accelerate to those contradictions, but rather for what is cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden from the sentiment by which the inquiry of it is made with the fingers.
And the restoration should be thus that it equals the fracture with the fingers according to the possible manner, until it is equalized as it was, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone in this way, if it is necessary for that.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines to the internal parts, then it accelerates to the patient vehement pain and puncture, thus as puncture that accelerates to one who has suffered a blow, and for what reason the bone puts forth swelling; and it accelerates to difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting of much blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And thus the Antics were ingenious in that with many clever contrivances.
And of them it is said: they believed that the patient's belly would generate inflammation and wind, because the belly would be inflated and extended, and the fracture would be driven to the front parts.
We must avoid that because it would not be the cause of generating a hot abscess, if it does not accelerate; and if it does accelerate, then it helps with that.
And they said that some of them should be placed under the window and then suck with fortitude; and it is similar to rational thinking, but we, in our empire, are afraid that the window will attract the superfluities to the place due to weakness.
And they said that some of them: the place should be covered with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and dust powders between the ribs until it is filled, which is the binding equal to when you envelop it according to the return; and then the patient should be cured by cure of blows of wind and medicine.
And if it causes vehement constriction to the patient who does not suffer, and the bone puts forth swelling with piercing pain, fear about the patient, then they believe that they fall on the place, discover from the broken rib, and then pause over that instrument which preserves the sign, the remembrance of which precedes, and that they inscribe the bone with facility, and extract it.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with coagulation, and cure it with plasters until it is healed.
And if it accelerates to internal abscess, then you cut and pour powders into hot rose oil and place on the area, and that the patient should be cured with what is convenient for the internal abscess.
And it should be raised above the bed on which they sleep, until they are sane.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Some veins sometimes fracture the bones of the neck, and then they have a similar attraction, and similarly to the spine of the back. And with what accelerates to some and you want to know if it will be sane or not, then consider, because sometimes the veins are more mollified and stupefied and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen them and when they constrict them with the fingers or pierce them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that it is not sane, and among the same dispositions it is mortal.
And if you touch those areas and feel in those constricted passages with your fingers and points, then you will know that the core of the bone is healthy and that the patient's gout is being cured.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck similar to that and want to know if it is healthy or not, then examine their feet.
Then if you find that it is already softened, and you see that the same thing has happened in the hands, and then when you sit on his back and feel heaviness and difficulty in their will, and sometimes they are supported on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not labor over their cure.
Maybe if you don't find any cause of those things, the cause is better and more hidden.
And the cure for it is that you perform a sedation of the abscessed aposteme because it settles on the affected vertebrae or on the muscles of the back; settle on those areas several times a day until the abscessed aposteme is sedated.
And then apply one of the comforting and exiting emplasters, and stretch over that limb; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the affected side until they are healed.
And if you find that the essence of the bone is damaged or some cause has already separated from it, then it is necessary to cut over the cord and remove that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, sewing if it is large; and then cure that encarnated enguentz until it is healed.
Maybe if the rear of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the coccyx, then it is necessary that you introduce the finger of your left hand into the anus, and that you straighten the broken bone as much as possible for a second alignment; and then apply an emplaster and asterion, if you are skilled in those things, and then stretch that.
And if you feel broken vertebrae in it, then you feel over that, and remove that, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the Restoration of the Narrowness.
The bones of the narrownesses are often broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is not only communicated in the extremities of those and are inserted in their length and decline to the affected parts; and it causes pain to the patient in the area and point, and the leg is stupefied when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that until it is on the fracture which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is in the extremity of it only, then you straighten it according to your skill for aligning until it is assembled into its natural shape.
Maybe if the fracture is in the loin or has already declined to the lower parts, then you make the patient sit on their belly until it is prepared for your restoration of that fracture. And then when you have straightened it, apply an emplaster over it, and then apply a splint of wood or cord, and tighten by stricture so that there is no point of fracture nor movement of the splint.
And straighten the concavity so that it fills in until it takes on the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Maybe if you find an abscessed aposteme, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscessed aposteme is sedated, and apply to it what settles according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and tighten that thus as necessary.
And if you find them in the vertebrae or they are communicated, then you treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the Restoration of the Fracture of the Adjutorium.
The adjutorium is that which is between the shoulder-blade and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners, one of which is that you take wood planks instead of middle groove according to this form.
And tie them in two extremities with two ligaments, and then they are suspended from the elevated place.
And sit the patient on a seat; and then you place the broken arm on the wood until it reaches the titillic of it in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is annexed.
And then suspend it over some heavy cause or the minister extends it to the lower parts; and then the doctor sees that the fracture is in its proper place, until the fracture returns as necessary.
And the other manner is that the patient is resupinated on their back and suspends the hand of the neck with a ligament; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture in its proper place; and the other holds it below; and each of them extends to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then stretch over the fracture with a bandage and over that another bandage, and almost all of the two ministers extending to their respective parts.
So if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is necessary that half of the bandage be placed on the citellum and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow, then it is necessary that the bandage be placed on that place and on that elbow.
Empty that which has been facilitated and its troubles, and then quantify how it will be emptied according to what is necessary and it is applied for good application, then stretch it if you do not come across a post-trauma abscess.
But if you do come across a post-trauma abscess, then lay aside the structure until the seventh day, and place under the woolen cloth soaked in warm oil and rose oil until it rests and absorbs the abscess, and then stretch it.
And the way to stretch it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a wrapping of new cloth around the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that adjuster, and place your hand held back over the surrounding muscle.
And place the cloth and stretch over the adjuster to hold the arm in a steady position, so that the arm is stable, if it does not prohibit any cause of the broken bone.
And then use a stabilizer.
And it is that you place over the fracture a stabilizer that is more firm and stronger than the other stabilizers; and place between each stabilizer the width of a finger, and let the length of the stabilizers be according to the breakage with an addition of three fingers on each side.
And then stretch over the stabilizers with the structure that was mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your structure over the place of the fracture should be more stretched. And when the fracture has been lengthened, the structure should be smaller.
And so if you observe the situation of the stabilizers and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its original position, then do it.
And if you fear a post-trauma abscess, then leave the structure and stabilizers until the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not accumulate in the place of bruising or inflammation; or it is prohibited to bring nourishment to the member by means of superfluous structure; and therefore rectify everything according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that it does not accumulate any cause of this, then do not loosen the ligature until three days or more.
And let the patient's rest be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
And place over the adjuster a full cloth of warm wool, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not deformed or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened, therefore rectify everything according to your virtue.
And place the nourishment of the patient according to the order that we have given you, in such a way that the nourishment is subtle at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then it is necessary to increase the nourishment of it.
Because the custom of the adjuster and of the leg of it is to strengthen in 40 days; and then it is necessary that they be loosened and administered a bath and medicated with ointments that rectify that.
And if the fracture is badly treated, then do not loosen that bandage and stabilizers for a month or until two months.
Chapter 12.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called two forearm bones; of which one is small, and it is the one that is called the radius, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small bone, from the part below.
And often the larger forearm bone alone is broken, or the smaller one, and often they are broken together.
And when the small forearm bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is easier.
And when the forearm bone is broken below the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when both bones are broken together.
So if the bone that is broken is the small forearm bone above, then it is convenient for the doctor, in restoring it, to make a small extension with a facilitated entrance so that it can be emptied.
But if the larger forearm bone is broken, then it is necessary to make a stronger extension.
And if both forearm bones are broken together, then it is necessary that you make the external structure even stronger.
And it is necessary that you make the figure of the hand with the restoration of it and the extension extended over a pillow, and let the pulse of the hand be at the parts above, more than all the other fingers, and the auricular finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be seated on a wooden chair.
It should be a cushion under him in the high chair or bed, so that the patient does not incur trouble.
Then extend one minister's arm on the affected part, placing his hand there or on the limb, and another minister extends similarly.
Then the doctor should bend the bone inward so that it returns to its best figure as much as possible.
And if the fracture of the bone is dislocated, then you should perform reduction by pulling on the entire weight in the same place with your strength.
And if it appears that the dislocated part is separated from the code and it's not in your power to restore it, then you put an end to it and leave it according to the manner which we have discussed above.
Maybe the fracture is a plague, you already did it to that singular capital, and so take care of that.
And if you notice an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then you lay a strip of cerate made from olive oil and white wax, and it is better between speculation and subtlety, and strengthen the strip over that subtle structure until the abscess is cleansed; and then remove the cerate and pause with an emplaster prepared from powder of mulberry in clay water, and then place stilths; and let the stilt be the one that is applied over that fracture so it may heal and become strong.
And you will know that the number of stilts on the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or it is a fracture in one focus or in two foci together.
And then place your structure over the place of the fracture strongly and vehemently, and when it will be more settled, the extrication to the parts above the fracture or to the lower parts of it, place the structure a little while more softly according to what is preceded by the remembrance of it at the beginning of the capital.
And the strips that are wrapped around the fracture should be very humid strips, and not hard nor dry, and the thread which is strengthened should be of a middle nature, more subtly between subtle and gross, just as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament to be adjusted for some days. And if you find some cause for which rectification is necessary, just as you previously mentioned what has happened to the limb, and then it is necessary that you envelop the limb with warm water until that rectification ceases.
And let the limb not be constricted until it rests, and then return to the structure.
And if the extrication is already softened and the bone is already remodeled and similar to those, then you rectify everything with your strength.
And consider that maybe the nutrition is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess of structure, because then it is necessary that you soften that a little and let it be for some days until it can receive the nutrition, and then strengthen it.
Maybe the patient does not find any cause among those that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to delay until about 20 days or around that.
And then the hand of the patient should be suspended by its natural power of agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
And you will know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or indeed it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all this is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the strength.
Chapter 13.
On the restoration of fractures of the finger and toes.
You will know that the fingers of the hand and the toes are prone to fracture, and they do not occur to them unless with strong and vigorous movements.
And when a fracture or dislocation occurs in the hand, then it is necessary that the patient follows a straight line and lies down with his arm extended equally, and then place his hand on that extension.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor bends them inward so that they are congruent with good congruence.
And then it is necessary to apply an emplaster and a stopper, if an abscess does not occur; and then place a stilt underneath according to the quantity of the place, and you have already wrapped that in a strip of cloth.
Maybe the splint is in the inner parts of the fingers near the palm of the hand, and then make a strip similar to a bandage, and command the patient to strengthen that with his own splinted palm; then it will be strengthened with a long strip.
And let the stilt of the heart be in the strip in which it is elevated, so that the heart is applied to the palm; and strengthen that according to what is necessary.
Maybe the fracture is in the forepart, then it is necessary to place one stilt on top and another stilt of the part below in the palm, so that the hand is elevated and straightened; and then place the structure, just as the hand is revolved between the fingers with ligaments.
If a fracture occurs at the tip of the toes, then if it is a small break, it should be wrapped according to its curve and strengthened with a bandage on the palm, and if you want, pause at the little table to elevate the fracture so it does not get worse.
Maybe the fracture is in other toes, like in the middle place, or in the index finger, or in the ear, or in the ring finger, then it should be wrapped and tied according to its shape; or if all the ties are continuous, it is better; or pause on that little table, as we have said about the pulse.
And consider, in your restoration, and place that, the disposition of an abscessed cautery and opposing — in the tie of the operation — in what is convenient when some cause of those occurs, according to which the narration of it is repeated.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of fractures of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone, when it is broken and torn apart, is declared dead according to the sensation as it is converted into the upper and lower parts.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that one ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their back and on their face.
And then the minister extends all the ligaments to their part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle place of the bone.
Maybe it is propelled to the root of the thigh, then the ligament is propelled to the outer part of the knee, so that the extension remains in its place, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly if the break is propelled to the outer part, then make the ligament propelled to the outer part, and let the extension be in the lower parts.
And then the doctor wraps the bone with both hands inside so that it reduces to its natural similarity and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then it is convenient to pause in plaster and structure, if not, the limb becomes aposteme. Maybe it occurs in the aposteme, then you leave it for some days until the post-apostemic abscess is calmed, and then return to your cure.
The structure of it should be done thus: it is convenient to wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, and double that two or three times, and remove the superfluous part; and then wrap the leg until it reaches the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long wooden splint between the thigh and the leg near the outer part, down to the lower parts, and bring together the extremities of the splint from the upper part above both sides, and then revolve around the leg and the thigh so that it exceeds the bandage.
And then pause on the thigh at the place of that fracture thus, and pause with those one stake on the bone of the leg.
And then fill in the voids between the leg and the thigh with many cloths, so that the extrication is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong structure over the middle of the fracture with three or four wraps, and when you feel that you have loosened the ligament of the place of the fracture, your structure should be less and lighter and more relaxed.
And then extend the two extremities of the splint to the lower parts until they reach the heel of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the stakes on the other side so that the ligament is not removed from its place.
And then leave the structure over that, so that it does not occur to the corroding member or apostemic abscess or inflammation and similarly to those; and if some cause of those occurs, then cut away from the disunion of it, and rectify what occurs totally, according to what we have said many times.
Maybe in the bone there is a piece of bone that has been broken, then it is convenient to wrap that according to what is possible for you; and if not, finish over it and remove that, and cure with what precedes the remembrance until it is healed.
And some times it is strengthened by this fracture of the thigh or other adjustments to its stakes, as we have said in the adjuster and in the arm.
Maybe in the restoration of it, in such a way that it does not occur to the patient's lameness; and if it is restored alone, or another that the other leg should be applied, then it is necessary that it limps for some time.
And you know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few months, and all that is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
On the restoration of fractures of the knee joint.
You know that fracture of the knee joint is difficult to heal, maybe it occurs to many times with attrition.
When there is an accident to the fracture, then it's not just a crack or break in its parts, and that's a wound or several wounds, and above all this is what has been established as the sensation.
And the restoration of it is also in a way that it's glued together what's broken from its parts with the inner joints until it's reunited and conjoined as much as possible for equalization and facilitation and fabrication.
And then stop the plaster and put it on that round steel, if you need it; and stretch underneath to the structure according to what is convenient.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, also with apostemic caution and similar to those that oppose all accidents in what is convenient for it to be healthy.
Chapter 16.
On the restoration of a fracture of the leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is large, and it's called by the name of the leg; and the other is subtle, and it's called ankle.
And it happens to some species of fracture that it happens to the two bones of the arm, and therefore it's made restoration of it just like the restoration of the arm by union, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg is converted into all its parts.
And if the thin bone is broken, the leg is converted into the anterior parts.
And if the large bone is broken, you will have those symptoms, and it's because of those causes that are not easily reduced.
And then administer extension and equalization and ligamentation of the bones according to that union.
However, Emperor Cove, if the fracture of the leg is already having many painful symptoms, that the extension should be milder and less frequent, and it will alleviate your virtue.
And in the leg there is some cause of operation on the arm, and it's when you unite the bones and complete the entire surgical operation, then you will take pieces of wood from the palm tree which were placed above the causes that were placed in solutes; and so make a splint of branches of palm; likewise take those away from the small grooves, and not be hindered by the bandages, and let it be the length of those according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the foot.
And then envelop it with a certain cloth in two envelopes according to its length, and put one over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and so from the knee to the foot at the lowest place.
And then bind the two bones in three places of two extremities and at the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prevented from bending to the right and left sides, and it stays in good position.
And then administer a wooden board according to the length of the leg; and let it be placed on the leg so that it conserves its movement.
And moreover, Cove, you do this in fracture, and when you have that wound properly.
And then consider each day the leg and study it for further study, and you will guard it from apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and when some cause of those happens, then stop it with what Cove has taught you to be healthy.
Chapter 17.
On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
The ankle does not have complete fracture; however, the bones of the foot have some veiled fractures; and the toes of the foot rarely have fracture, and they do not have it unless it's attributed to an awkward position.
And if the bones of the foot receive fracture and those bones are elevated above each other, then the patient puts their foot on the prepared earth in this way like a nest.
And then put one foot on what is elevated by those bones, and then calcify those, and press, and unite them until they return to their places.
And then put on plaster and stop underneath, and put below the belly of the foot a small table to which are two flat plates.
And then stretch that around the foot in descending structure, since you have enveloped it with cloths and other causes of which you need.
And when three or four days have passed, then you will release the ligament, because you will find the bones united, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in those is thus as it is known.
But if some toes are broken, then restore them, and unite them thus as you have recommended to me in the restoration of the toes of the hand. And then put the broken toe bone according to the length of the toe, and let it be bound with a little bandage; and then put below the foot this table that you have recommended, and stretch that around in descending structure.
More often it happens that the bones are broken in two or three places, then you stop on any digit of this quantity wrapped in lion's drap, and stretch the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the legs of the table to hold the belly of the foot for good retention.
And it is convenient for you not to overlook that you do not consider all the causes which have been told to you in other fractures of accidents, and pause to consider each accident as if it were new.
Chapter 18.
On the fracture of the hip joint of the thigh and of the bone of the penis and of the wand of the man.
When the hip joint of the thigh is broken, then make that cesspit in the hollowed-out seat, and incline it to the back of the two small ones, and hold it from behind.
And place the matron under the hip of the patient, and make it in the hip of him just like a spear; and place the thigh to be concuted, and elevate the back of the small one little by little, because all this is forgotten until it is inside the joint again just like a spear and the broken bone returns.
And place poultices on the back of him, and when he wants to urinate, remove the patient to facilitate it and place urine, and return and reduce according to the manner in which you mixed at the beginning, and return to the first poultice.
And do it thus for seven days or around that, because then it is restored.
And if you want, take an egg of ovella and stretch it over the thigh of him with a cane stick; and insert all the bladder into his hip, and blow into the cane stick until the bladder is inflated inside the hip, so that the fracture returns.
And place it full of patient and stay there for several days according to what we have recommended, until he is healed.
And when the bone of the penis of man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and agglutination of what we have recommended for the bone of the ankle.
And that which is direct is not hidden in these proper fractures and few happen, mainly to one who has some study and use and understands my free book; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions via direct restoration and in the structure of him, and therefore understand well.
More often in the wand of the man when it is broken, take a twig of elder tree, and put the wand in that; and place poultices over the wrapping of lion's drap, and it will be wrapped, and place it to rest for three days or around that, and it will be healed.
Chapter 19.
On the restoration of fractures of bones when they are wounded by plague.
It is convenient for one to whom a fracture with plague occurs, and mainly if the bone is large thus as the bone of the hip or of the adjutori, or similar to that, which you collect and remove as soon as possible if the conditions of removal are suitable for you or testify thus as we have said before.
And if the plague flows with blood, then it is necessary that you collect at the retention of him in such a way that you powder on the dried-out wound, if another cause is not present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, if an abscess does not occur.
More often if an abscess occurs cautiously, then you delay the restoration of him until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not approach him on the third day and the fourth of all, because you will cause bad accidents.
More often if the broken bone is prominent above the uncovered codena, then it is necessary that you perforate to reduce it and to engulf it with your hands facilitated and with little external extension.
More often if the extension is not prepared for you and the equipment of him with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands more; and it is a sturment which is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight digits and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor who takes those three or four according to the quantity that he indicates in the cure of all species of fracture.
And it is rounded, and it is in a small groove so that it does not double over itself during the operation hour.
And it is of sharp extremity to which the margin is in the six extremities; and it is the beneath of him with a gross tendon stretching, and of the greatness of him within the parts.
And this is its shape:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a small spatula.
Because it is necessary that the extremity of him, the elevated acute point, be placed above the extremity of the prominent bone.
And he should be placed in a warm bath so that his bones are relaxed, and it is equalized in some equation.
So then forces should be applied to equalize the extremities of the fracture among them, and if the broken extremity is subtle, and do not take that instrument for good acceptance, then it is necessary that you insert the extremity of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
Maybe you cannot reduce the bone to its entirety as we have recommended, then insert that into the one who governs the instruments which we have described; or it will be one of the serrations in some manner that is possible for you.
And then grind that which remains in the bone of roughness and of small scars.
And when the bone is reduced, and then the reduction alleviates the patient's vehement pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer to the patient great comfort.
When your restoration is completed which you do to the bone, and then submerge it in a stipptic wine, and properly if it is in summer, and do not pause over the oily plague or another cause in which there is oil, so that it does not induce decay and corruption.
And then administer stelas at the time of the completion of the bone restoration, and thus uncover the plague in such a way that you insert the fork-shaped instruments and uses of enveloping according to the quantity of the plague.
And beware that you take all caution so as not to strengthen the plague in the fracture, because many times it makes the foolish doctors, and it ferments above the diseased mortifying or corroding wounds, so it is healthy. And if the bone structure loosens, softens, differs from the structure of other fractures.
And if the plague is great or it is a bad plague, and you fear about those evil accidentals that we have recommended, and it brings pain to the place, then it does not fit to pause over those astellas, maybe do adhesion with those enveloping of harsh dry draps in place of stelas and strengthen it.
And when one or two days have passed since the plague began, which in it has generated a break, then you remove from underneath the drap which you had placed over that vein, and then administer calques, injecting those of our custom that we medicate the plagues, thus as we inject tetrafarmacon and similarly to that.
And it is convenient for you to dissolve the liament and consider the plague in some morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and it fits that the member be prepared in such a manner that the purging corruption flows from it to the lower parts, facilitated.
If the plague passes many days, and it is not consolidated nor has it abscessed from the break, then you know that here are satanisms of the small wounds because it fits to inquire into the plague in tenderness. And of those satanisms, those that are separated remain and extract, those that from there are not separated and put the member and make it ache, therefore you should insert them according to what is possible for you.
And if you reach the plague with zinc oxide or lunar caustic, it is stimulants, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then it fits to pause on one of those which convenes to him for the cure of which is preceded by narration in the previous chapter.
And of that which fits to stay in the middle sermon and you make present your peace: when the bone is well-trimmed, it seems above the member just as the bone of the thigh and of the helper and similarly to those of the big members, and do not presume attraction from it, nor the extraction from it because many times it aches per that which mortifies; having thus until you purge, because strong will be your case for if then xx days or ... . And then cure the plague if you have seen it, and if there is not that.
Chapter xx.
On the cure of nodulation that occurs in the vestige of some fracture.
Many times it aches this nodulation in the vestige of sanitation of fracture, and moreover that it is near the joints, and it is ordained by the figure of the member; and strongly it prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the nodulation is recent and administer in those medicines that have stipulated thus as aloen, and enses, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similarly to those; in such a way that you take some of those or all, and combine them am vi stip, or am album of huou, or am vi agree, and pause that over the nodulation in estopa, and constrict those over it for good constriction.
And let the extrication not dissolve that for many days; and then dissolve it and iterate another, until the nodulation is removed; or strengthen over that lamina of lead decentment, because lead has the property to remove all that which is inflated in the members.
When the disease has turned into a stone and becomes strengthened and it is necessary to provoke an evacuation of that accumulation, and then divide it into parts with superior abundance and prominence, or make a hole in order to expel it; and take care that what remains is healed.
Chapter 21.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then returns to its Roman [normal] subtle member, freed from secondary damage according to its own natural law.
When a fracture of bone is restored, and then returns to its normal subtle member, it is not done except for many causes: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligament and the bonding of the broken part not according to its natural course; or due to excess of structure in the ligaments so that nourishment is prohibited from flowing to the member; or due to multitude of superfluous embrocation; or due to excessive movement not at its proper time; or due to lack of health in the patient's body and weakness.
And the care of this is to give nourishment to the patient and make their heart tender so that health may be multiplied in them; and administer baths; and put gypsum and lettuce on them.
And then pause the poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts to it the necessary nourishment, or continues embrocation with warm water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter 22.
On the care of broken bones when they are restored incorrectly and prohibit the operation of their own that is proper.
When it happens to a member that is restored with the healing of its crookedness and eminence to the broken bone and node, and it is because of the deformity of the form of the member, but meanwhile the member does not prohibit its own natural operation, then it is not proper that you receive the word of him who says that this member was newly broken.
Many have been foolish doctors and restorers who have done this on our earth; and this operation is very reprehensible, producing great fear of the sign which is mortal.
Many times stiffness and node are recent, then it is proper that they be embrocated with warm water in which they collect softening herbs, thus as they are fuels of high virtue and roots of the same, and melilot, and similar to those; and let it be made a plaster with mollifying emplaster, thus as it will be well done; or that it takes mucilage of root of high virtue and is mixed with grey gauze or oil of cirami, and is embrocated there; or that they take fat figs and are trussed in females' colostrum, and similar to those of the medicines which are named merman's consolidation.
And some times it is dissolved in frequent friction of the ligature that is in the most humid places, and let there be administration of movement to the member at every hour.
Many times crookedness has gone inside and is made strong and converted into stone and provoked necessity for care of it with iron, then it is proper that the pus be evacuated from above and the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and let there be incised what superfluously nods to that meter in the bone at subtle incisions, and let there be administered facilitation in that which is solicited and studied.
Chapter 23.
On sermon in dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from their proper place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the member is altered, and brings great pains and lesions to the patient.
Therefore when it happens to a dislocation, then it is proper to perform reduction as soon as possible, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place becomes apostemated and very strong with what is made difficult the reduction of dislocation.
And for this reason it is not proper to touch or stretch at the time of apostematization, because many weakened fibers come to produce spasm and severe pains.
Many times when it happens, then it is proper that you fall back to the flaccidity of the patient, and then let it be relaxed until the apostema subsides; and then the member is embrocated with warm water and oil, and then it is reduced with facilitation.
And every member is cared for with water of which the remembrance will come to its place.
And thus I have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been preceded in fracture; from the superior part of the body down to the inferior part.
Chapter 24.
On the care of dislocation of the lower jawbone.
Thus the two jawbones are dislocated if not treated; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two manners: either they are returned to their places with little remotion, and thus softened a little; or they are fully dislocated and completed, until they are softened at the joint so that saliva flows from the patient's mouth and they cannot hold it nor clear their mouth, and their tongue is enveloped in its speech.
More when the dislocation of it is little, then in major arrangements it returns to itself for a little cause.
But if the dislocation is entire and complete, then it is necessary that reduction of the limb be administered immediately, and not delayed at all.
And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and inserts his fingers into the open mouth to reset the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers at the same time, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands are placed before them so that they engage; and he commands the patient to release their jaws and withdraw from any quarter; and the minister resets the jaw and pushes it back into place until it returns to its proper location.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated at the same time, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until the limb makes the reduction of both, and does not delay the reduction of both at all, thus as we have said.
And thus when they return and are reset, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then pause on those pillows of drap cloth soaked in cerate, and be made with wax and oil rubbed; and it is fitting to facilitate the ligaments more.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be stationed between two aurelhes, so that it does not incline to the right or left; and do not force them to grasp anything, lest they cause some harm; having the gentle food forbidden, until when the pains are alleviated and the jaws are numb, then let them eat what they want.
And that is administered to facilitate, and do not trouble about the perception of the mouth unless eating and drinking and citation, until the jaw is numb and healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at some hour and not converted to their proper places, then apply many vegetable acids and assiduous soda, and strengthen the patient's belly with a ligature, and strengthen it and vomit pure cholera.
And when you see that, then know that it is perdition; and many vegetable acids die for the one to whom that acid agrees in ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the ankle and of the extremity of the muscle.
The ankle is not dislocated from its joint due to its continuity with the foot; and some acids are dislocated at the forefront, and that is declared by the symptom.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And then bind the area with your palm in strong binding, so that it returns.
And then pause on that plaster and pillows, and strengthen that.
But the extremity of one who has seized the thigh and is continued with it, is not dislocated on any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and reset according to what we have said and according to what appears to you.
And then pause on that plaster, and pillows, and extrication, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And in this treatment, the reduction of the extremity of the muscle is made when it is separated from its proper place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is dislocated from the top to the bottom.
And the second is that it is dislocated from the top of the muscle, and that is done sharply; and it is not dislocated at the back parts because of the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts because of the nerves.
And especially it is dislocated and beforehand exits at the bottom parts because of the titillic, and especially in those where the flesh is little, the limb is dislocated; but in those where there are many fleshes, it is exited with difficulty.
And strongly it agrees to some men percussion or cauterization, and the patient's muscle is apostematized with caution, and it is cajoled for that which has already been dislocated.
Then it is necessary that you spread this out until you are above-certified about it, and then proceed with the cure of it.
And it is known that the dislocation of it is at the bottom parts because of the titillic; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the whole muscle, because you find differences manifest among them; and you find in the head of the concave muscle below the titillic from the touch of the head of the muscle as if it were a vacuum, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to the proper aurelhe, nor can they move it at all.
If the foot is displaced or turned inwards, then you will clearly see the deformity, and it is not hidden.
And from this displacement, make gentle reduction when it is fresh and the patient is in infancy.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises their hand to the upper parts; and then pause with the whole weight on them, and raise the joint with strength in its own place, and the minister raises their hand, and extends it thus, so that it returns gently.
Perhaps because of what we have said does not return, and thus from the beginning that causes the dislocation, many days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water and be administered a gentle embrocation that mollifies and soothes, as if it were a coating of fenugrec, and melillot in water, and it is administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back with their foot elevated and supported by pillows, waiting for the swelling to subside between relaxation and contraction, and then the doctor places their hand on the affected area, raising the head of the muscle in a straight line, and touches the patient's hand so that it is not bent towards the lower parts, and another minister holds the patient's head, so that it is not bent towards the lower parts, until it returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you should be present at home where the patient is lying, and stand on the side of the bed, and insert your hand under the patient's muscle below the foot, and raise the foot to the upper parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the lower parts of their belly. Perhaps the patient is gentle, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended, so that gravity affects it, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced in this way: and it is that a long stick with a rounded head of a moderate size, like a mason's pole, not too thick or too thin, be fixed in the ground; then place the patient on top of the stick, stretching their hand to the lower parts of the other side; and extend the body of the patient from the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its proper place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the reasons we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of the length of two arm's spans, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness is adjusted at the end of the foot according to this form.
And then place the rounded head on it, so that the stick does not slip from the patient's hands.
And then place it on the patient's foot, and extend their hand or arm over the stick up to the lower parts, and tie the stick to the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a ladder of steps according to the width, and the hand is extended to the lower parts, and the other body is suspended from the other side, so that the joint enters quickly.
And when the instrumentation of it is completed according to whatever method is possible for you, and then it is necessary that you place below the foot a quantity of swelling; and then prepare an plaster made of powder of molybdenum and album of egg white over all the muscle, as if it were revolved from above, and then strengthen below the foot with decent contraction; and the ligament is revolved over the plaster, and the hand of it is attached to the neck of it, and it is raised, and it should not be bent for seven days.
And it is necessary that the food of the patient be suspended for a little while, until the member is comforted, because it is easier to bring about their health.
And then the food should be given more abundantly after seven or eight days, and exercise some movement; and if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is already healed.
Perhaps the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that affects it or for another cause, then it is necessary that a cautery be administered in three tracts, according to what was said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and seven days have passed, the ligament and joint are not strengthened, and the plaster and contraction are reduced on several occasions, and it is not strengthened and cannot be elevated to the upper parts, then you will know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either numb or extended or softened, and you will know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
From the dislocation of that which is done from the foot and the thigh or the back parts, the reduction is done with impulse and extension in the hands, until it returns.
And it should be administered in that other strict structure, and care for it until it is healed.
And if it happens that the healing is weighed down in the limb and slowed down in its movement, then the patient uses many worn-out remedies until that weight is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Chapter 27.
On the cure of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all parts, especially from the front part to the back part, and the dislocation of it is not hidden when you feel the movement or touch according to some figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip in this way, it is manifestly declared, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the surrounding muscles.
And it is covered that the hips are reduced, and the dislocation is reduced as soon as possible before it reaches a critical point, because if it reaches a critical point, difficult is the reduction of it, and hardly can it be fully healed; especially when it is in the back parts, because worse is all the other species of dislocation, and of greater pain, and many worn-out remedies are used in that case, almost to the point of death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of it should be extended in two ways, and the arm of it should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are placed over the hip and below it, and the fingers of its hand envelop the joint with the tips of its palm until it returns to its place.
Moreover, if the dislocation is in the front parts, then it returns thus that the hand doubles over its own hand, until it strikes the hip with the tip of its palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and very strong force.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that equipment with two ministers so that it is not removed from there during the extension.
And then the arm is revolving from all parts, because it is enveloped in a double layer of cloth wrapped around its hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, until he feels some oil for that purpose so that it is those causes that help in lubricating the joint to facilitate; and then he wraps the joint with a strong wrapping until it returns.
And then the reduction of it is that it should be placed on that paste in which it is stipulated and exception made in album of urine, and it should be extracted with a strict descending structure, and the arm should be suspended from the pillar, and it should be left for some days.
And then it is dislocated; and therefore if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you remove the bandage of it and leave it like that.
And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you repeat the paste and bandage, and leave it like that for some days until it is extracted; and then you remove it.
Moreover, if it happens that the weight is administered for the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidity in baths and subtle friction, and compress, until it is alleviated; or place on the joint a heating poultice, so it is fomented with a warm motion; and then it is bound, and left like that on the bone day and night. And then remove that, and put it in a bath; and when it sweats, then you rub the joint with tempered friction, and then place it on that heating poultice, so it is rounded by motion, once, and the second, and the third. in a bath instrument, until it is clean.
And if you want, place on that moist and scaled area of the cow's skin in a wrapping and stretch over it; and do this several times, because it is moist and reduces its disposition.
Chapter 28.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
The shoulder of the hand sometimes becomes dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easier, and conversely it is with other joints, but especially because velocity is needed in the reduction of it at the hour in which it is dislocated, lest the place become critical or something happens to the critical point.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and the minister extends his hand, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint, and wraps it until it returns to its proper place.
Moreover, it is necessary to consider if the palm has been placed at the belly of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding from the back of the hand, then the position of the hand of that one should be precisely over the table, so that the doctor's hand falls upon that vicinity of the joint.
Therefore, if it returns soon, it is good; and if not, then strengthen that part with an ointment, and let it be there; and do not touch it, because if not, you will not feel nor put weight on the reduction of pus that passes to the days.
Maybe the Roman emperor is according to his tortuousness; and do not notice in the patient any cause, but rather that the hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are weakened or shrunk, and then it is not generated in him unless it is strengthened with a pointed cautery for the improvement of his case and to confer strength on his conferring cause.
Then when the sickness is returned, then stop over the ointment which we have recommended, and let it be there and strengthened for five days; and then it will be dissolved and let it be there, and the patient's hand will be exercised.
Maybe if the movement of it is stopped and stuck in some gravity, then apply that with warm water and friction on certain veins, until it is alleviated.
Chapter 29.
On the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
Some veins are dislocated from the fingers to the entire joint.
And when a finger is dislocated from those at the palm or belly of the hand, then hold the finger and push back the dislocation with the tied poultices, until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend it from the part where it is dislocated, and let it be there for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened in that seventh day.
And when it is night, lay it according to that narration, and do not cease to dissolve it in the day and exercise its movement, and lay it at night; and do this for some days until it is straight.
And do similarly to this, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and lay it at that joint and do the first operation on the poultice, until it is healed.
And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other joints.
Chapter 30.
On the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When it happens to one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, a complete dislocation, and so many vertebrae are moved from their places, then there is no cure, because death follows the patient.
And it is sign of this that the evacuation of the patient is beyond their will, and cannot retain it; and many veins are mollified in some members of his or two legs of his or two arms of his, or one of those; or a vertebra is moved from its place, because many veins are moved and many veins are made to make the movement of those in four joints.
Then that has already been moved to the back parts and is called gelbozitation.
Maybe the cure of it is that then you consider if the gelbozitation happens from weakness, because then there is no cure nor healing of all.
Maybe in that which is seen by chance or by percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients already said the ways of cure are verbose, from which the most returns with profit; maybe you have already heard and abbreviated from that which I have little excuse for the trope of his, for my proximity to the intention of my exposition, in which I have explained and formed diverse instruments of that which I will show and expound.
And of those, none are cured except for the one that happens in the back properly, as I have recommended.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face above a soft pillow, and be extended below his instrument as much as possible so that the foot of his is not hindered.
And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the extremity of the pillow around his head, and another stick in the air above his feet at the other extremity of the pillow.
And the servant should hold the stick, and not be fixed in a pit; and another servant should hold the other according to that form.
And then envelop above the head of the patient and below the small linen wraps firmly; and extend the extremity of the wrap to the stick which is at the head of his, and lay it on him; and then strengthen the other wrapping over his hips with his denials, and around his legs; and then adjust all the wrappings and lay them on the other stick which is at his feet.
And then the servant should carefully extend the wrapping to the part of the stick, and do not move the two sticks and the wrappings from their fixed places in which they are fastened, maybe the emperor does not fix them thus as we have said.
The doctor stops his hands on the spinal column for strength until it returns, or stops on that one table, and then adjusts on the table both feet until they return.
Perhaps if it does not return in this way, then take a table on which the width or length is in the air of three handbreadths, and hollow out the side of the table where we have said the patient's thigh should enter into the extremity of the table. And then stop the flat part of the table on the spine, and the doctor stops both feet on the other extremity, and stretches it until the spine is straightened and returns to its own place.
And if you want, take the one that is turned around with your hand; and it is that you place on the ground the head of the patient's thigh at the back of two feet, the length of which should be an arm's length, and the head of it at the back of two feet just the same; and let the length between each foot be a palm, and already it is made in each foot through which the course turns, and each one is firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be a fixed foot in which the course turns, and let it be turned around in the two tracks of the two feet.
And on the extremity of it there is a track in which the foot is formed, the length of which is a palm and a half that is turned around; and on the two other feet it is similar to that.
And then stretch the ligaments that have been stretched on the chest of the patient in the course which is from the head of it, and the ligaments that have been stretched on its thighs in the turn which is from its feet.
And then there is a turn and stays a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor adjusts the spine according to what we have said.
And then since the spine is returned, and the place is adjusted, then you should apply a plaster of egg white on the album of skin, and then stop; and then stop over the plaster like a table with a width of three fingers or around that, and its length being the quantity that takes the place of the gibosity, and on the part of the spine itself.
And then it is relaxed in the ligament which we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment until he is healthy.
And if there remains some impediment in the place at the end of the healing, then you should administer medicines that mollify and soften with an administration on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already it is administered in that place a laminate of lead.
And some evil accidents occur in the back of the spine of the two, and it is judged for that dislocation; and it is that bone which already warned you so that you do not think to make a promise to him with this medicine, because strong fear will make you consent to death.
Chapter 21.
On the cure of a dislocated ankle.
You know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle do not deviate unless there is a dislocation only, and it does not occur to those which occur to other joints with small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated to the inside parts, or to the front parts, or to the inner parts, or to the back parts.
And mostly it is dislocated to the inside parts, and rarely to the inner parts or to the back parts.
And the sign of dislocation of it to the inside parts is that, when you adjust the healthy leg of the patient with the diseased leg, it is then longer and the denudation is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot from the ankle, and it is the place where the ligament becomes apostematized by an apostema-causing cautery, so that the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the front parts is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the inner parts is that it expands the foot according to its own complement, but meanwhile it does not bend because of the pain that is in the denudation, and if it is perforated to go out and cannot walk on those inner parts; and its urine is retained and its ligament is apostematized, and its walking is on the ankle.
And the sign of that one to which dislocation occurs to the back parts is that it does not expand the denudation, nor can it bend that denudation which bends the ligament, and its leg is shorter than the other, and the ligament is mollified, and the head of the thigh is in that place.
Perhaps the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been antiquated with what you have administered to him, and you should reduce it according to its own disposition, then it is not in that complete cure; and therefore you do not think to make a promise about that.
In that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should strive to return the joint to its proper place and extend it to the posterior and anterior parts, and move it neither to the right nor left, because strong leverage returns it and does not require another kind of cure.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong minister and extend the leg from the posterior part, or hold their hands, or bind what is tied above the knee; and another minister extends the hand of that one on the other side so that they hold the little fingers of theirs; and you strengthen a ligament over the joint of the thigh, and hold another minister to straighten the extremity of the ligament.
And it is an extension of it or from the posterior part to the angle of the shoulder blade, or from the posterior part to the back, or from behind to the back of the spine.
And it is an extension of all these in one way, so that the patient is elevated on their back with their legs on the ground and remains hanging.
And this species of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for all species that require their own cure.
In the reduction of its own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is in the posterior parts, you should resupinate the patient on their back with their legs raised; and then pause the ligaments over the joint of the thigh in that place where the head of the thigh and the place below the shoulder blade meet; and then extend the ligament from above the angle of the shoulder blade to the further posterior part of the spine.
And then another strong minister takes hold of their arms, and embracing the large joint of the patient's thigh, extends to the anterior parts for vigorous extension, because that returns it to its proper place.
And this species is of lighter cure, in which this member is reduced more easily than the other species.
But if it is excused above you and does not obey the entrance to this species of cure at all, then you should bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong ligature, lightly, over both ankles and both toes.
And it is the length of each one by the quantity of four fingers, and the patient's leg is extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient is suspended over the top of a pole, and that he is in a balance; and it is the length of it from the ground by the quantity of two arms.
And then command a strong youth to move the head of the thigh, and it is suspended with the patient another youth, and the other youth moves the thigh with strong and empiric force, because the joint returns to its proper place with velocity.
But in the proper reduction, when it is dislocated to the anterior part, you should make the patient sit on a stool according to what we have recommended in the preceding chapter; and strengthen the ligament over the patient's own leg properly and over their feet.
And then two poles are placed, one at their feet, and the other at the head; and then two adjusted poles are fixed on the middle of the peg, upon which drips humid sponges are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the pole being between their thighs, so that the extension to the posterior parts is not attracted.
And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor places his hand on the patient's hand to guide the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then you should make the leg be extended lightly, and it is according to this method of narration about the peg; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the patient's shoulder blade, and then cuts off that with the other hand, and in that cutting-off pauses the extension to the posterior parts at the back of the spine.
And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then you should not make the patient be extended to the posterior parts, and it is elevated from the ground; having paused because of hard cause, thus as you should examine if their ankle is dislocated to the anterior parts, according to what we have said about the examination of it on two anchors; and it is over their face and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no error.
And you should administer compression on the table over the place where the joint is.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed according to what you should do — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see those joints and the patient's leg is strengthened and expands those excuses, then you know that the member has returned according to what you should do — and then you adjust both thighs and pause in a bandage and strengthen with a strip so that the ankle is not weakened in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then release the ligament and the paste, and compare one leg to the other.
Then, if you see those signs in the vestment, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and therefore leave the patient alone afterwards.
And if you see some cause of softening, then you return and apply a plaster to that, and stretch it according to your primary structure, and leave it like that for three days.
And then release that, and make it wait in ambulation over some crutches for some days, until it is comforted.
Chapter 32.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, because it is dislocated forward, and backward, and downward more than upward; and it is not dislocated inward.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to bend their leg towards the thigh; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all its ways is to make the patient straighten up, and if they can extend their leg, then put it on that; attach the two hands to the face of it, and place their foot between the two hands; and then make them attach the shoulder to their palms, and hold those between the two hands placed on the shoulder with strength, and another minister extends their foot until the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction of it is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a lifted and labor-free way.
And then apply a plaster to that and make them attach the leg to the thigh, and then bind those together with a bandage for three days or four, and then release it.
And do not allow the patient to walk about for some days, until they are healthy and comforted.
But if the reduction of it to you is excused, then administer strong extension on the ligaments of those in the cure of the preceding narrative's wound.
Chapter 33.
On the cure of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle sometimes is removed by small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated according to completeness, and the dislocation of it is made either backward or forward.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that the ankle becomes swollen proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
But the cure of the movement of it is by gentle reduction, and it is that it should be extended with facilitation on the hands and be bent until it returns.
But in the cure of it when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient straighten up, and hold that with a strong and valiant minister from behind the two hands on the middle place of it.
And then you put your right hand straight on the foot above the ankle, and your left hand below the foot at the place of the heel.
And then you pull the foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two movements, and then extend with your left hand; and you will find the foot of the leg in its proper place.
And do that twice according to what we have counted.
And then you will find the foot of the leg in its proper place at the third movement, and you are at the heel.
Therefore, if it returns in one movement or in two according to this method, and if the foot is bent, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, because it will return.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it in the way that we have recommended, then make the patient sit on their two feet on the ground, and stretch a strap firmly on the ground, and place it between the thighs of it, and you have already wrapped around it with a cloth so that the patient does not move.
And then the minister of it holds its thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with a ligament that lies on the top of the foot; and then extend each minister against the extension of the other side, and the strap is extended between the thighs of the patient holding it, so that the body of it is not pulled towards the lower parts beyond its extension.
And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh below, so that the dislocation returns to its facility.
And so when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you the health of the reduction of it, then pause and apply a plaster strongly, and bind the foot with a ligament to the leg.
And be careful that you do not touch or guard the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the ligament on it is not violent and holds it strongly.
And then leave it like that for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, extend it.
And remove that from the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient from strenuous activity for 40 days. Perhaps it is forgotten to anaesthetize that space, it is not safe that the dislocation is not on top of it dissolved and corrupted, and then do not receive treatment.
And if you reach the acute aposteme, then you should administer in the sedation of that water in which our narration precedes, in another place of treatment and of embrocation, until it is removed.
Chapter 34.
On the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
It is necessary that what is dislocated be reduced with little extension of its strength; and that which is not difficult, therefore it is easier.
Perhaps the dislocation is in some toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient sit with their foot on the ground or on a table, and stand thus as if they were going.
And then you stand on feet, and stop the foot on that which is imagined from the joints, and then calcify that in the foot in a virtuous manner until it returns, and you see that already reduced and does not appear in the eminent place.
And then stop below the belly of the foot on a table that holds the entire foot, to which are two cups, and then strengthen it in a decent structure and firm for three days; and then remove that and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is strengthened and the recovery is assured.
Chapter 35.
On the species of dislocation that are made by plague or fracture or any other evil encounters.
When you reach some cause of those, and you persevere in the treatment of that and in the restoration of it, many expected successes follow, avoiding death.
And for that reason it is not necessary to presume on the treatment of the patient, but rather one who is wise in the art, with long experience, merciful and pitied, tardy, not arrogant nor presumptuous; and who uses in the beginning of medicines that calm apostemes as much as possible, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but rather to whom they hope for salvation from perdition, with alleviation of the malady, and in which appears some hope. And therefore it is necessary to strive so much for the reduction in the beginning of the cause, since then the acute aposteme will be avoided.
And therefore if the member returns according to what we want, then administer a regimen that calms the acute aposteme and cures the plague with what is convenient for the joints of the dried-out limbs.
And if the dislocation is with a fracture and reaches the separated sacred bones, then you perform the statement of theirs, and do in that what we have said in the simple maladies of that which is preceded in those places.
And beware and escape according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear as it has been preceded by my preaching; for that is better for you to serve your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your cosmos truly existing in your time. Thus ends the paragraphs of Albucasim perfectly, of which God may be blessed. Amen.
