When I completed for you, my sons, this book which is a part of knowledge in medicine in its entirety, and reached the goal therein through its clarity and explanation, I saw that I should complete it for you with this section which is the part of work by hand.
For surgical practice by hand is in our land and time completely nonexistent, so much so that its study was nearly discontinued and its effect lost. And what remained of it were only a few diagrams in the books of our predecessors, which hands corrupted and filled with error and confusion until their meanings became obscured and their benefit distant.
Therefore, I decided to revive it and compose this section on the path of explanation, clarification, and abbreviation, and to present images of sharp surgical instruments and all other tools used in surgery, for this is an increase in explanation and a fulfillment of what is needed.
The reason why there are no skilled craftsmen with their hands in our time is that the craft of medicine is long, and its possessor should first be trained in anatomy, which Galen described. So that he may understand the benefits of the organs, their structures and temperaments, their connections and separations, as well as knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, their number, origins, and the veins, arteries, and sinuses and their locations.
Therefore Hippocrates said, "Physicians in name are many, but in deed few, especially in the craft of hand," and we have mentioned a part of this in the introduction to this book.
For he who is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned of anatomy is bound to fall into error that kills people, as I have witnessed many times from those who imagined themselves to be experts in this science and claimed it without knowledge or experience.
Indeed, I once saw an ignorant physician who incised a wen on a woman's neck and severed some of the arteries in her neck, causing her to bleed profusely until she died at his feet.
I once saw another physician who had advanced in the removal of a stone for a man who had been stabbed in the tooth, and the stone was large; so it crumbled, and he removed it with a piece from the bladder neck. The man died in about three days, and I had been summoned to remove it; I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that it was beyond my ability.
I saw another physician who made a living practicing medicine for some of our local leaders.
It happened that a black boy had a fracture in his leg near the heel with a wound, and the physician, in his ignorance, hastily bound the fracture on the wound with bandages and splints tightly and did not leave the wound room to breathe.
Then he released him to his own devices and left him for days, ordering him not to loosen the bandages until his leg and foot swelled up and he was near death.
I was summoned to him, and I quickly untied the bandages; he found relief and recovered from his pain, but the damage had become firmly established in the limb, and I was unable to restore it.
The corruption continued to spread in the limb until he died.
I saw another physician cauterize a cancerous tumor, and it ulcerated after a few days, greatly afflicting its owner. This is because if the cancer is entirely composed of black bile, it should not be treated with hot iron at all.
Unless it is in a member which can tolerate the removal of all of it.
Therefore, my son, you should know that work done by hand is divided into two parts: work that is accompanied by safety and work that is likely to result in harm in most cases.
I have warned in every place it comes up in this book about the work that involves risk and danger, so you should beware of it and refuse to do it.
So that the ignorant man may not find a way to speak and revile, take care for yourselves with caution and watchfulness, and treat your patients with gentleness and deliberation.
Use the best path leading to safety and a happy outcome, and beware of dangerous and difficult diseases.
Purify yourselves from what you fear may bring doubt into your religion and your worldly affairs, for it is the most lasting safeguard for your honor and the highest attainment in this world and the next for your stations.
For Galen said in some of his precepts, "Do not treat a bad disease lest you become bad physicians."
This treatise has been divided into three chapters.
The First Chapter.
Cauterization with fire and cauterization with caustic drugs, arranged in order from the most recent to the oldest times, and illustrations of instruments and iron for cautery, and everything needed for work by hand.
The Second Chapter.
Incision, dissection, bloodletting, cupping, surgery and the extraction of arrows and the like, all arranged in order, and illustrations of instruments.
The Third Chapter.
In splinting, setting bones, and treating dislocations and the like, arranged in order from the most recent to the oldest times, and illustrations of instruments.
The First Chapter.
On Cautery.
Before mentioning its use, it is necessary to describe the ways in which it is beneficial and harmful, and in what temperaments it is used.
I say that speech concerning the ways in which cautery is beneficial and harmful is lengthy discourse, a subtle science, and a hidden secret, about which many wise men have spoken.
And they differed in their opinions; I have summarized a little of what they said for fear of being too long.
I say that cupping is generally beneficial for all bad humors whether with a material or without, namely hot humor without a material and dry humor without a material.
As for dry humor with a material, they differed on it, some saying that cupping is beneficial and others saying the opposite, that cupping is not suitable for a disease caused by heat and dryness because fire is by nature hot and dry.
It is impossible to be cured of a hot and dry disease by a hot and dry remedy, and the one who says otherwise claims that cupping with fire may benefit from a hot and dry disease that occurs in people's bodies. Because when you add the human body and its moisture to the humor of fire, you arrive at a cooling effect for the human body.
And I say the same, because experience has shown me this many times, but it should not be attempted except by one who has practiced and trained extensively in the art of cupping. And he must have a thorough understanding of the differences in people's humors, the states of illnesses themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration.
As for all other humors, there is no danger in them, especially cold and wet diseases, on which all physicians agree and are unanimous about the benefits of cupping.
Know, my son, that the secret of treating with fire cupping and its superiority to cupping with burning medicine is because fire is a simple element whose action does not extend beyond the cupped member and does little harm to other connected members.
Cupping with burning medicine, on the other hand, can extend its action beyond the cupped members and may even cause a disease in a member that is difficult to treat and may even kill it. Fire, due to its honor and generosity of essence, does not do this unless it is excessive.
This has been made clear to us by experience, through long service and care in the craft, and by grasping the true nature of things.
Therefore, I have dispensed with lengthy discourse; if it were not unbecoming to my book, I would reveal to you a secret and hidden fire, its method of action in the body, and its negation of diseases through philosophical and demonstrative reasoning which would pierce your understanding.
Know, my sons, that they have differed concerning the time best suited for cautery, and they have made spring the best time.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harm caused by time is surpassed by the benefit obtained through cautery. Especially if the cautery is from necessary, strong pains, which cannot be delayed, lest what follows be a tribulation greater than the slight harm caused by time.
Do not imagine, my sons, what the common people and ignorant physicians suppose: that cautery which cures a disease will never recur, and make it obligatory.
For the matter is not as they think, because cautery is like a medicine which changes the temperament and dries up the humors which are the cause of pain.
Except that cautery surpasses medicine in the speed of its success, the strength of its action, and the severity of its power.
And it is possible that the disease may return at some time, according to the temperament of the patient, the strength and power of his illness, and what may occur in his body from the gathering of superfluities and negligence in acquiring them from food and the like.
Except if the disease for which cautery is used is a mild one and in an organ with few superfluities and humors. Such as cautery of a tooth for pain and the like, it may be that the pain will not return, or at least it will be less.
The common saying that cautery is the last of medicine is true, but not in the way they understand it, for they believe that no treatment is effective by drug or otherwise after cautery has occurred. The matter is different.
The meaning of the saying that cautery is the last of medicine is that when we have used various treatments for a disease and those drugs have not been effective, and then we use cautery as a last resort and it is successful, then it is said that cautery is the last of medicine. Not according to the meaning to which the common people and many ignorant physicians adhere.
The ancients have stated that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, saying this because of the moderation of gold and its noble character, and they said that it does not cause suppuration at the site of cautery. This is not true at all.
For I have tried it and found that it only does this in some bodies and not others, and cautery with it is better and more excellent than iron as they said, except that if you heat the iron in the fire like gold, it will not become apparent to you when it has reached the degree of heat that you desire for the redness of gold.
And because it quickly cools, and if you increase its heat in the fire, it melts and pours out, causing the craftsman to fall into trouble. Therefore, cautery with iron has become quicker and closer to correctness for our work, God willing.
I have arranged this chapter on cautery into sections ordered from the head to the foot to make it easy for the student to find what they need, God willing.
Chapter One.
Cautery of the Head: One Method.
This cautery is beneficial for the predominance of moisture and cold on the brain, which are the cause of headaches, frequent colds from the head to the area around the eyes and ears, excessive sleepiness, toothache, and sore throat. And in general for every illness which arises from cold such as paralysis, epilepsy, stroke and the like of these diseases.
The image of this procedure is to order the patient first to vomit with a purgative medicine purified for the head for three or four nights according to what necessitates the strength of the patient, his age and habit.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor then seat him between your hands squatting having placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the base of your hand on the base of his nose between his eyes and where your middle finger ends mark that spot with ink.
Then heat the olive-wood cautery iron whose image is this.
Expose from the bone the head of a pin or the size of a carob bean then raise your hand or else apply your hand with the same iron or another if it cooled. Until you see from the bone what I have mentioned to you then take some salt, dissolve it in water and soak a cotton ball in it, place it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then place on it a cotton ball soaked in clarified butter and leave it on until the burning sensation from the fire subsides then treat it with the four-ingredient ointment until it heals, if God wills.
And they have said that the wound, the longer it remains open and discharges pus, the better and more beneficial it is.
And some have mentioned to cauterize the skin down to the bone and hold the iron until some of the thickness of the bone burns then remove what has been burned from the bone afterward and treat it.
And others have said that one should exaggerate the cautery so as to strongly affect the bone until it falls from the bone like a small nail or a small flake and they claimed that vapor of the head escapes from that spot and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals, and I do not see these two types of burns at all except in some people and by chance. Leaving them with me is best, and farewell if that is the case. For the head weakens when its natural connection is separated, as we have seen in all other organs.
Especially when the patient's head is weak by nature, the first type of burn is safer and better with me, and with it I work, so do as I say and you will be safe if God wills.
Chapter Two.
Burns to the head also.
If chronic pain occurs throughout the head and lasts for the patient, and poultices, collyria, potions, ointments, and bandages are used, especially if he has been burned by the single burn that we described and nothing helps him, then look. If the patient's head is strong by nature and not weak, and he feels intense cold, then cauterize another burn slightly above that one. Then cauterize each horn of his head with a burn until the skin's thickness is gone and the bone is exposed to the extent that we have described. And cauterize a burn at the back of his head in the place known as the hatchet, and lighten your hand in this one and do not expose the bone because the patient will feel intense pain from it unlike the pain of all other burns on the head, and I will mention this burn in its place.
The iron with which the horns and back of the head are cauterized should be finer than the iron with which the middle of the head is cauterized, and this is its image.
Chapter Three.
On non-chronic migraines.
If pain occurs in a section of the head with headache and the pain extends to the eye, then purge the patient with purgatives for the head and use all the treatments I mentioned in the divisions of diseases. If that does not work, cauterize it on two sides. Either with a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
As for cauterization with burning medicine, it is to take one clove of garlic, peel it and cut off its ends on both sides, then make an incision in the painful area at the temple with a broad trocar until there is a place under the skin large enough for the clove.
Insert it under the skin until it is hidden, then tie it tightly with strong ligatures and leave it for fifteen hours, then untie it and remove the garlic, leaving the wound for two or three days, then dress it.
Cover it with cotton soaked in ghee until the area suppurates, then treat it with ointment until it heals, if God wills. If you wish, you can do this with some of the burning medicines that I mentioned in the eighteenth article on burning medicines.
As for cauterization with iron, it is done as follows: heat the iron which has this shape:
It is called a nail iron because its head is shaped like a nail with some grooves and a small protrusion in the middle.
Then place it on the painful area and hold your hand while turning the iron slightly, burning an amount equal to half the thickness of the skin. Lift your hand so as not to burn the artery below, which would cause bleeding, then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the area and leave it for three days. Then dress the cotton with ghee, then treat it with ointment until it heals if God wills.
If you wish, cauterize this sciatica with the pointed knife tip that comes from the iron and avoid cutting the artery in this unchronic sciatica, especially.
Chapter Four.
On Cauterizing Chronic Sciatica.
If you have treated the migraine with the treatment mentioned above and the division of diseases, and the treatment has not been successful, and you see from the cause something that cannot be remedied by what we mentioned in the first cautery with medicine or cautery with fire. The searing iron should then be heated until it glows white. You will learn the location of the pain with a line half the length of a finger or so, and leave your hand once while pulling it so that it cuts the artery and reaches toward the bone.
However, you should be careful not to touch the moving jaw when chewing, as this will burn the muscle or the nerve that moves it and cause paralysis.
And be wary of bleeding from the severed artery, for there is danger in its severance. Especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not an experienced practitioner, it is best to leave this work alone.
The management of bleeding that occurs from the artery will be mentioned in its place in the book, God willing. If you see from the cause something that cannot be remedied by this cautery.
And you saw the body of the patient tolerating a cautery in the middle of the head as we described and treated the wound until it heals, God willing.
And if you wish, use the cautery we mentioned in the chapter on severing an artery with a double-bladed iron, as it is better and more effective than this one.
Chapter Five.
On Cautery for Ear Pains.
If pain occurs in the ear due to cold, and it is treated with purgatives and all the other treatments mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, heat the iron called "the point" which is shaped like this.
Then cauterize around the entire ear with it, as it turns, or all around them both if the pain is in them. And cauterize with a cautery a little distance from the base of the ear after learning the spot with ink, making the cautery ten points in each ear or thereabouts, then treat the spots until they heal, God willing.
Chapter Six.
Cauterization of Strength.
The strength that is treated by cautery is of the kind that occurs from phlegm as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
And one avoids cauterizing the type that occurs from dryness and constriction of nerves.
When you have treated this type of strength with poultices, fomentations and gargles and your treatment has not been successful, then the patient should be cauterized with three cauterizations. One at the base of the ear, the second a little below the cheekbone, and the third at the junction of the lips.
Make your cautery opposite the affected side because relaxation only occurs on the side that appears sound.
And as for the image of the cautery, make one cautery opposite the upper end of the ear, a little below the horn of the head, and another in the cheekbone, its length being the length of the thumb.
Lower the cautery with your hand until it burns half the thickness of the skin, and this is the image of the iron, which is a type of surgical knife whose shape has already been presented, but it is slightly finer as you see. And the knife should have a slight increase in thickness, then treat the spot with what has already been mentioned until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
Cauterization for Chronic Stroke.
If the stroke has persisted and you have treated it with what we have mentioned, and your treatment has not been successful, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries. On every century of its head, a cautery and a cautery in the middle of the head as we mentioned, and a cautery at the back of the head as previously stated.
As for the description of the cauteries as previously mentioned, it may also be cauterized with a cautery on the mouth of the stomach to be more effective, and then treat as previously stated.
Chapter Eight.
Cauterization for Forgetfulness.
That which is from phlegm, it is necessary that the patient be given first from large juleps and purifying herbs for the brain.
Then his entire head is shaved and a mustard plaster, as written in the article on plasters, is applied to the back of it repeatedly for it is a type of cautery.
And do that on the rank specifically mentioned there, for if he is cured by that, otherwise cauterize three cauteries in the back of his head aligned from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
And make the width between each cautery and the next one equal to the thickness of a finger, then treat the cauteries as previously stated, and if you desire more and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize the middle cautery.
And if you desire more, then cauterize on the temples and treat it until he is cured, and the cautery iron should be olive-wood as previously described.
Chapter Nine.
Cauterization for Palsy and Relaxation of the Whole Body.
It is necessary to proceed with purifying the head with juleps and what we mentioned, then shave the patient's head, then cauterize a cautery in the middle of the head, a cautery on each temple of the head, and a cautery at the back of it.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck, and if you need more for relaxation of the body and the patient can tolerate it and the illness is strong and chronic, then cauterize four cauteries on the vertebrae of his back. Heat the cautery until it burns most of the skin, then raise your hand and treat it as previously mentioned so that it heals if God wills, and let the cautery be olive-wood.
Chapter Ten.
On Epilepsy.
Only an epileptic whose seizures are caused by phlegm should be cauterized. First, his brain should be purged with large enemas and all the treatments we mentioned in the division, if the patient is an adult and able to take medicine.
But if he is a child who cannot tolerate medicine, gargles and washes that purify the brain should be used for many days beforehand, along with an improved diet.
Then shave his head and cauterize him once in the middle of the head as previously described, and another cautery at the back of the head. And on each temple of his head, a cautery. If the patient is strong and able to tolerate it, cauterize him with the number of cauteries mentioned for the paralytic patient and relax the body on the hollows of the neck and back. The cautery should be olive-wood as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, make the cautery delicate in this manner.
Chapter Eleven.
On Cauterizing Melancholia.
If melancholia is caused by foul humors and thick phlegm, cauterize him with the number of cauteries we mentioned for the paralytic patient.
If melancholia is caused by a predominance of black bile and the patient's body is moist, purge his brain as previously mentioned in the division.
Then shave the patient's head and make a tight cake of linen like a circle, then lower it in the middle of his head while the patient is sitting upright, holding on to each side. Then take one pound of old sheep fat.
Then heat it over a moderate fire until the finger can tolerate it, then empty it in the middle of its head into the circle and leave it until it cools. Do this to the patient once a week along with all his good treatment so that he may recover if God wills.
And if you wish, cauterize it with many small punctures without holding your hand on the iron, for this type of cautery will moderately moisten the brain.
Then apply cotton soaked in ghee or chicken fat to it.
Chapter Twelve.
On cautery for watery eye.
If the beginning of watery eye is apparent to you by the signs mentioned in the division, hasten and make the patient wash his head and protect it from all moisture, and have him sweat in a bath on an empty stomach for several days.
Then, once his head is shaved, cauterize it in the middle of the head, then two cauteries on the temples if the beginning of watery eye is in both eyes, or on one side if it is in one eye.
Then cut all the veins and arteries under the skin with the iron, making the cauteries long in the width of the temples and beware of bleeding.
If you see any of it, cut it at once with whatever treatment is possible, and I will come to the wisdom in severing the arteries and preventing bleeding.
And two strong cauteries may be applied on the nape of the neck under the bones.
Chapter Thirteen.
On cautery for chronic tearing.
If tearing of the eye is chronic and persistent, and it comes from the veins and arteries on the outside of the head, and you are certain that this is due to cold phlegm that is thick and bilious, then cauterize it as described for the beginning of watery eye. A cautery in the middle of the head and two on the temples, and two on the nape beneath the bones, and if you need more cauterize one on each side of the tail of the eye at the end of the eyebrow with a small iron.
Chapter Fourteen.
On Cauterizing the Nose.
If you treat him with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment does not work, then hasten to make the patient fast for three nights, then shave his head and cauterize the middle cautery with an olive-oil iron. Then cauterize with a nail iron two cauteries above the eyebrows under the hair a little, and be careful not to cut the artery. This is a picture of the nail iron.
Chapter Fifteen.
On Cauterizing Relaxed Eyelid.
If an eyelid relaxes from illness or moisture, cauterize the eyelid with one cautery using this crescent-shaped iron.
And if you wish, cauterize above the eyebrows a little two cauteries on each side, spaced from the temples, and the length of each cautery is along the eyebrow.
Do not overdo your hand with the cautery, but only to the extent that one-third of the skin is burned, and the iron will be shaped like this.
Chapter Sixteen.
On Cauterizing the Eyelid.
If its eyelashes turn inward and sting the eye, then cautery is done in two ways. Either cautery with fire or cautery with a burning medicine, but if you cauterize it with fire, order the patient beforehand to leave his eyelashes alone if he is one who plucks them so that they grow long and even.
For if they sting him when they are sprouting, tighten his eyelids with a bandage so that they do not move until they grow. And when they have grown and become even, then place the patient's head in your lap and draw on the eyelid with ink a mark in the shape of an asparagus leaf.
The sign begins near the eyelash and then you place under the eyelid cotton soaked in egg white or the saliva of a hen, then heat an iron shaped like this.
Then it is cauterized according to the shape you have been taught, a little at a time in many sittings until the surface of the skin burns, which is shaped like an ash leaf entirely exposed and a sign of your work's success is that you see the eyelid has wrinkled and the hair has risen from the flesh of the eye.
Then raise your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then apply cotton with ghee to it until the scab comes off, then treat it with ointment until it heals, if God wills, but if something of the hair returns after a while and the eyelid relaxes.
Then cauterize that spot again as you did at first, and if the hair is in the lower eyelid, pluck it until it returns to its natural place so that it does not encroach upon the eye. As for cautery with burning medicine, it is to order the patient to leave the eyelash alone until it grows long and level.
Then make from paper a shape like an ash leaf, then take from the common soap and quicklime not yet quenched, one dirham's weight or thereabouts of each, and crush them all together thoroughly and do this quickly so that it does not dry. Then spread it on the paper you have made in the shape of an ash leaf and put it on one or both eyelids, and place cotton soaked in egg white under the eye, and the patient's head in your lap.
Place your index finger over the medicine and press it lightly, moving it whenever the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine because he will find it pleasurable like fire. As long as he feels the burning, leave the medicine and move it with your finger, and when the burning subsides remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And see if you find the eyelid has risen as it rises when blushing with fire or cutting, otherwise put more of the medicine on the spot where the medicine has not taken effect and has not blackened until your work is complete and the eye blushes, then place cotton soaked in butter on it until the burn scab comes off.
Then treat it with palm ointment or another until it is healed, and you should, when working, be extremely cautious that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye; for if the eyelid relaxes after a few days, we fear something of the hair may fall into the eye.
So put the medicine on that spot of the relaxed eyelid again, as you did first, and then treat it until it is healed. This is an image of a leaf of the plant Asafoetida.
Know that people's eyes vary in size, so let your blushing be according to that, and this is not a subtle path of rightness for one who has experience in this craft.
Chapter Seventeenth.
On the ingrown eyelash that appears in the corner of the eye.
If you treat the ingrown eyelash as we mentioned in the sections on diseases and your treatment is unsuccessful, it should be cauterized in this manner.
Order the patient to place his head in your lap and have a servant hold his head between your hands, holding it so that it does not move or shake.
Then place cotton wool moistened in egg white or in the saliva of a fig on his eyes, then heat the iron which has this shape.
It should be hollow like the quill of an eagle's feather from one end, which is the end for cauterizing. If you wish, the other end may be open; if you wish, it may be closed like a pomegranate seed, but this hollow one is better for your work, God willing.
Then press the abscess if it is open and extract the pus from it, or if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus; then put on it a cautery iron which is very hot, hold it with your hand until it reaches the bone.
Move your hand slightly away from the eye towards the nose so that your hand does not err, nor does the patient become agitated and the cautery iron falls into the eyeball socket and spoils it; if it reaches the bone in the first application, otherwise apply the cautery iron a second time if needed.
Leave it for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter and treat it with drying ointment until it is healed; if forty days pass and it does not heal, apply a sharp corrosive medicine so that the bone is exposed and clean it according to what will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
Another method of cauterizing an abscess, mentioned by some of the ancients, is to intentionally make a cut at the site of the abscess and then insert a thin trocar into the same incision, its image is as follows.
Pour into it a weight equal to one dirham of molten lead and hold the trocar firmly with your hand so that it does not move at all, lest the molten lead flows into his eye; you should place cotton soaked in egg white or water on the patient's eye.
For the lead burns the site of the abscess and heals it in an astonishing way; if the abscess is healed by what we have mentioned regarding cauterization and treatment, otherwise it is necessary to use nasal puncture and return the abscess to the nasal passage as will be mentioned in its appropriate place.
Chapter Eighteenth.
On Cauterizing a Lip Fissure.
A fissure often occurs in the lip, called a harelip, especially in the lips of boys, as it frequently happens; if you treat this fissure with what we have mentioned in the division and the treatment is unsuccessful, then heat a small, pointed cautery iron to this shape:
Let her cavity be on the thinness of a knife, then put it in a bandage with haste into the same incision until the cautery reaches the depth of the incision, then treat it with cerate so that it heals if God wills.
Chapter Nineteenth.
On the cauterization of a wound in the mouth.
If a tumor appears in the root of the gum or palate or roots of molars, then it dries and bursts, and pus flows out becoming a fistula, and if treatment is not successful, then a cautery iron should be heated to a size that fits within the fistula.
Then carefully insert it into the fistula hole, and hold your hand until the iron reaches its deepest point, doing this once or twice, then treat it afterwards as we have previously mentioned so that it heals if God wills.
If the matter is discharged and it heals, otherwise, it is necessary to examine the area and remove the decayed bone as will be explained in its chapter if God wills.
Chapter Twentieth.
On cauterizing molars and relaxed gums.
If the gums become relaxed due to moisture and the molars move, and medications are not effective, then place the headrest in your lap and heat the iron whose image will be shown after this, placing the tube over the molar.
Carefully insert the iron into it with haste and hold your hand for a short time until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the molar, then lift your hand and repeat the iron application several times as desired, then have the patient fill his mouth with salt water.
He should hold it for an hour and then spit it out, as the moving molars will become fixed and the relaxed gums will tighten, drying the corrupt moisture.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On the pain of toothache.
If the toothache is from cold or there are worms in it and medication does not help, then cauterization should be done in two ways: either with butter or with fire.
As for cauterization with butter, take cow butter, melt it in an iron ladle or a seashell. Then take cotton and wrap it around the end of a probe. Dip it into the melted butter and quickly place it on the aching tooth, holding it until it cools.
Repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth. If you wish, soak a wick or cotton in cold butter and place it on the aching tooth. Then put a heated iron on top of it so that the heat reaches the bottom of the tooth.
As for cauterizing it with fire, take a copper or iron tube, making sure it has some thickness so that the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth. Then heat an iron shaped like the one shown and place it on the same tooth. Hold your hand there until the iron cools down. Repeat this several times.
The pain will go away either that same day or the next. After cauterization, the patient should fill their mouth with good butter and hold it for an hour before spitting it out. This is a picture of the iron.
Cauterize with whichever end you prefer, to the extent that is possible. This is a picture of the tube.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On Cauterizing Warts.
If warts are from phlegm and cold humors, and do not mature with medication, and you desire quick maturation, heat a hollow iron, shaped like the one shown here, with openings on both ends.
Let the smoke come out at the cautery from the other end and place it protected on the same tumor once or twice if needed until it reaches the depth of the tumor, but if the tumor is small, place the iron to the extent of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and carry on it cotton soaked in butter until what was burned by the fire goes away, then treat it with ointment and wicks until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Twenty-Third.
On cautery for hoarseness and shortness of breath.
If phlegm overwhelms the trachea, especially if this is accompanied by a cold temperament, the patient should first be purged with laxatives, then cauterized in the hollow of the neck at the base of the pharynx in a low position.
Be careful not to reach the pharynx with the cautery and burn no more than half of the skin, then cauterize another point at the junction of the neck in the last vertebra prominently. The iron should be pointed as previously described.
Then treat it as previously mentioned until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Twenty-Fourth.
On cautery for lung disease and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold phlegm and the patient does not have a fever or consumption, and the illness is chronic, cauterize two points above the collarbones in low, soft, empty spaces, and another point in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
The iron should be pointed as previously described, or if you wish, cauterize in a punctate manner with the iron called "al-nida," whose shape has been previously shown in puncturing and earache. The number of points should be from thirty to approximately that amount.
Then treat it as previously mentioned until it heals. You may make a three-pronged iron in this shape, and hasten cauterization with it because you cauterize three points at once. This is the image of the iron:
Chapter Twenty-Five
In the Armpit.
If the head of the humerus has become dislocated due to slippery humors, or if it has not been fixed when being put back in place so that this becomes habitual, and it is then repeatedly dislocated with the slightest movement, as we have witnessed, then the jaw should first be put back into place. The patient should then lie on his back or on his right side, and the skin inside the armpit should be lifted upwards with the fingers of your left hand if the joint has been dislocated inwards.
Then a heated iron with two prongs, such as that pictured, should be applied.
The skin should then be cauterized with it until it penetrates to the other side, producing a burn mark of four dots. It may also be cauterized with an iron having three prongs, in which case the burn mark will consist of six dots, with the prongs resting on the fleshy part of the armpit.
This is a picture of an iron with three prongs.
The number of prongs may be increased by one, making a total of eight dots. Afterwards, pounded alum mixed with salt should be applied to the burns, and the patient should be kept at rest and the limb immobilized for a time until it strengthens. If the dislocation is upwards, which rarely happens...
…a single, well-placed cautery above the elbow should be applied, or many small punctures may be made. This will strengthen the joint and eliminate the moisture, causing the patient to recover.
Chapter Twenty-Six
On Cauterizing the Abdomen.
If the stomach has suffered from a cold and excessive moisture, causing it to deviate from its normal state and resulting in frequent attacks that have not been relieved by various treatments, then the patient should lie on his back with his legs and arms extended, and three cauteries should be applied. Make an incision under the spoon of the chest as wide as a finger with a heated iron, and two incisions below on either side of the first one until they form a triangle, spacing them apart so that they do not join when they heal. The depth of the incisions should be one-third the thickness of the skin.
To this extent and no more.
And if you wish, make one large cautery in the middle of the stomach in this manner.
The iron with which this single cautery is made should be circular in shape as shown.
The stomach may also be cauterized in a punctate manner for those who are afraid of this cautery, and this is done by marking points on the stomach with ink in the desired quantity, then cauterizing them with a pointed iron, and treating them with the aforementioned treatment until they heal.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On Cauterization of the Cold Liver.
If the liver presents with pain due to coldness and dampness, or a strong wind, which has caused it to depart from its natural temperament excessively, and the patient has been treated as mentioned in the division previously but without success. The patient should lie on his back and three cauteries marked in this shape and size exactly, should be applied to the liver below the ribs where the elbow of a man ends.
The distance between each cautery should be the width of a finger, and the cautery should be straight along the body. Do not press hard with the iron.
The depth of the burn should be half the thickness of the skin, no more. The patient should stand on his feet. If he is unable to stand, he should lie down with his legs extended and arms raised. This is an image of the iron.
You may cauterize these with a pointed iron if you have experience and skill in the craft, but be careful not to press too hard during cautery so that it burns all the skin, reaches the abdomen, and damages the intestines. The skin is thin in that area, so be aware.
Chapter Twenty-Eight
In the treatment of a liver abscess with cautery.
If an abscess appears in the liver and you wish to know whether the swelling is in the flesh of the liver or in its peritoneum, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will experience heaviness and pain without sharpness.
But if it is in the peritoneum of the liver, there will be severe sharpness with the pain, and you see that doctors have become weary of treating it, then the patient should lie on his back, and then a cautery iron should be applied to the warm spot.
Then the iron should be heated in the fire; it is an iron resembling a plumb, and this is its image. It should be cauterized with a single application until it burns all the skin, and the cautery is continued to the peritoneum so that all the pus comes out; then it should be treated like other abscesses until it heals.
This type of cautery should not be used by anyone except one whose training in the medical profession has been long and who has repeatedly treated these diseases by experience; only then should he undertake such work, and I prefer to leave it at that.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On the cauterization of a hydrocele.
The ancients mentioned cauterization with the root of a plant called zarnad for a cold hydrocele in the following manner: Take one dried, long root of zarnad, as thick as a finger, dip it in oil and heat it in fire. Then cauterize it with a single application between the connection of the collarbone to the neck, and two small cauterizations a little below the testicles, slightly inclined towards the side under the chin, and two large cauterizations above the breasts, between the third and fourth ribs.
And two more cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly inclined backward, and one in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach, and three cauterizations from behind—one between the shoulders, and two on either side of the spine below the cauterization that is between the hands.
Your hand should not be plunged deep into the wound, but rather there should be a branding on the surface of the skin. Some of the ancients have mentioned that some people used to use an iron poker resembling a millstone, heat it and insert it between the ribs until it reached the tumor itself.
And the tumor is extracted as we mentioned in connection with a liver tumor. In this instance, cauterizing with a hot iron is extremely dangerous; either the patient will die immediately, or an incurable fistula will develop at the site.
Chapter Thirty.
Cauterization of the Spleen.
If you have treated splenic disease as described in the section on treatment, and your treatment has not been successful, then cauterization may be performed in three ways, all of which are correct: one is to brand it with three or four cauterizations lined up along the length of the spleen.
These cauterizations should be done in the shape of those for the liver, as previously described, with a space between each cautery the width of a finger or slightly more. The iron should be of the same type as that used for liver cautery and your hand should not be plunged deep into the wound. The patient should lie on their back during the procedure.
The other method involves raising the skin opposite the spleen, where the patient's left elbow ends. The skin should be raised to a width equal to that of the body so that the cauterizations fall along the length of the body.
Then insert the heated cautery irons, well protected, until they penetrate through to the other side of the skin. Withdraw the irons and you will have made four cauterizations. If you prefer, you may use a three-pronged cautery iron instead.
Then treat the site of the cauterizations, allowing it to drain pus for many days. This is more effective than any of the treatments previously mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-One
On the treatment of dropsy.
Cupping is only beneficial for ascites, especially the dry type. If you have treated the patient with dropsy with the types of treatment mentioned in the division and your treatment was not successful, you should apply four cuppings around the navel and one cupping on the stomach.
Another cupping on the liver, one cupping on the spleen, and two cuppings behind his back between the shoulder blades - one opposite his chest and the other opposite his stomach. The depth of the cupping should be close to the thickness of the skin, then the cupping is left open so that pus can drain for a long time.
And do not neglect the patient's treatment after cupping with what is appropriate so that both objectives are achieved and recovery is hastened. The shape of the iron with which the back is cauterized is nail-shaped, as previously described, and the one with which the stomach is cauterized is olive-shaped.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
On cupping the feet and legs.
If the feet become swollen in a patient with dropsy and are filled with yellow water, cupping should be applied on the back of the foot in the hollow between the little toe and the next toe.
Place your hand with the iron and do not bend it, then lift your hand and do not return it at all, for yellow water will drain and the iron will be in this shape.
Then two cuppings are applied to each leg, with the cupping done with the sharp end of the iron. The cupping should be along the length of the leg, one below the knee and the other lower down towards the middle of the leg.  Two cuppings should also be applied to each thigh.
Leave the cupping open without further treatment for a long time so that water drains from it, and then treat it with all that we have mentioned.
Chapter the Thirty-Third
On Diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is from cold and moisture until it weakens the retentive and digestive powers that are in the stomach and intestines, and this is treated by types of treatment but does not recover, and you see the patient able to tolerate cupping and of abundant strength, then cup him with a large cupping on his stomach. As previously mentioned, cup the stomach with a circular iron and four small cups around the navel with a fine pin-head iron, and one large cup on the cotton above the coccyx or two.
And if you see that the moisture is abundant and the patient able to tolerate it, cup him on the groin and one on each buttock, and perhaps add two small cups to the stomach near the large one; for this is a successful treatment whose benefit will not be missed if God wills.
Chapter the Thirty-Fourth
On Cupping for Hemorrhoids.
If there are chronic hemorrhoids in the anus, many or one, and they are from thick cold humors or corrupted moisture, and treated as we mentioned in the division but to no effect, then cup the patient with three cups on the lower part of the sacral vertebrae below the waistline a little, triangularly.
And one cup under the navel, about two finger-widths apart. And if you think that his stomach has become cold and his food does not digest, and you see his face swollen, then cup him on the stomach with a large cup as previously mentioned, and one on his liver. And another on the spleen with a fine pin-head iron, and leave the cupping open for a while, then treat him until he recovers if God wills.
Chapter the Thirty-Fifth
On Cupping for Warts.
After cutting them off, heat an iron that resembles a millstone and then insert it while still hot into the same cut warts and press your hand down until the iron reaches the mouth of the vein from which blood flows; do this once or twice.
If the warts are numerous, cauterize each one as we have described, then treat them with appropriate ointments until they heal. If you cauterize a large wart on cotton, it will be more beneficial.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
On the cautery of a fistula that is in the perineum and its surroundings.
If the patient does not respond to incision and the work we have described in his place, he may be cured by cautery. And if a fistula occurs with pus and corrupted humors running from it, the first thing you should do is measure it with a thin probe.
Then determine the depth of it with the probe, then heat a cautery iron resembling a wedge and insert it heated into the same fistula, along the straight course of the fistula and to the depth that the probe entered, repeat the cautery until all those corrupted humors are burned away once or twice or thrice according to your need.
Be careful not to burn a nerve if there is one, or a large vein, and be aware if the fistula leads to the bladder or the bowels.
Be cautious of all these places, and only do this if the fistula is in a fleshy place and you have determined that it is impassable, then treat the area until it heals. If the area closes up and the discharge stops and it remains so for a time, know that it has healed completely.
And if the discharge does not stop, know that it is passable or there is a large corrupted bone in its depth, or something similar to what will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
On the cautery of the kidneys.
If pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or harsh wind and a consequent lack of union in the patient, you should cauterize it on the two sides on the same kidney with a pointed cautery iron that has been previously mentioned; perhaps you may cauterize it three times in the same session, resulting in three cauteries in a row which will be most beneficial.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
On the Bladder.
If weakness and relaxation occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, make incisions on the lower part of the perineum, above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins. Make one incision on the right side of the perineum and another on the left.
Each incision should be as long as a thumb joint. Make another incision in the lower back, or two if necessary. The cautery iron should be pointed as previously described.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
On Cauterization of the Womb.
If a substance of cold and moisture develops in the womb, preventing conception, corrupting its humor, and hindering its functions, or if pain occurs during menstruation, then three incisions should be made around the perineum as described for cauterization of the bladder. One incision should be made on the cotton under the lower back, or two if necessary. The cautery iron should be pointed.
Chapter Forty.
On Cauterization for Hip Displacement.
Erroneous humors may accumulate around the hip joint, causing it to dislocate. The sign is that one leg will be longer than the other when measured. You will find a gap where the dislocation has occurred. A semi-circular incision should be made on the hip itself.
The incision should be made so that the center of the circle coincides with the affected area, following its curvature. The cautery iron previously described for cauterizing the stomach should be used. If this is not available, make three incisions with a large olive-shaped cautery iron.
The incision should be deep enough to penetrate the entire thickness of the skin. Then, treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Forty-One.
On the cauterization of the sciatic nerve.
If pain occurs in the hip and its cause is cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as mentioned in the division but the treatment is unsuccessful and prolonged, then it is necessary to lighten the thick humors of the patient with marshmallow or colocynth, or the like.
Then cauterize and direct the cautery in two ways, either with burning medications or with fire. Cautery with fire is done in many ways, one of which is to cauterize on the hip itself three triangular cauteries in this shape.
Make the depth suitable, and after each cautery and the next, make a distance equal to the thickness of a finger. The iron should be olive-shaped. Sometimes one cautery may be applied in the middle on the top of the hip itself, making four cauteries. If you wish, you may apply it with the circle previously mentioned for dislocation of the hip, using one cautery.
Make the circle encompass the entire hip and burn all of the skin's thickness. This is the characteristic of cautery for sciatica if the pain persists in the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
But if it extends to the thigh and leg, apply two cauteries on the thigh at the location the patient indicates with pain, and one cautery above the popliteal fossa by four fingers towards the ulnar side. The iron should be thin and the depth of the cautery should be only as thick as the skin.
If they indicate that the pain extends towards the toes of the foot, cauterize where they point with a punctate iron three, four or more times if needed. If they point to pain below the knee towards the leg, apply one thin cautery there.
Take care in all your cauteries not to burn a nerve or large blood vessel, as this could cause the patient a severe injury or disability.
I have seen one or two people who cauterized above the ankle and put a poultice on the cautery, causing the leg to swell until the swelling reached the foot, with all of it becoming perforated and spoiling all of the limb; then diarrhea and death occurred afterward. If the pain is on both sides, cauterize them in this exact same manner.
Some of the wise scholars have mentioned that when cauterizing the hip, it should be done in this manner: they make a sort of crucible from iron with a diameter of half a hand-span. At its mouth, it should be as thick as the pit of a date or slightly less. Inside this crucible, there is another crucible and a third one within that.
The space between each pair of crucibles should be the width of a thumb joint. The crucibles should be open on both sides and their height should be about a handbreadth or two. A handle made of iron is firmly attached to the crucibles, and this is its form.
Then it is heated in the fire until it glows red and the sparks are removed. It is then placed on the hip bone and sciatic nerve, with the patient leaning on the proper side, cauterizing three circular burns at the same time. Then it is left for three days and dressed with butter. The wound is left open for several days.
It is then treated with ointment until it heals. The author of this book said that this type of cautery is rarely used due to its ugliness and horrifying appearance, as well as the scarcity of those who can endure it; however, it is a good cautery for those who can bear it and are struck in the proper place.
As for cautery with burning medications, it is done by making two crucibles shaped like funnels, into which the retorted sublimated mercury (rat tail) should be poured, made of either copper or iron.
Their rims should be about two handbreadths high, and the space between them should be about the width of a finger. They should be open at the bottom and open at the top, with some being soldered together in this manner.
Then you lower it onto the right hip and thigh while the patient lies on his right side. Hold your hand firmly, then pour between the two circles hot, sharp water heated by a small fire pot, and hold it for a quarter of an hour. The patient will endure its sting and burning, for he will find pleasure like fire.
Until the sting subsides, then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the sharp water from the hip with fresh water. Then leave it for three days and apply butter to it until the blackness of the burn is gone. Leave it for several days until pus flows from it, for this is most beneficial.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make him a mold that holds water according to what you made for the hip. This is the description of sharp water, and its preparation has been proven in the treatise on the Correction of Medicines.
Take a portion of saltpeter and quicklime, each one part, crush them together, and put them in a new pot which has been pierced with a single small hole at the bottom so that the mordant enters it, and place another glazed pot beneath the base of the first pot.
Pour fresh water over the saltpeter and quicklime to cover them by a finger, after firmly squeezing them with your hand. Leave the pot until the sharp water descends into the glazed pot below, then collect all of that water and pour it over other new quicklime and saltpeter.
It will then be very sharp and effective for many medical purposes and for cauterizing all other organs, as it acts like fire itself. There are also medicines with which the hip can be cauterized, such as thapsia, bladder honey, lime mixed with soap, and crushed together.
Galen relates a story about an ancient man who treated hip pain and sciatica, greatly exaggerating its effectiveness and claiming that it needed no other treatment and healed in a single application.
Even it is possible to introduce him into the bath carried and he comes out of it fully healed. It is to be taken from the green plaster, if there is no green one, then the fresh dry one is taken, finely pounded with a little fat and placed on the hip where the pain is or in the leg or thigh.
It is tightened and left for three hours or as long as the patient feels relief from the burning, then he is introduced into the bath. If his body sweats, he is put into the basin, for the pain will go away and he will be healed by God's permission. If he is not healed, the poultice is applied to him again after ten days once more.
It will heal, God willing, and know that no one should use cautery with these remedies except after the body has evacuated, and Dioscorides mentioned that if goat hair is used to cauterize sciatica, it will be beneficial.
The cautery is done in this manner: wool soaked in old oil is placed on the deep spot between the thumb of the hand and the wrist, which is closer to the wrist, then take a dry goat hair.
Ignite it with fire until it becomes a coal, then place it on the wool and leave it until it goes out, then take another one and continue to do so until the sensation reaches from the middle of the upper arm to the hip and the pain subsides by God's permission. This type of cautery is called hair cautery.
Chapter forty-two.
On the cautery for back pain.
Back pain may occur for many reasons, such as a fall or blow or excessive purging and the like, and it is due to a buildup of cold, wet matter. Cautery falls into this category alone.
That which is due to a buildup of cold matter, after the patient has evacuated with hellebore or the like, should be cauterized on his back where the pain is, in three rows across the table itself, having first marked the location with ink. In each row there should be five cauteries or more according to what you see as the patient's endurance and strength.
It should be cauterized with a pointed iron, and if you wish, cauterize it three or four times with a medium-sized nail iron in this manner.
Chapter Thirty Third.
In the beginning of cauterization, a swelling.
This condition often affects young children, and its initial sign in a child is shortness of breath upon standing and moving. You will find at the end of his back vertebrae a knot that has protruded beyond all other knots.
If you see this and want to stop it, cauterize it with a round iron in this manner. Let the cautery be applied to each side of the vertebra evenly, and if you wish, cauterize it around the vertebra with a pointed iron in two or three rows, making sure the dots are close together. Then treat the area until it heals as we have described.
And be careful to use cautery on the swelling that is from nerve constriction.
Chapter Forty Fourth.
On cauterization for gout and joint pains.
If joint pains are from cold humors settling into any part of the body, and if the pains occur in the legs, it is customary for physicians to call this gout, especially.
If gout, which is caused by cold, is treated with the types of treatment mentioned in the division and the pains do not go away, then cautery will remove them. Cauterize around the joint of the leg with many cauteries after vomiting, using a medium-sized olive iron in this manner.
And if you need to cauterize the front of the leg, do so with a pointed iron. If the pains rise to the knees or other joints, which often happens, then cauterize each knee three or four times on each side with this same olive iron.
If you need more than this, cauterize it and do not delve deep with the cautery, but let it be about the thickness of the skin. If the pain ascends to the thighs or back, use what we have mentioned about cautery in its chapter.
If the pain is only in the hands, we place dots around the joints as if drawing two lines. If the pain remains in the fingers, we place a dot on each knuckle and on the back of the hand. If the pain ascends after a few days to the elbows or shoulders.
Cauterize them from all sides, and the patient should not be without good treatment and medication. For if he eats well and expels phlegm, he will recover with this cautery, God willing.
Chapter forty-five.
On the Cauterization of the Foot.
If a hernia appears in the groin and some of the intestine and fat descend to the testicle, and this is recent and slight, then you should order the patient to abstain from food for a day and use laxatives that will expel feces from his bowels.
Then he lies down on his back between your hands and you order him to hold himself so that the fat or intestine protrudes, then push it back in with your finger. Then mark beneath the hernia on the pubic bone a sign resembling half a circle with its ends pointing upward.
Then heat an iron in this shape.
Until it glows white, emitting sparks, then push the intestine or fat back into its place, and have a servant put his hand on the spot so that the intestines do not protrude again; having parted the patient's legs and placed a cushion underneath him, and another servant holds his legs.
Another servant is on his chest holding his hands, then lower the iron onto the mark itself, hold it upright and steady until it reaches the bone or repeat it again if it didn't reach the bone the first time.
Preserve your effort from the protrusion of the intestine while cauterizing, lest you burn it and thereby cause the patient either death or great suffering. Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work will not succeed, and the cautery iron should be gentle according to their ages, both for children and adults.
Then treat the cauterized spot after three days with butter until the dryness of the fire goes away, then treat it with all ointments until it heals, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound closes.
You should make his diet during his treatment consist of things that soften his stomach so that the intestine does not protrude when straining and defecating. Then, if he wants to get up after forty days, use a tight bandage and keep it for another forty days, and reduce exertion, fullness from food and drink, and loud shouting.
Indeed, if he follows this treatment, he will recover completely, God willing. I will mention the treatment of hernia by incision in its chapter, God willing. As for the hernia that occurs in the rest of the abdomen and is in its beginning, if you want it not to increase, cauterize a circular part from it according to its size. Let what you burn of the skin be like a third of it, then treat it as we have mentioned; it will not increase, God willing. Some of the ancients mentioned cauterizing the hernia with a triangular iron in this shape.
After you learn about the hernia by drawing a line across the upper side of the hernia and another line downward, place your hand in the middle and cauterize it with one, nail-like cautery; the first cautery is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Six.
On Cauterizing a Boil.
If pain occurs in some organs due to a fall or blow, and that pain lasts for a long time, and medication does not alleviate it, then it should be cauterized with a pointed iron, the cautery being applied to each organ according to its size, weakness, and strength.
If the pain and inflammation are relieved by the first cautery, then he is cured. Otherwise, it should be repeated, for it is customary for these pains to spread from one organ to another nearby, so cautery should follow them until the patient is cured.
Chapter Forty-Seven.
On Cauterizing Leprosy.
As for lepers, they may greatly benefit from cautery, especially those with leprosy caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
If you wish to cauterize him, examine it first. If the leprosy is in its early stages and you have treated it with what we mentioned in the division, but it has not subsided or stopped, and you fear that corruption will seize all his humors, then apply five cauteries to his head. One in the usual middle of the head, the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, two on the temples, and one behind on the nape. Apply the cautery a little more strongly until it has a slight effect on the bone.
Scales will peel off from it, making it easier for the thick vapors to escape. Cauterize the spleen in the same way as described above. If the leprosy has persisted in the patient and has appeared clearly, then these cauteries that we mentioned should be applied to the head. Apply a cautery to the tip of the nose, two on the cheeks, two on the nape, six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large cautery on the coccyx at the base of the tailbone, another above it in the same area, and two on the calves, one on each. Two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the elbows, two on the elbows, two on the shoulder joints and one on each joint of the fingers of his hands and feet, a number on each heel of his feet and his wrists.
And preserve from the nerve that is on the back of the heels lest you burn them, and it may be cauterized on the pubic bone and another on the mouth of the stomach and another on the liver, and know that the more you increase cautery the more beneficial and effective it is.
And know that the patient does not find pain from cautery as the healthy person does because his body has become numb, and the cauteries should be of large and small size according to the limbs and joints as previously mentioned of the qualities of the irons.
Then treat the cautery with frankincense gum mixed with honey and all other treatments until it heals, God willing.
Chapter forty-eight.
In cauterizing numbness, when a limb from the limbs is numbed and treated with medicines, ointments and bandages and does not recover, cauterize the same numb limb with cauteries according to what it deserves, whether the bone is large or small, and let your cautery be shallow and penetrate the skin slightly.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals, and sometimes cauterize some of the numbness that occurs in the hand and foot in cases of back pain at the exit of the nerve that moves that limb, so the numbness goes away.
And let no one undertake this except who is insightful in the anatomy of organs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
Chapter forty-nine.
On cauterizing leprosy.
If leprosy has advanced and no medical remedy is effective against it, cauterize it with a shallow cautery according to the thickness of the skin so that the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with lentil flour mixed with rose oil, plantain leaf, and the blood of a pigeon or finch, one part from each, all mixed together and spread on a cloth, applied to the area until healed.
Chapter Fifty.
On the Removal of Cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with a circular iron, turning it around the growth. Some sages have mentioned cauterizing a significant area in its center, but I do not approve of this as I expect it to ulcerate; I have witnessed this several times.
The proper method is to cauterize around it in a circle, as mentioned, or with many cauterizations.
Chapter Fifty-One.
On Cauterizing the Hemorrhoid.
If someone has a hemorrhoid that is slow to mature, either due to the effectiveness of the factor causing it, or because of the patient's age if they are elderly and have little blood, or simply due to time, and you wish to hasten its maturation, cauterize around it with many small, dotted cauterizations.
Then leave it alone; it will hasten its maturation. If you wish to cauterize it, use an iron shaped like this.
Lower it into the center of the hemorrhoid until it pierces the skin, and let the cauterization be such that pus can easily flow. Then treat it accordingly until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
On Cauterizing a Fistula.
A fistula is a corruption that progresses through the body, consuming it like fire consumes dry wood. If you see a fistula in a location suitable for cauterization, apply many small and large pointed irons according to what is appropriate for the location of the fistula.
Then pare it from all sides until all the corruption is eradicated and nothing of it remains, then leave it for three days and apply powdered sulfur mixed with oil to the cauterized areas until all the scabs and corruption are removed.
Then treat it with flesh-producing ointments, and if after three days you see that the flesh is growing healthily without corruption, then leave it. Otherwise, cauterize what remains of the corrupt areas, and the ulcer may be treated with a caustic medicine.
For it acts as fire, more quickly beneficial, and I have mentioned treating it with a caustic medicine in the division, so take it from there when you need it.
Chapter thirty-three.
On the cauterization of reversed and unreversed nails.
This condition often occurs in the soles of the feet, and it is something rough that pains a man. Cauterization for this can be done in two ways: either by fire or by caustic water.
As for cauterization by fire, heat a hollow iron tool shaped like an eagle's feather, made of iron to the extent that it surrounds the nail from all sides and is thin at the edge. Then lower it while hot onto the nail and turn your hand with the iron around the nail until the iron reaches the depth of the nail.
Leave it for three days so that it swells with pus, then bandage it with wild barley flour pounded with salt and leave the dressing on for a night, as it will come off from its roots. Then treat the wound site with flesh-producing ointment until it heals. If the nails are not reversed.
This often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet. You should take a tube made of copper or iron or an eagle feather quill and lower it onto the nail or wart. Then pour a small amount of caustic water into the tube.
Hold your hand and turn it while squeezing slightly with your hand so that the tube's edge touches the base of the nail, allowing the sharp water to find its way to the base of the nail. The patient should endure the sting of the sharp water for a moment.
Then you leave it, and the nail will detach from its base. You do this one by one until you have removed all of them from the body, then you treat the spots after they are removed with ointments that promote flesh growth.
Chapter Forty-Five.
In the Removal of the Nail.
If someone suffers from a nail affected by cold in the nerve or from a fever, a quarter of it or something else, then four or five cauterizations should be applied on the back of the neck between each cauterization and one on its chest. And a cauterization with an olive iron should be applied to the stomach, for this will soothe the nail and hasten the ripening of the cold ailment.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
On Cauterization of a Swelling Occurring in the Body.
Ugly boils may erupt in the body, originating from thick, putrid cold matter; upon their first appearance, a gentle cauterization should be applied to the head of each boil with a slender rod whose tip has been ignited by fire or with the root of long asarabacca or an lentil-sized iron.
Similar cauterization may be applied to the mammillary glands upon their initial eruption in this manner so that it will not worsen, and the beneficial effect will dissipate, and the patient will recover. However, this should be done only after the patient has undergone bloodletting.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
On Cauterization of Hemorrhage Occurring Upon Severing an Artery.
Hemorrhage from a severed artery often occurs during external wounding, incision of a tumor, cauterization of a limb, or similar procedures, making it difficult to stop the bleeding.
If this should happen to anyone, hurry your hand to the mouth of the artery and put your index finger on it and press it down firmly until the blood is stopped under your finger and nothing comes out. Then place several small and large olive pits in the fire and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one, either small or large according to the wound and the place where the artery has burst open, and lower the pit on the vein itself after quickly removing your finger, and hold the pit until the blood stops.
If the blood rushes out when you lift your finger from the mouth of the artery and the pit goes out, take another pit quickly from those prepared in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the bleeding stops.
Be careful not to burn a nerve that may be there, for it will cause the patient further suffering. Know that if blood flows from an artery, it cannot be cut, especially if it is a large artery, except in one of four ways: either by cauterization as we have said or by amputation if it has not already been amputated. For if it is amputated, its ends will contract and the bleeding will stop. It can then either be tied tightly with threads or have medicines applied that staunch the blood and bandages tightened firmly around it.
As for whoever tries to cut it with a ligature or by tightening cloth or applying burnt objects, and the like, the bleeding will not stop at all except in rare cases. If someone experiences this and does not have access to a doctor or medicine, let them quickly place their index finger on the mouth of the wound itself as we have described.
Press it down very hard so that the blood is confined and flows from above the wound onto the artery and finger. Do not remove it with cold water, always keep pressing until the blood freezes, thickens and stops. During this time, look for what you need in terms of cauterization or medicine.
Chapter Two.
On incision, scarification, bloodletting and surgery, and the like.
He who came before us has said that in the first chapter we mentioned every disease which can be treated with fire cautery and burning medicaments, its causes and reasons, its instruments, and the figures of the cauteries, and we have made this into chapters from beginning to end.
And I follow in this chapter the same path so that it is easy for the student to attain his goal.
Before I begin with that, you should know, my sons, that this chapter contains more marvels than the first chapter on cautery.
Therefore, caution should be even greater in this chapter because the work often involves vomiting blood, which sustains life, when an artery is opened or an incision is made on a tumor, abscess is lanced, surgery is performed, an arrow is removed, or an incision is made for a stone, and the like. All of these are fraught with danger and fear, and death often results from them.
And I advise you against acting in doubtful matters, for in this profession you may encounter people with various diseases; some of them may be weary of their illness and find death preferable.
Because of the severity of their sickness and the length of their suffering, some are determined to die, and from those who may offer you wealth to provide them with health, though their illness is formidable - do not help those who approach you in this manner.
Let your caution be greater than your desire and eagerness, and do not undertake anything except after you have certain knowledge that will lead to a favorable outcome. In all treatments for your patients, use the advance of knowledge and warning as guides to safety.
For this will help you gain praise, glory, renown, and gratitude. May God inspire you with righteousness, my sons, and not deprive you of truth and success, for that is in His hand; there is no god but He.
This chapter has been arranged in sections, from the century to antiquity, on what was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, so that you may easily find what you desire, God willing.
The First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that gathers in the heads of boys.
This ailment often occurs in boys at birth if the midwife presses the boy's head without gentleness, and it may also arise from a hidden cause that is unknown.
I have not seen this ailment in anyone other than boys, and all those whom I have seen with it quickly succumbed to death; therefore, I decided to abandon working on it. I once saw a boy whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger every day. Until the boy could no longer sit up due to the size of his head, and the moisture increased until he died.
This moisture either gathers between the skin and the bone, or it gathers under the bone on the peritoneum. The procedure for this is as follows: if the moisture is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, one should make a single cut across the middle of the head, about two spans long, so that the moisture may flow out. This is the shape of the surgical knife.
But if there is more moisture and the swelling is larger, make two intersecting cuts in this pattern:
And if the moisture is under the bone, a sign of which is that you see the sutures of the skull open on all sides and the water descends when you press it inward with your hand - this is not subtle - then make three cuts in the middle of the head in this pattern:
After making the incision, all the moisture will come out; then tighten the incisions with cloths and bandages, and then soak them from above with syrup and oil until the fifth day. Then untie the bandages and treat the wound with poultices and ointments. Do not leave the head tightly bandaged, and feed the patient with dry food that is low in moisture.
Until the member is strengthened and healed, another prescription for incision is to look where the bone appears at the meeting of the water, for it may be more in the back of the head or in its front, or on the right or on the left.
So you intend by incision where the swelling appeared to you and the filling of water, so cut it as much as you can while preserving that you do not cut an artery so that bleeding occurs and the patient dies from that bleeding along with vomiting moisture.
Chapter Two.
Cutting the arteries behind the ears, known as the carotids.
When one is stricken with acute colds to the eyes or chest, and it persists and medication does not work, then cutting these two arteries is prescribed as treatment.
If you wish to cut them, then shave the patient's head with a razor, and then rub the spot with a coarse cloth so that the artery appears. Then tighten the patient's neck by pulling on their garment, and look where the pulse beats and the two depressions are located behind the ears, for they seldom hide except in some people.
Then mark them with ink, and cut them with a dissecting knife down to the bone, doing so across the head. If you wish, insert the knife under the artery and trace it upwards with cuts, making the length of the incision about two fingers' breadth.
For when the artery is severed, blood comes out in a throbbing, pulsating manner, surging forward and back repeatedly. If the artery does not appear to your senses, then you should estimate three finger breadths behind the ear, mark it with ink, and cut down to the bone.
Six ounces of blood are sent on the average, and perhaps more or less may be sent, all according to the apparent strength of the patient and the fullness of his arteries; then look at the wound, and if any part of the peritoneum remains upon the bone, cut it off.
So that a hot tumor may not develop, then draw the wound together with a linen wick and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter Three.
Cut the arteries in the fingers.
If a person suffers from chronic migraine or acute attacks brought on by humid heat and muscular pains in the fingers, or severe chronic headache, and is treated with the various remedies of medicine without success, we have found in these cases that cutting or cauterizing the arteries of the fingers as described is effective.
The procedure for cutting them is as follows: the patient should shave the hair on his fingers, and then aim for the superficial artery in the finger; it will be apparent to you by its pulse, and it rarely escapes notice except in a few people.
Or if the cold is severe and it is hidden from view, have the patient constrict his neck with the help of his garment, then rub the spot with a cloth or compress it with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the scalpel, which is pictured here. Then gently peel back the skin with it until you reach the artery; insert a snare and pull it upward until it emerges from the skin, freeing it from the fascia underneath on all sides. If the artery is thin, twist it with the end of the snare. Then cut off a portion of it, as far apart as its ends can retract without bleeding; for if it is not completely severed, the blood will not recede. Then draw off from six to three ounces of blood.
If the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong doubled thread. The thread should be either silk or from musical instrument strings so that gangrene does not hasten towards it before the wound heals and bleeding occurs.
Then cut the part between the ligatures, doing so at that hour or a later time. If you wish, cauterize it close to the bone with a searing iron until its ends are severed. This will serve the same purpose or even better, as we have said.
However, if the patient has a fever or an unbalanced temperament, cauterization is more beneficial because it helps destroy moisture. After ligating the arteries, the area should be packed with soft cotton and covered with tight bandages. After the ligatures are removed, treat it with dry medications that promote flesh growth and apply a bandage until it heals, God willing.
If bleeding occurs from the artery during your work, hasten to cut it either by cauterization or fill the area with alum and press firmly until the blood stops. If none of these are available, place your finger there until the blood clots.
Rinse the area with very cold water to soothe the burning and bandage it properly. It is lighter and easier than ligating the artery to cauterize the vein with this searing iron after marking the locations with ink.
Lower it while very hot until it reaches the bone and the vein is severed in two places so that what is between its ends does not join at all with this cauterization. This is an image of the iron.
The searing irons are sharp like small blades, but they are much less sharp than a knife because if they were as sharp as a knife, cold would set in quickly and the flesh would not cut easily. If there is any thickness, it will retain the heat of the fire.
The flesh is cut quickly, and this is the best of all actions, the lightest and easiest, and let the space between the knives be the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
In the treatment of continuous hot tearing into the eyes.
If the tears are continuous and flow from the veins on the head, outside, and are not benefited by any medical treatment with drugs, and you see the face of the patient has reddened. And he feels a tingling in his forehead like the crawling of ants and his eyes are shaking, wet, their healing has been confirmed and their eyelids have become stuck together from the severity of the tears, so the first ones in treating it resorted to this action, and they call it treatment by the sword, which is that you order the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then three parallel incisions are made in the forehead, along its length, each incision being about two finger lengths long. The first incision is parallel to the length of the nose, in the middle of the forehead, the second is a short distance away from the movement of the muscle in the temple and the third is on the other side.
Be careful not to cut the arteries on either side and keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws.  Let there be three joined fingers' distance between each incision, and have absorbent cotton pieces or many dry cloths ready to soak up the blood.
Then insert the sharp double-pointed trocar which is pictured here. From the incision next to the temple to the middle incision, and scrape off all the skin between them along with the membrane on the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the third, then remove the trocar. And insert into the first incision another instrument called a knife, sharp on one side and smooth and blunt on the other. This is its picture:
And its sharp side is turned upwards towards the flesh adhering to the skin and its smooth side towards the bone, and it is pushed until it reaches the middle incision, and all the vessels descending from the head to the eyes are cut with it without the cut reaching the outer surface of the skin.
Then you do the same in the middle incision to the other incision, and after a moderate amount of blood has flowed, you press on the places where the clotted blood is cut, then you place a wick of cotton in each incision and put a dressing soaked in syrup and oil or vinegar and oil on it.
So that a hot swelling does not occur, and on the third day the ligature is removed and you use a lot of rinsing with lukewarm water, then treat it with balsam of Peru ointment mixed with rose oil and all that which you treat wounds with until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Five.
On the treatment of tears and discharge to the eyes from within the head.
When someone has frequent, sharp, stinging discharges and sees their eyes as two small, weak things, and their eyelids are ulcerated and their eyelashes fall out. And there is a sharp, painful ache deep in the head and continuous sneezing, then know from these symptoms that those substances and discharges come from many deep vessels, and the best treatment for it is this: order the patient to shave their forehead, then make one incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there is a sharp, painful ache deep in the head and continuous sneezing, then know from these symptoms that those substances and discharges come from many deep vessels, and the best treatment for it is this: order the patient to shave their forehead, then make one incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise it a little horizontally and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, the incision being down to the bone, keeping your hand furthest from the temporal muscles that move when chewing, until the bone is exposed and all the blood has been dried with a sponge.
Then separate the edges of the incision with loose cotton or a linen twist, then tighten it from above with bandages and soak the bandages in syrup and oil so that a hot swelling does not occur. When you remove them and see that the hot swelling has subsided, you should rub the bone until the flesh begins to grow there.
Then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and making an ointment from them to be used in the growth of flesh in such wounds.
Chapter Six.
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone or something like stone, such as iron and glass; or a plant seed such as chickpeas, kernels, and the like; or something liquid such as water, vinegar, and the like.
Or an animal. When a pebble or something like a pebble falls into the ear and does not exceed what is in the ear, expose the ear to the sun; if you see the pebble only smear some violet oil or cerumen on it, then try to remove it with a head movement or sneezing with a cane. And plug the nostrils when sneezing after placing a band of cloth or wool around the ear and extending the ear upwards, for it often comes out with this treatment. If it does not come out, then try to remove it with a fine hook, which is pictured here.
If it comes out with the hook, or else try to remove it with a fine, flexible blind fishing line. If it does not come out with that, then make a copper tube and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal properly.
Seal what is around the tube with softened pitch so that the wind has no path except through the tube, then draw it with your breath in a strong pull and it often comes out this way. If it does not come out as we have described, then take a little mastic gum or prepared birdlime used to catch birds and place it at the end of the rod.
After wrapping it tightly with cotton, then insert it gently into the ear canal after drying the ear from moisture. If it does not come out with everything we have described, hurry to incise before a hot swelling or spasm occurs.
The description of the incision is as follows: you should first make a cut on the patient's temple and let out blood according to his strength. Then, sit the patient before you, turn his ear upwards and make a small incision at the base of the ear near its cartilage in the lowest part.
The incision should be crescent-shaped until you reach the stone, then remove it as best you can with instruments. Then quickly sew up the incision and treat it until it heals.
If the object that has fallen into the ear is one of the grains that swell and become engorged, try to remove it as we have mentioned. If it does not come out, take a fine, delicate scoop like this.
Try to cut that type of grain that has fallen into the ear with it, but only do so if you are certain that the grain has become moistened by the ear's vapor until it becomes many small pieces. Then remove them with a blind syringe or a fine forceps or by suction.
As we mentioned, it is easy to remove it. As for water that has entered the ear, the patient should first sneeze with a reed, having filled his ear with some soft cotton while lying on the ear that contains the water; if it comes out that way.
Otherwise, take many smooth, flat pebbles the length of your fingers and warm them slightly in a fire. The patient should insert one of these into the hole of his ear, leaning on one leg from that side and striking another stone against the stone in the ear.
He should continue to do this with stone after stone until all the water comes out. The water may also come out by taking a blade of grass or a feather and inserting one end into the ear, while burning the other end with fire so that most of it is charred; then repeat with another feather.
Do this several times until all the water comes out or draw it out with a tube as mentioned previously in the case of calculi. As for removing the animal inside, look and see if it is small-bodied like a flea or similar. If so, treat it as I have mentioned in the section on division.
If its body is large and perceptible to the senses, try to extract it with forceps and hooks. This is easier than anything that becomes lodged in the ear. As for extracting worms generated in the ear, if you have treated them as mentioned in the section on division in the article on catarrhs, and your treatment has not been successful.
You should then look into the ear in the sunlight. If some of the worm appears to you, extract it with forceps or fine hooks. If nothing appears, take a tube shaped like this:
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, insert the narrow end into the ear as far as the patient can tolerate, then suck strongly. Do this several times until all the worms come out. If they do not come out for you, seal around the tube with wax as I have mentioned to you in the case of calculi.
If they do not come out as mentioned, use the catarrhs that I have mentioned, which were tried by those who came before to kill worms. You will find this in the article on catarrhs. Pour your ointments and medicines into the ear with this instrument: and this is its shape:
As you see, it is made of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, and wide at the top. If you wish, the cannon in the inside of the tube can be made of solid brass. If you wish, you can take a lead pipe and wrap cotton tightly around its end.
Then pour the ointment or juice or whatever medicine you want into the tube while it is in the ear. Then insert the lead pipe with cotton from above and squeeze it moderately with your hand until the ointment is driven into the auditory canal and he feels it.
Pour into the ear of the patient, and let what you pour in have been slightly warmed in the fire; be careful that what is poured into it is not too cold or too hot, for the ear cannot bear it.
Chapter Seven.
In the Treatment of Deafness Affecting the Ear.
Some children may be born from their mothers with their ear canals not pierced.
It may also happen that some people have an obstruction in the ear canal from a wound or growing flesh, and this obstruction may be deep within the ear hole, undetectable to the sight.
It may also protrude slightly from the hole and be visible, but what occurs deep in the ear and is undetectable by sight is usually difficult to cure. What is visible should be treated by placing the patient's ear in the sun. Examine it, and if you see the obstruction, open it with a delicate perforator which has this form:
Its tip should be slightly wide, and the rest of the perforator smooth on both sides so as not to injure the ear. If the obstruction is flesh that has grown in the ear canal, grasp it with a fine snare and cut it off carefully until all the flesh is removed.
If the obstruction is deep in the ear, take a fine, smooth probe, heat it slightly in the fire, and insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the obstruction and the patient experiences difficulty hearing, gently push it.
Be careful not to injure the nerve of the ear, and then place in the ear a wick equal to the width of the hole, having saturated it with Egyptian ointment. Continue this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed or take a wick, soak it in water, and sprinkle powdered glass on it.
Use this, and if you see that the ear has become swollen and inflamed, remove the wick and replace it with another one saturated with a liniment made of rose oil so as to soothe the inflammation, and then treat it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use all the treatment that stops the aforementioned bleeding mentioned in the article on catarrhs.
Chapter Eight.
In the treatment of warts that appear on the eyelids.
These warts that appear on the eyelids may be wet or dry, so they should be grasped with forceps or a snare and cut at their base with a scalpel, then powdered alum should be applied to the area.
If blood flows from them, cauterize it with a gentle lentil-sized iron, preferably after cutting. It often recurs if anything remains of its root. If cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter Nine.
In the treatment of cold affecting the eyelids.
It often appears in the eyelids something resembling a cold in its intensity and stiffness.
This is why it is called a cold, which is a gathering of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelid. The procedure is to examine it. If the swelling protrudes on the surface of the eyelid and moves in all directions, then its treatment is easy: make a transverse incision over it.
Then carefully peel it off from all sides until you are free of it, and hook it with a snare and cut it. If you cannot cut it except after penetrating the eyelid, this will not harm the patient at all. If the incision is large, bring it together with stitches and treat it until it heals.
If it is small, there is no harm in leaving it, as the ointment will bind and seal it. If the swelling is inclined towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, turn the eyelid over and hook the swelling with a snare without needing to make an incision, and cut it from all sides.
If you cut the eyelid, it will not harm anything. Then wash the eye after cutting away the bandage with salt water and treat the area with something that heals until the patient recovers.
Chapter Ten.
In the treatment of ophthalmia that occurs in the eyelid.
Ophthalmia is a redness that occurs in the layers of the upper eyelid and it mostly affects boys. It weighs down their eyes and makes them susceptible to colds at night, and they are unable to look at sunlight. So that tears flow quickly to them.
Therefore, you see them leaning on their faces always and sleeping on them, with their eyelids wet under the eyebrows, swollen, and the ophthalmia clearly visible. When you press the area with your fingers, you feel the ophthalmia between them. The procedure is to have the patient place his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a wick from it, making a circle from that wick large enough to enclose the ophthalmia on all sides. Place it over the ophthalmia and press with your fingers on all sides to gather the ophthalmia in the center of the circle.
Then cut in the center of that moisture with a lancet, making a horizontal incision no larger than the one made during venesection. In depth, however, you should cut through all the skin until you reach the ophthalmia.
Often, the ophthalmia will protrude from the incision in the form of a white lump of fat. Grab it with a cloth wrapped between your fingers and pull it outward while turning your hand right and left until it is removed. Be careful not to widen the incision lest the lancet touch the eye and injure it.
If the ophthalmia does not appear in the first incision, you should carefully widen the incision slightly until it emerges. Then grasp it as we have said, and soak a cloth in vinegar and water, place it on the area, and bind it with a bandage. Some people crush salt instead.
And place it in the wound so that the remaining moisture dissolves, then treat it until it heals. If a hot swelling occurs at the site, treat it with cooling poultices until it is healed.
Chapter Eleven.
On Kinds of Ocular Cauterization.
If excessive eyelashes grow on the eyelid, beyond the natural course, beneath the normal lashes and become inflamed, they will harm the eye and cause various diseases such as constant tearing, relaxation of the eyelids, leukocoria, and opacity, to such an extent that it may lead to blindness.
Cauterization of the eye is performed in four ways: either by cautery with fire, or with a caustic drug as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery; or by excision and suture, or by means of a reed, as I have already described.
You should place the patient's head in your lap and then flip the eyelid with your left hand. If it flips, that is sufficient; otherwise, insert a needle with thread from below the eyelid and pass the needle with the thread through from above. This should be done near the eyelashes themselves. Draw the thread upward along the eyelid.
Turn it with a speculum, then incise the inner part of the eyelid without the excess eyelashes using a scalpel from the larger forceps to the smaller ones. Then loosen the thread and place a small dressing of cotton or linen underneath the eyelid. Finally, apply a bandage to the eyelid with mastic.
Make it like the shape of an ace leaf, but the shape should be according to how much you want to lift the eyelid because people differ in this; some may need you to cut a suitable amount from the eyelid depending on how relaxed it is.
Others may need less, all depending on the relaxation of the eyelid. Then incise with a scalpel along the lines you marked, starting from the larger forceps to the smaller ones. Each incision should be near the natural eyelashes and about the width of a speculum.
Then the snare is inserted into one of the corners of the skin, then it is peeled off completely, then the two lips are brought together with a needle and a fine woolen thread, the blood is wiped away and what remains of the threads is glued onto the eyebrows with something sticky.
If you wish to do so, or else it does not matter, then the stitches and threads remain for about three or four days, then it is treated, and if you wish you could leave the wound without stitching and treat it with what dries and constricts, for the eyelid rises when the wound is closed and joined, and stitching is better.
This method of cauterization, which was mentioned by those who came before, has a benefit for the patient and is a good procedure with no danger. There is another method of cauterization as well, which is to draw a shape on the eyelid like the shape of an oleaster leaf, as we have described. Then the eyelid is lifted with three forceps, which are either separate or grouped in this way:
Then what remains of the eyelid is cut with a small pair of scissors in this way, cutting moderately:
If you cannot hold the forceps and they do not stay in place for you, then take a needle with thread in it and insert it into the middle of the shape, insert another thread near the larger angle and a third thread near the smaller angle, then gather the threads between your fingers moderately and lift them up moderately with your hand.
And lift the whole marked skin as we have described, then bring the two lips of the wound together with stitches and treat it until it heals. If a hot tumor appears when you cut or make an incision, soothe that tumor with cerate and other cooling ointments.
It may also happen that the lower eyelid turns inward, and what we have mentioned should be used for cutting, stitching, cauterization with fire and with caustic drugs, and cauterization with fire or with caustic drugs is more effective and lighter on the patient than cutting and stitching, and cutting and stitching are better in them.
Cauterization with sugarcane is done in this way: you turn back the eyelid and make an incision on the inner side as described before, then make two canes or thin pieces of wood as long as the eyelid and narrower than a lancet.
You cut their ends on both sides where the threads will be attached, then carefully bring them together on what remains of the eyelid and tighten the canes from both sides very tightly, leaving them for several days. The stretched skin will die, turn black, and rot.
It will fall off on its own, but if it is delayed, cut it with scissors and then treat it until it heals. When the wound unites, the eyelid will rise and the eyelashes of the eye will not sink. This is an image of the canes, made in this shape and size exactly in length and width:
Chapter Twelve.
On raising ingrown eyelashes from the eye with a needle.
If it is one or two hairs, the procedure is to take a fine needle and thread a very fine, smooth silk thread through it. Then gather both ends and tie them into a very delicate knot, the length of the thread being about a span long.
Then attach another thin thread to the needle, shorter than the first one, and tie both ends if you wish. Have the patient place their head in your lap, preferably near sunlight so that the work can be clearly seen, as it is a delicate procedure. Then insert the needle with the thread through the base of the ingrown hair.
Quickly push it through the eyelid until it emerges above the natural hair, then pull the thread up toward the needle and thread that ingrown hair into the needle's eye if there is only one or two, or at most three.
Then pull your hand upward so that the hair comes out with the needle in the eyelid along with the natural hair. If you pull on the needle and the hair does not come out, pull the needle down with the thread you attached to it until the needle emerges from the upper hole.
Then return the hair to it and pull them, do this until it rises in the upper hole and you see it with your eye. Then loosen the forceps and the thread and pull them out, tighten the eyelid and leave it tight for two or three days until the hair is fixed in its place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add a long hair from natural hair to it so that it rises with it, or leave it until it grows after a while, and then lift it.
Chapter Thirteen.
In the treatment of a sty that occurs in the upper eyelid.
The sty that is exposed to this is called a chalazion, and this sty can be either natural or accidental, the accidental one being from the healing of a wound, a scratch, or something similar.
The procedure for treating it is to cut that induration, separate its lips, and place a wick of linen between them, tying it until it heals. It should not be treated with things that dry and constrict.
For if you do that, the sty will return worse than before, but use things that soften it, such as fenugreek and a compress with water in which hyssop and flaxseed have been boiled, and a diachylon plaster dissolved with some ointment, and apply it to the wick and treat it.
The goal of treating it is to try every way to prevent it from healing in the shape it originally had, and this work we mentioned is only some improvement of the sty, not returning the place to its original condition.
Chapter Fourteen.
In the treatment of a sty that occurs in the lower eyelid.
This sty, which is from below, is truly called a hordeolum and can be either natural or accidental. The accidental type is from a wound, scratch, burn, or something similar.
The way to work with it is to take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left armpit to the right armpit until the thread is at both ends of the flesh. Then you pull the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a wide chisel.
If the eyelid returns to its proper shape, otherwise you take a pledget and place it on the incision site and turn the eyelid with it, making two incisions in the inner side of the eyelid. The ends of the incisions should be from the corners of the cuts that were made until they meet, forming an angle. Until they come together, its shape will resemble this shape: .
It is the shape of the Greek letter lambda, then you remove that flesh so that the sharp side of it is lower than what follows the eyelid, then you bring together the separate parts with two sutures sewn with wool thread and then treat them with the softening and loosening medicines we mentioned until it heals.
And if the rupture appeared from a cut, stitch or burn, then a simple incision should be made without hair on the eyebrows as mentioned above, then the lips are separated with a twist as we mentioned.
In summary, when treating a rupture whether it is from above or below, you should proceed according to the shape of the rupture as it presents itself, for it may vary greatly in appearance and the skilled craftsman will find a way by any means possible.
So that the shape returns to its natural form or approaches it, and the same disease will guide you to what is suitable for it in terms of work and instruments in most cases.
Chapter Fifteen.
On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea.
This adhesion may occur in many people, with the upper eyelid adhering to the white of the eye, preventing it from moving easily and hindering its natural functions. Therefore, you should insert the end of a pledget under the eyelid.
Raise it upwards or extend it with a thread, then cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel, not one sharpened for cutting but rather slightly blunted so as not to alarm the patient during the procedure, lest the scalpel slip and injure the eye with its sharpness; your cutting should be like peeling away that adhesion.
And anticipate that once the eyelid returns to its natural state and the adhesion heals completely, you should then pour saline water into the eye to wash it, or drip a solution of zangari ginger in water; afterward, separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen wick.
Place over the eye a compress moistened with egg white, and after the third day, use softened poultices until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
On Excising the Chalazion and Removing Fleshy Growths.
A chalazion comes in two types: either it is nervous, resembling a thin, firm membrane; or it is non-nervous, resembling a solid, white lump. If iron touches it or a thread attempts to grasp it, it breaks apart.
Neither type allows a thread to be passed through it; both begin at the larger conjunctiva and gradually spread until they cover the viewer and obstruct light and eye movement.  The procedure for excising them is as follows: have the patient rest their head in your lap.
Then have them open their eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand; grasp the chalazion with a slightly curved thread and extend it upwards. Take a needle, insert a horsehair or cowhair and a strong thread into it, and bend the tip of the needle slightly. Insert the needle into the center of the chalazion.
Pass the needle through, tie the thread around the chalazion, and pull it upwards. Peel away the side of the chalazion adjacent to the iris using the hair as if spreading it out to its end. Then cut the remaining portion at the base of the conjunctiva with a fine scalpel or small scissors, leaving the natural conjunctiva flesh intact.
So that there may not be continuous tearing from the piece cut, and the cicatrix may extend with the thread alone or with a string as we have said. Then the smooth-edged knife is used to peel off the end of which this is the image:
And take care that the knife does not touch the corneal membrane, for a perforation would be made and the pupil would dilate. Then after the cut, put into the eye some powdered salt or ginger powder, and leave it until the next day, then treat it as is proper until it heals.
But if the cicatrix is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle into it nor fix a thread there, this type of cicatrix is often treated with medication and heals as described in the section. If you wish to cut it, open the eye of the patient.
And take a delicate smooth-edged knife, weak at the point, like this: And pare the cicatrix from above with delicacy. If you see that it loosens and crumbles, and the paring has only affected it, put in the eye at once some ginger powder or red pepper or powdered salt. Bind the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the process until it is all gone, unless you encounter a hot swelling in the eye. Leave it and treat the hot swelling until it heals. Then repeat the paring until it is healed. As for fleshy growths...
If the growth pains the eye severely, suspend it with a thread and cut off some of it, but do not overdo the cutting lest there be continuous tearing. Then put ginger or pepper into the lachrymal sac until it heals.
Chapter Seventeen.
On Cutting the Pterygium and Excess Flesh That Grows in the Eye.
Sometimes red flesh grows on the eyes of some people until it covers the pupil or comes close to it, or overflows onto the eyelids. The eyelids may even turn outward and resemble a pomegranate flower.
The procedure involves the patient placing their head in your lap and then opening their eyes, while you grasp all of that red flesh with suitable forceps.
Or you may hold it with a clamp or forceps, and then cut the flesh one by one until all of it is gone, while preserving the eye so that it is not harmed during the procedure. Your cuts should be made either with the scalpel we described for cutting eyelashes, or with small scissors. Like those used to pluck hairs, as will be shown in the chapter following this one.
Once you have finished cutting and all the growth is gone, fill the eye with pounded salt or drop into it red lead or a similar caustic medication. Apply cotton wool soaked in egg white to the outside of the eye to prevent hot inflammation.
If some of the growth remains, and bleeding is profuse and you fear hot inflammation, leave the eye alone and treat it with something that will soothe the inflammation. Then return to work on it until it heals. Do the same for any excess flesh of this type that appears in the eye.
However, you must avoid treating any weak eye, either by nature or appearance, with iron instruments and do not put your hand to any of these procedures until you are sure that the organ can tolerate it.
Chapter Eighteen.
On Plucking Hairs From the Eye.
Hairs are red vessels that grow on the eye, preventing vision and weakening it over time.
Then comes the ligature, which is to order the patient to place his head in your lap and then suspend those veins with one or two silk threads according to your skill. The threads should be fine and capable of bending in this manner:
Or they may be double threads in a single strand, in this manner:
Then, with fine scissors, carefully cut those veins and wipe away the blood from time to time until you see that the eye has lost those veins and the blood has clotted. Be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the scissors, and work facing the sun during daylight hours.
And be very steady in your work so as not to cut anything other than those veins. When you are finished, cauterize the eye with green or red vitriol, so that its sharpness will consume whatever remains of the vessels. If you cannot ligate them all at that time, bandage the eye with something that soothes it.
Leave it for several days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling disappears, then repeat the procedure in the same manner until this image of the scissors is gone.
Leave it [with the patient's head in the lap of the student, and another wiping away tears and ensuring clear vision at the front and back of the eye], and know that the principle in this work is to open the eye with fixed or triangular clamps held by a student.
Gaze intently, with the patient's head in the lap of a student and another wiping away tears and ensuring clear vision at the front and back of the eye. You have the choice to begin the ligature from the top or bottom of the eye;  it is preferable to first tie two threads on the upper side, one at the end of the ciliary body and the other at its beginning.
Hold them between the middle and index finger, then suspend threads underneath opposite them. Hold these with the ring and little finger, lightly lifting your hand until you see all the vessels have risen. Then cut them off with the smallest scalpel if you choose to use a scalpel, or with a fine probe if you prefer.
And insert the needle holder into the needle and elevate all the paths until it rises above the skin, and do not cut the conjunctiva for tears and blood will obscure you.
Then cut with the scissors what exceeds the limbus from above and below so that nothing remains protruding except in the cornea, for if you are able to raise it from the cornea, remove it with the needle holder, this is best, and it may become available in some people.
And if you cut it, it will be shaved for a few days, its pain will subside and the hot swelling will disappear, then resume working on it.
Chapter Nineteenth.
On Returning the Feather to the Nose.
Physicians call the feather a nasal suppressor if they treat it with cautery or with a sharp burning medicine, as previously described, and it does not heal; there is no remedy in this case except to incise the swelling when ripe and extract all the moisture or pus within it.
Until the bone is exposed, and if you see decay or blackness in it, scrape it with an instrument of this form:
It is called a rough-headed scraper, made of Indian iron and its head is round like a button, engraved with a fine file or eskalfash mark. Place it on the decayed part of the bone, then turn it between your fingers while slightly pressing your hand until you know that the decay has been removed.
Do this several times, then bind the area with drying astringent medicines. If the area closes and flesh grows in it, and if the discharge stops for a period of forty days and does not recur or become inflamed, and no incident occurs.
Then know that it has been cured, otherwise there is no remedy except to return the nasal suppressor to the nostril in this manner: expose the bone again with iron or a sharp medicine. Once the bone is exposed, take a spatula of this shape:
The end of the iron should be triangular, and its shaft conical, brought to a point at the end, as you see. Then place it upon the bone itself near the tumor and a little distance from the eye with your hand.  Then turn your hand with the instrument until the bone is pierced and the patient feels it.
If he feels the wind coming out when he puts his hand on his nose, then bind the place with drying astringent medications as I have taught you. And if the flesh grows and the place becomes firm, then the matter that was flowing outward will return to the nose, and this will be easier for the patient, God willing.
Chapter Twenty.
Returning a Protruding Eye.
If the eye protrudes entirely and no defect or deficiency has occurred in vision, then you should soothe the patient and then fix him in a head bandage, then apply a collar to the neck without fail and suck gently.
Then place a poultice on the eye made of acacia, patience, frankincense, and myrrh, then bind the eye tightly over the poultice with many bandages; the recipe for the bandages is to take many soft rags and fold each one into four folds, making many of them.
Then place them one on top of the other according to the eye's need, and bind tightly with a strong rag. Then replace the collar with suction without fail, then remove the collar and leave the eye bound for a day and a night.
If the bandage loosens during that time, it should be tightened again. Then remove the bandage after a day and a night as we said. If you see that the eye has returned, otherwise repeat the poultice, bandages, tightness and collar until it returns.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On Cutting a Cataract.
If a rupture occurs in the lens layer, then protrudes and emerges outside the eyelids, resembling an onion, and disfigures the human form, and you wish to cut it out, proceed as I describe.
It is done by inserting a needle into the base of the abscess from below upwards, then inserting another needle with a doubled thread into it from the side of the ulceration and passing it through, leaving the first needle in place.
Then the place where the doubled thread bends is cut and some of the abscess is tied around the needle, which is then tightened well. The needle is then removed and wool moistened with egg white is placed over the eye and left until the threads fall off with the abscess, after which the eye is treated with something that strengthens it.
Until the wound is healed, and the abscess may be tightened from all sides with a circle of cloth so that the eye becomes more prominent, then it is treated with a thin probe that reaches into the depths of the eye, so that the egg-white moisture flows out and the eye descends and softens in its place, then it is tightened until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On the Treatment of a Cataract.
This ailment, which is called a cataract, is a fluid-like substance that gathers in the eye but is not actually water. The procedure for this involves having the patient sit upright on a chair and then taking their head in both of your hands.
You move it until you see the fluid descend downwards with your eye, and then fix it so that it does not move again. Then light is released and the patient can see things as they used to. If the fluid does not descend, we know that it is water. If the descent of the fluid is not possible as mentioned,
then seat the patient in front of you, and take a thin probe and make a small incision above the corneal membrane at the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane in the limbus, so that the substance is expelled.
Once it has been expelled, pour hot water into which honey or boiled licorice and honey have been added into the eye. Then treat it with all other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter twenty-third.
We have mentioned the types of water in the division and which is suitable for washing, with detailed explanation, so take it from there according to its correctness. Then, the patient should sit in front of you, squared towards the light near the sun.
Tie his sound eye and pull it tight, then raise the eyelid of his eye with your left hand if the watery eye is the left one or with your right hand if the watery eye is the right one.
Then place the tip of the syringe near the limbus, with the thickness of a reed, in the same white part of the eye from the side of the smaller pupil, then push the syringe firmly while turning it with your hand until it enters the white of the eye and you feel the syringe has reached something empty.
The syringe should go to a depth equal to the distance from the pupil to the edge of the black, which is the limbus of the eye. Since the copper you see in the same way that the viewer sees it due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, then turn the syringe upward to the place where the water is.
Then press it down again and again, if the water comes out from its hour, then the patient will see what his sight has opened from its hour, and the syringe in his eye, then rest for a while. If the water rises, lower it again without taking the syringe out.
If it settles and does not rise, carefully take out the syringe while twisting your hand a little, then dissolve a little fine rock salt in water and wash the eye from inside, then put mashed linen or a damp cotton wool on the whole eye outside.
Anoint it with rose oil and egg white and tie it with the sound eye. As for us and the people of our time, we put crushed cumin with egg white on it. If the syringe does not enter the eye due to its hardness because some people have very hard eyes… It is necessary to take the scalpel which is called a briquet, which has this shape:
Then pierce it with the briquet only, and do not deepen the hole; rather, gently touch the point of the instrument to a suitable place on the ligature, then insert the trocar as we have mentioned. When your work is complete, prepare the patient lying firmly on his back in a darkened room.
He must abstain from all movements and coughing, and his food should be what softens by nature. He should not move his head right or left at all. The bandage should remain in place until the third day, then it is loosened in that darkened room, and his sight is tested.
Show him objects, then reapply the bandage until the seventh day. This should not be done during or after the operation, but rather it should be avoided before the water rises quickly due to intense gaze.
If a hot swelling appears, the eye bandage should be loosened before the seventh day and this should be remedied with what soothes the swelling until it subsides; then release his sight and place a veil over his face that trains his vision from underneath for several days while he is in that darkened room.
He should then gradually leave the house and behave normally. Know that a learner cannot dispense with observing this procedure many times before performing it himself. I have heard from some Iraqis that one of them said he makes in Iraq a perforated trocar that absorbs water.
I have not seen anyone in our country make this, nor have I read about it in any of the books of our predecessors. It may be a recent innovation. Here are images of different types of trocars so that he can learn about them:
It is made of copper, specifically, and its tip has this exact shape, triangular and sharp.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
In the Treatment of Flesh Growing in the Nose.
Various kinds of excess flesh may grow in the nose, some resembling many-legged scorpions and some being cancerous, hard flesh of a dark color, and some being soft flesh not of a dark color.
Now, as for this flesh which is soft and neither malignant nor cancerous, the patient should sit before you facing the sun, open their nostrils, and have a thread passed into that flesh. Then draw it out and cut off what it has grasped with a fine, sharp scalpel from one side only.
Continue doing this until you are sure that all the flesh is gone. If some remains that you cannot cut, scrape it off carefully with one of the fine instruments so that nothing is left. If blood overcomes you or a hot swelling appears,
treat it accordingly. If, however, the tumor is malignant, quickly remove it so that the bleeding stops and all the flesh is gone. Then pour vinegar and water or a drink into the nose. If the nose opens and the moisture flows down to the throat.
Know that it has been cured. But if the moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is flesh still growing at the top of the loose bones which the instrument did not reach in cutting.
Then take a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and tie many knots in it, spacing them out by the width of a finger or less. Let the patient insert the end of one thread into his nostril with a rod or whatever else is possible after fashioning it like a needle, and draw on it gently until it reaches the cartilage.
It will come out at the back of his throat. Boys in schools often do this sort of thing, and it is easy for anyone who wants to learn. Then gather both ends of the thread: the one that came out of the mouth and the one that remained in the nose.
Then use the ligatures in the thread to spread the flesh, doing this until you know that the flesh has been cut by the thread ligatures. Then remove the thread and after wiping away the blood, place a wick in the nostril which has been soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment consumes all that remains of the flesh, then the last thing in the nose will be a lead tube for several days until it is healed. If it needs drying treatment, use that.
This is a picture of the syringe with which ointments and medicines are dropped into the nose.
It is made of silver or copper, resembling a small lamp with an open pouring spout and channel.
And if you wish, make the tube closed like a reed and the syringe's pouring spout flat.
It has a handle at the end, as you see, which is held when the fat or whatever juices or liquid substances are heated in it.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On Vegetable Warts at the Tip of the Nose.
A wart often grows at the tip of the nose, increasing in size with time until it becomes unsightly.
Therefore, it should be cut off as soon as it appears, and its entirety eradicated. Then apply either cauterization or a burning medication that acts in place of cautery to the area. If cutting it was delayed until it grows large, examine it; if it is hard, petrified, dark-colored, and insensitive.
Do not apply iron to it, for it is a cancerous tumor. I have often seen this tumor cut and the result was great suffering for the patient. If the tumor is soft to the touch and not dark-colored, and you see that cutting can be done completely. Then drain the wart and cut it without hesitation or fear, treating the area with drying and astringent agents until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Six
On the suturing of the nose, lip and ear. If the connection of one of them becomes separated due to a wound or something similar, know that when separation of connection occurs in one of these cartilages, it rarely allows for successful work except in some people.
So, when one of these things occurs, see if the wound is fresh and bleeding. Bring the lips of the wound together by suturing and then treat it until it heals. But if the separation has made both sides complete, you should flay each side to the thickness of its outer skin until it bleeds.
Then bring the lips together by suturing, tighten them and place powdered myrrh and frankincense on top. Put a plaster of naphtha ointment or other prepared ointments over it and leave it tight for two or three days, then remove it.
Change the dressing and leave it until the stitches fall out on their own, then treat it with ointment until it heals. As for the suturing technique, bring the separated connection together either with needles as we described in suturing the abdomen or with thread as we explained there.
Chapter Twenty-Seven
On the removal of nodes that appear on the lips.
It may happen to many people that small, hard tumors appear inside their lips, some resembling a carnation seed and others smaller or larger. So you should turn the lip over and cut it open at each node, then hang them from a thread.
Cut them from all sides, then fill the area after cutting with powdered borax until the bleeding stops. Gargle with vinegar and salt, and treat the areas with astringents until the wounds heal.
Chapter Twenty-Eight
On Excising Superfluous Flesh in the Gums.
Very often superfluous flesh grows on the gums which the ancients called an aphtha. It should be hung by a thread or grasped with forceps and cut at its base, then the wound is allowed to bleed freely or the blood is wiped away, after which powdered alum is applied to the spot.
Or one of the astringent dried herbs. If that flesh returns after treatment, which it often does, cut it again and cauterize it; for it will not return after cauterization.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On the Extraction of Teeth with Iron.
It may happen that rough, ugly scales collect on the surfaces of teeth, both inside and outside, and between the gums. These scales may become black, yellow, or even green, until decay sets in and affects the gums, thus spoiling the appearance of the teeth.
The patient should sit before you with his head resting in your lap. You must then extract the molars and teeth which show scales and anything resembling sand, until nothing remains. Do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and so forth, until they are cleansed.
If all the deposits are removed at the first extraction, well and good; otherwise repeat the extraction on another day, and a second and third time until you achieve your purpose. Know that molars require various types of forceps, shaped in many ways, according to what is presented for your work.
This is because the forceps used to extract a molar from the inside are different from those used to extract it from the outside, and those used between molars have yet another shape. You should have several types of forceps ready at hand, all prepared:
Chapter Thirty.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
You should treat a toothache with every remedy and delay extraction as much as possible, for there is no substitute if it is removed; since it is a precious entity. Even if extraction becomes necessary, proceed cautiously.
If the patient is determined to have it extracted, you should ensure that the toothache has subsided. Patients are often deceived by pain and think it is in the correct tooth, so they have it extracted, but the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is removed. We have seen this done by barbers many times.
If the toothache is indeed in that tooth, then you should mark around the tooth with a strong forceps to loosen the gums from all sides, and then move it with your fingers or delicate pliers, at first little by little, until it loosens.
Then, when it is loosened, grasp it firmly with large forceps, the patient's head securely between your knees so that he does not move, and then pull the tooth straight out so as not to break it. If it does not come out, take one of those instruments, insert it under it from all sides gently, and shake it as you did before.
And if the tooth is carious or decayed, you should fill that cavity with a rag and tightly plug it with the end of a thin probe so that it does not break when you pull on it with the pliers. You must carefully examine the gums around all sides.
Take care not to break it, for some of it may remain and cause the patient more suffering than his original pain. And beware of doing what ignorant barbers do in their haste to extract it without using what we have described.
They often inflict great evils on people, the least of which is that the tooth breaks and all or part of its roots remain. Or they may extract it with some of the jawbone, as we have seen many times. After extraction, rinse with a drink or vinegar and salt. If bleeding occurs from the site, which often happens, then crush some alum and apply it to the site.
Otherwise, cut it out if the borax does not help. The image of the delicate callipers with which to move a tooth first has long prongs and a short handle, thick so that they do not bend when you grasp the tooth. This is an image of the large callipers:
It should be as you see, with a thick handle so that when you grip it, it does not give way or bend. The prongs should be short. Make it of Indian iron or of well-tempered steel. The ends should be squared off, and on the end there are teeth which fit into one another so that they grasp firmly and tightly.
The prongs may also be shaped like a file, for a firm grip as well.
Chapter Thirty-One.
On the Extraction of Tooth Roots and Removal of Broken Jawbones.
If after extracting a tooth, a root breaks off, you should place cotton wool soaked in butter on the spot for a day or two until it relaxes, and then insert a probe or callipers. Like those with tips resembling the beak of a bird called a "pleurisy," and this is an image of the callipers:
It should be made like a file on the inside or like a scalpel. If this instrument does not succeed in removing it, you should then excavate around the root and expose all the flesh with a spatula, and then insert an instrument resembling a small pestle, such as is shown in the following image:
It should have a short, slightly thick end and not be squared off, lest it break. If the root comes out with this, well and good; otherwise, you should resort to these other instruments, which are shown in the following image: the first is triangular at the end, and somewhat thick:
An image of another delicate triangle:
We may also use this instrument with two prongs, which is also shown in the following image.
And other instruments and tools mentioned in the inventory of dental extractions, we may also use this tool which resembles a large fishing net, as shown in this figure:
It is triangular with a bent end, slightly thickened so as not to break, and it should be unsharpened. Know that dental instruments are numerous, as are all other instruments, and can hardly be counted. A skilled and experienced craftsman may invent for himself instruments according to what the work and diseases themselves indicate.
For there are diseases for which the ancients did not mention instruments due to the variety of their types. If a bone in the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth breaks or decays, search for it in its place with what is suitable from these instruments and forceps mentioned for extracting roots.
We use this pair, as shown:
It should be slightly thickened so that it can grip the bone and not let go until the bone is removed. We then treat the area with appropriate medications. If the bone has decay, remove the decay and pus until it is clean, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
On spreading erupted teeth that are not like others.
If teeth erupt in an unnatural position, they become unsightly, especially if this happens in women and delicate individuals. It should be examined to see if the tooth has erupted behind another tooth.
And if it cannot be spread or moved back, extract it. If it is stuck to another tooth, cut it with this instrument, as shown in this figure:
It resembles a small beak and should be made of very sharp Indian steel.  Cutting should be done over many days due to the hardness of the tooth, so as not to disturb other teeth. If, however, it is loose and amenable to being cooled, cool it with this type of cooling instrument, as shown in this figure:
Let the entire instrument be of steel, and its engraving from it very fine, like the file with which needles are made. Cool the tooth little by little over many days gently so that the tooth is not loosened and falls out, then smooth it finally and strip it with some files.
And if a tooth has broken off some of it and it hurts the tongue when speaking, then it should also be cooled so that the roughness of the break goes away, and it becomes level and smooth so that it does not hurt the tongue nor spoil speech.
Chapter Thirty-Third.
On fixing movable teeth with silver threads or gold threads.
If the front teeth become loosened and movable from a blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew anything to eat lest they fall out, and they have been treated with astringent medicines without success.
The solution is to tighten a gold or silver thread, with gold being preferable because silver oxidizes and rots after a few days, while gold remains unchanged. The thread should be of medium fineness and thickness according to what fits between the teeth.
To illustrate the splinting, take the thread and insert its bend between the two sound teeth, then weave the ends of the thread between the movable teeth, one or more, until the weaving reaches the sound tooth on the other side.
Then repeat the weaving back to the side where you started and tighten your hand gently and skillfully so that they do not move at all, making sure the thread is tight at the roots of the teeth so it does not come loose. Then cut off the excess ends of the thread with scissors, gather them together, twist them with a small tool and hide them between the sound tooth and the movable tooth.
So that it does not hurt the tongue, then leave it tightened as long as it lasts. If it loosens or breaks, tighten it with another thread. In this way one can enjoy it for life. This is a picture of the teeth and the splinting method in two sound teeth and two movable teeth, as you see:
A single tooth or two may sometimes fall back into place and become fixed as we have described, but this is only done by a skilled craftsman. He may carve bone from the bones of an ox, fashion it into the shape of a tooth, and insert it into the space where the tooth has been lost. It is then securely fastened as we have said, and he will enjoy its use.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
On cutting the frenulum which appears under the tongue to prevent speech.
This frenulum which appears under the tongue may either be natural, with which a person is born, or accidental from a wound that has healed.
The procedure is to open the patient's mouth, place his head in your lap, and then raise his tongue. Then cut the frenulum across with a scalpel so that the tongue can be released from its hold. If there is some stiffness and complexity, and if this is from a healed wound, insert a probe and split it across until the frenulum breaks and the knot dissolves.
Be careful not to make the incision too deep into the flesh, as you might cut an artery there and cause bleeding. After the cutting, rinse with rose water or vinegar and cold water. Then place a linen wick under the tongue for the patient to hold in his mouth every night.
So that it does not heal again. If bleeding occurs, apply powdered alum to the area. If the bleeding persists, cauterize the spot with a lentil-shaped iron suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with all other remedies until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On removing a frog that has developed under the tongue.
Sometimes a tumor resembling a small frog develops under the tongue, preventing the tongue from functioning normally and perhaps even growing so large as to fill the mouth. To treat it, open the patient's mouth facing the sun and examine the tumor.
If you see it [the tumor] dark in color or black, hard and the patient feels no sensation in it, do not interfere with it, for it is cancerous. But if it tends towards whiteness and has moisture, insert a probe into it and cut it with a delicate scalpel, clearing it from all sides.
If blood overwhelms you while you are working, put powdered alum on it until the bleeding stops, then return to your work until you remove it completely. Then gargle with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with all appropriate remedies until it heals.
Chapter the Thirty-Sixth.
On the Treatment of Tonsil Tumors.
And whatever grows in the throat of other tumors may appear within the throat glands resembling those that appear externally, called tonsils, and if you treat them with what I mentioned in the division and they do not heal.
See if the tumor is hard, dark in color and with little sensation, do not interfere with it with an iron instrument. And if it is red in color and its origin is thick, do not interfere with it either with an iron instrument for fear of bleeding, but leave it until it matures, then either cauterize it or it will burst on its own.
But if it is white, round and its origin is soft, then this is what should be cut. The work is to look before working whether its hot inflammation has completely subsided or decreased somewhat.
Then seat the patient facing the sun with his head in your lap and open his mouth. Have a servant press his tongue down with an instrument, its shape is as follows: .
Make it of silver or copper, thin like a knife. When you press with it on the tongue and the tumor is revealed to your sight, take a probe and insert it into the tonsil, drawing it outward as much as possible without pulling any membranes with it.
Then cut it with an instrument whose shape resembles scissors, but its two ends are curved, and the edge of each is opposite the other and very sharp. It is made of Indian iron or Damascus steel.
If this instrument is not available, then cut it with a scalpel, which looks like this:
Sharp on one side and blunt on the other, after cutting one tonsil, cut the other in the same manner. Then after cutting, the patient gargles with cold water or vinegar and water.
If he experiences bleeding, gargle with water in which pomegranate rinds or bay leaves or similar astringents have been steeped until the bleeding stops, and then treat it until it heals. Sometimes other tumors may grow in the throat besides the tonsils, and these are cut out as described for cutting the tonsils.
I treated a woman for a tumor that had grown inside her throat, extending towards the uvula with little sensation; it was almost blocking the throat. The woman was breathing through a narrow passage and it had prevented her from eating or drinking water.
She was close to death if she had remained that way for a day or two, and the tumor had grown two branches that protruded from her nostrils. I acted quickly and inserted a probe into one of them, then pulled it, removing a suitable piece.
Then I cut it where I reached it from the nostril, and did the same with what protruded from the other nostril. Then I opened her mouth, pressed down her tongue, and inserted the probe into the same tumor and cut out some of it. There was only a slight amount of bleeding.
The woman's throat opened up, and from that moment she was able to drink water and then eat. We continued to cut away at that tumor repeatedly for a long time, the tumor regenerating what was removed; it was a long ordeal for both of us.
I treated a growth inside the throat by cauterization, and it stopped increasing; then I traveled to another place, and I do not know what God did with it afterward.
Chapter the Thirty-Seventh.
On Excising a Swelling of the Tonsils.
If a swelling descends into the tonsils and becomes white and oblong, it is called an "Amud" (pillar). If it is thick at the bottom and round, it is called an "Anba" (grape). If it is treated as described in our section on division and does not respond to treatment.
I saw a hot swelling subside and become thin, so it should be cut out. But if any part of it was gathered and round, or if it lacked length, or was blood-colored, leaden-colored, black, or insensitive, it should not be cut out.
There is danger to the patient in this, so if you see it with the characteristics of whiteness and length as mentioned, the patient should sit facing the sun and press their tongue down with the instrument previously described. Then a ligature should be inserted into the swelling.
It should be drawn downwards and cut off with one of the two instruments mentioned for excising tonsils.  Only that which exceeds the natural condition should be cut, because if you cut more, you will injure the voice and speech.
After cutting, the treatment we described for excising tonsils should be applied until it heals. If the patient refuses to have it cut out, a cauterizing method should be used, without fear or hesitation. The method of cautery is with a caustic drug; put the patient's head in your lap.
Then press their tongue down with the instrument we mentioned and take some of the caustic water, as described in the chapter on cautery, mix it into a paste, neither too thick nor too thin. Fill a hollow cavity in this instrument – and this is its shape: [Image of a surgical tool]
Its end, where the medicine is to be placed, should be concave like the bowl of a spoon. You place the instrument with the medicine on the wound itself, and the patient should lie on his side so that saliva flows from his mouth and nothing goes down his throat to harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine, pressing it on the wound for half an hour until you see it has turned black and the sting of the medicine has subsided. If you wish, you may take cotton wool, wrap it around the end of the rod, and soak the cotton wool in the medicine.
Insert the rod with the cotton into a tube from above until the cotton adheres to the wound. Repeat this several times until you have reached the desired cauterization. Then leave it; it will shrivel and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reapply the medicine, prepare it again.
After cauterization, wipe around the cautery with cotton soaked in butter and dry the medicine around it. Then gargle with cold water and treat externally with poultices and internally with gargles until healed. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and far less frightening.
The wound can also be treated with something gentler than cautery and cutting: treat it with fumigation in this manner. Take fennel, asafetida, marjoram, saffron, wormwood, chamomile, quince seeds, and similar herbs; gather them all or some of them in a pot and immerse them in vinegar.
Boil it, and place the pot on a wise man's brick base; there should be a hole in the middle of the lid. Mount a hollow instrument on this hole, made of silver or copper.
Insert the end with the rose into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the wound through the tube until the wound softens well; then repeat this several times until it softens.  Avoid performing this treatment at the very beginning of the swelling.
For it often increases the swelling, but it should only be done when the hot tumor is subsiding. If this instrument is not available to you, take a reed and fix an eggshell at its end so that the patient's mouth does not burn.
Because the eggshell prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, and this is a good treatment with its safety.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
On extracting thorns and what becomes lodged in the throat besides them.
A bone or fishbone, or something else often becomes lodged in the throat; therefore, you should extract what is visible and seen after pressing down on the tongue with an instrument under the sun.
So that what is in the throat will become clear to you, and what has not appeared to you and remains hidden in the throat.
Or he swallows a mouthful of dry bread, or takes a piece of soft sea sponge, ties it in a string, then swallows it. When it reaches the place of the thorn, he quickly pulls the string several times.
Often the thorn or bone will stick to it and come out; if it does not come out as mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this shape:
It is slightly thicker than a plumb and at its end there is a bend which the patient inserts into his throat gently while raising his head upward, and he refrains from touching his larynx lest coughing should occur, and he pushes with it the bone or thorn; or the doctor introduces it with his hand.
And the patient's introducing it is better, because of his knowledge of the location of the object that is embedded, and he pushes it down or pulls his hand with the instrument up, all according to what he can manage until it comes out.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
On the Removal of a Fishbone Lodged in the Throat.
If you have treated the fishbone as mentioned in the section on treatment with medication and it has not been successful, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight after pressing his tongue down with the instrument that has been described to you.
If your sight falls upon the fishbone, then draw it out with a small fishing line or a delicate pair of tweezers; if you are not able to do so, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat as near to the fishbone as possible, then insert a heated iron into the inside of the tube.
Do this several times, and the patient abstains from water all day; then he takes a large cup filled with cold water, opens his mouth into it, gargles, and does not swallow a drop of it, moving the water from time to time with his hand.
If the leech falls on the place when it feels water, if it does not come out as we described, then burn the throat with urine and with a cautery using the instrument that was described in the chapter on burning. Do this several times, for it will fall off.
The method of using incense is to take a container in which there are hot embers heated by fire, and the container is covered with a lid in which there is a hole. Then the end of the instrument is placed into that hole and incense is thrown on top. The patient places his mouth on the end of the tube and closes it so that the incense does not come out until he knows that the incense has reached his throat.
If the leech falls on the place, then if it does not fall off, incense is repeated several times and the patient endures thirst and eats salt and garlic and does not drink water; it is certain that it will come out with this treatment. This is a picture of an instrument with which to draw out a leech from the throat when sight falls upon it.
It resembles callipers as you see, except that it has this protrusion which enters the throat and its ends resemble a bird's beak with roughness like a file so that when it grasps something it does not let go.
And there is another instrument with which to press down the tongue, it is a wide ring of iron as large as the mouth above the tongue. It enters the mouth upright on its side so that the mouth remains open against the will of the patient and he cannot remove it at all until it is removed.
Describe the instrument with which to open the mouth in exactly this manner.
Chapter forty.
In it, discussion is made about cutting and opening abscesses.
There are many types of tumors, diverse according to what will be mentioned one by one in this book. They differ in their incision and opening in two ways: one is the type of tumor itself and what it contains of humors.
The second type is according to the places in the body where it occurs, for a tumor that occurs in the head is not like a tumor that occurs in the buttock, and a tumor that occurs in a fleshy place is not like a tumor that occurs in a joint; each one has a rule of treatment.
Some tumors should not be incised except after the maturation and completion of pus in them, and some should be incised while they are still immature, such as tumors that are close to the joints.
For if a tumor occurs near a joint and its matter continues until it becomes putrid, it may corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, thus becoming a cause for lameness of that limb, or the tumor may be near a principal member.
For if you delay its incision until it matures, you would thereby injure that principal member; or it may be near the buttocks, and you incise it while still immature, for it is necessary to incise a tumor that is still immature and not completely ripe when it is near the buttocks so that it does not become putrid and spread into the inside of the buttocks and become dangerous.
And it may reach a point where it does not heal, and you should know the time for incising tumors that have matured completely, which is when the pain of the tumor subsides, the fever goes away, the redness and throbbing decrease, and the head of the tumor becomes hardened along with all other signs.
The incision should be made at the lowest part of the tumor if possible, so that it is easier for the pus to flow downwards, or in the thinnest and most prominent part of the tumor. The incision should run lengthwise in the body if the tumors are located on the hands or feet.
Avoid making the incision over muscles, tendons, nerves, arteries, and in general, all flat places where there is no bending; as for those that bend, let the incision go according to that place. And if the tumor is in fleshy places, it is best to leave it un incised.
Until it is fully matured as we have said, for if you incise it before that, the pus will flow from it for a long time and be foul and dirty, and perhaps its lips will become rigid and swollen, and some tumors may be incised across the body when necessary or according to what the member requires.
And one incision should be used in small tumors, and a wide incision or many incisions according to the size of the tumor in large tumors, and some tumors may need to have their skin scraped and cut if it has become like rag.
And it has reached a certain point where it died as is shown in many abscesses and fistulas, some of which are cut with a three-cornered incision, and some are cut from it in the shape of an ace of spades like the Arabic sore.
And some use a round incision and a crescent incision and the like, and if it does not have a head like smooth flat tumors, it should only be incised with a simple incision. If the tumor is large and has been accumulating for a long time and you have incised it, do not hasten to let all the pus out at that time.
But draw some of it out, then tighten the tumor to another day, then draw out some more pus, and do this repeatedly gradually until it all comes out.
Especially if the patient is weak or a pregnant woman or a young child or an old man, for the animal spirit often dissolves with the sudden exit of pus, and the patient may die without you realizing it, so be extremely cautious in this matter.
And after you have incised these tumors, you should wipe the wound and look; if the tumor's wound is small or the incision was a simple one, use a bandage of linen or soft cotton, but if the tumor is large and there are many incisions.
It is necessary to insert a thread into each incision so that they reach each other, and if some of the tumor has been cut from the skin or dried up, it should be stuffed with absorbent cotton or tow linen without moisture and tightened until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals. If bleeding occurs while you are working, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a linen cloth in them and applying it to the bleeding site several times.
If the bleeding persists, you should use the measures, treatments and necessities that we have described in many places in this book and in the division. If it is wintertime and the tumor site is highly innervated, soak the bandages in a warm syrup and oil.
And place them on the site. If it is summer and the sites are hot, soak the bandages in water and oil or syrup and oil, all cold, until the third day as we said. Then the tumor should be dissolved and rubbed.
Use what seems appropriate for its treatment until it heals. This is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general. As for the detailed method, I have mentioned how to treat each tumor summarized and categorized.
Chapter Forty-One.
On the incision for tumors that appear on the scalp.
Small tumors appear on the scalp, and they are of a sac-like nature containing membranes, as if they were a chicken's pouch. There are many types; some are fatty, and others contain moisture resembling slime.
Some contain moisture resembling broth or soup, and others are hardened and calcified. All of them are safe to incise and remove unless you encounter an artery during the incision.
The operation on opening it consists first of probing it with the instrument whose form follows this, which is called a director, in order to learn its contents. If what it contains is moist, it should be opened lengthwise with a simple incision as shown:
Begin the incision from line ~B~ to line ~J~, and when the moisture has drained away, peel off the sac which contained it and cut it all away, leaving nothing of it at all, for it often recurs if anything of it remains.
Then dip cotton in soft ointment if available, or else in salt water, and fill the wound with it, leaving it until the following day, for it will consume what remains of the sac. Then reapply the cotton with Egyptian ointment a second and third time if necessary.
Until you are certain that nothing of the sac remains, and then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. But if the tumor contains fatty matter, open it as follows:
Make a firm incision, holding the edges with forceps, and peel it away from all sides. Strive to remove the peritoneum which contains it. If you encounter an artery, do as I have described above. Do the same in the tumor if it is hardened from the incision.
The treatment is the same as I have described, and the incision on the hardened tumor is easier because it has little blood and moisture. Some of these tumors in the head of some people have no moisture at all. For example, when I opened a tumor...
... in the head of an old woman, I found the tumor hard as a solid, rough stone, white and impossible to break; if someone had thrown it, it would have shattered. And none of the other tumors occurring in the head were like this except for those which occur in the heads of boys.
And when it comes to the roots of the ears, split them all with a simple incision and make its base from its underside so that the passage of matter goes down easily, then treat it with what is appropriate for its treatment.
The Forty-Second Chapter.
In the incision on pigs that are exposed in the neck, these tumors often appear in the neck and under the armpits and in the thighs and may appear throughout the body. The one that appears in the neck is usually singular, while those found elsewhere are multiple, some arising from others.
Each pig has its own peritoneum as it is in the hernias and head tumors as we have described, and there are many types of these pigs: some are petrified, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
I have not seen one in good condition when touched, and its appearance was close to the color of the skin. It moved in all directions and was not attached to the neck nerve or the jugular vein or any artery, nor was it sunken. It should be incised with a simple incision from above to below the body in this shape, from line ~J~ to line ~B~.
And peel it from all sides and stretch the lips of the skin with a forceps or two forceps or many if needed as we said in head tumors, and extract it little by little and be careful on the neck not to cut a vein or nerve, and let the scalpel not be too sharp.
Lest your hand increase the cut or agitate the patient and you cut what you do not need to cut, if you cut a vein or artery and it prevents you from working, put powdered alum in the wound or some astringents that stop bleeding.
Tighten the wound and leave it until the sharpness of the tumor subsides and the wound relaxes, then consider putrefaction, for the blood will stop then, so return to your work until you are done, then search with your index finger if there are any other small pigs left, cut them and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the base of the wart, it should not be cut off from its base. Instead, it should be tied tightly with a doubled thread and left until it falls off on its own without harm. Then the wound should be stuffed with clean cotton that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment and treated thereafter.
If the entire wart is cut off, the lips of the wound should be brought together and sewn up immediately after you are sure that there is no remnant at all. If you see that a remnant of the wart remains.
You should aim to cut it off at its base and foundation and use the suturing as we have mentioned. And if any of the warts contain moisture, cover them with a simple plaster where the ripening spot appears to you and place the plaster below as we said.
Then after the plaster, use a bandage with Egyptian ointment or similar to consume what remains of the corruption until you see that the wound has become clean and treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth so that it heals.
Chapter Forty-Third.
On the incision of the larynx for a tumor occurring inside the throat.
The ancients mentioned this incision in the larynx and I have not seen anyone in our country perform it, and this is according to their words. As for those with angina, they should avoid an incision in the larynx as they will not benefit from it.
This is because all the veins and lungs will be diseased, but for those with a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils, if there is no cause in the trachea, it is necessary to use an incision in the larynx to escape the disaster that comes from choking.
If we want to do this, we should cut the larynx under three or four small incisions in width between two circles as much as the incision is in the peritoneum and not in the cartilage. This location is suitable for the incision.
Because it is devoid of flesh and blood vessels are distant from it, if the operator is timid he should stretch the skin of the throat with a string and then cut the skin until he reaches the trachea, avoiding blood vessels if he sees any.
Then he should cut the peritoneum as we have described, and infer the cutting of the trachea from the phlegm that comes out of it along with its bubbling and cessation of voice, leaving the wound open for a time. If the time in which he feared choking passes, he should gather the lips of the wound from the skin.
And he should suture it alone without cartilage, then use medicines that promote flesh growth until it heals. The author of this book said: the interpretation of this whole statement which we have mentioned is only if they see the patient's throat obstructed by one of these tumors which we have mentioned.
And if the patient is on the verge of death and intends to die, they should proceed to cut the larynx so that the patient can breathe on the wound for a while and be saved from death, but they are commanded to leave the wound open until the course of the disease is completed, and its course is about three days.
Then they are commanded to suture the wound and treat it until it heals. I myself have witnessed a servant girl who took a knife and ran it across her throat, cutting some of the trachea. I was called to treat her and found her dying like a slaughtered animal. So I exposed the wound.
I found that the blood coming from the wound was slight, so I was certain that she had not cut an artery or a vein, and the air was escaping from the wound. So, I sutured the wound and treated it until it healed.  Nothing else happened to the servant girl except for a hoarseness in her voice.
And she returned after a few days to her best condition. Therefore, we say that cutting the larynx is not dangerous.
Chapter forty-fourth.
On the incision for the tumor that appears in the tonsil from outside, which is called elephantiasis of the tonsil.
This tumor, which is called elephantiasis of the tonsil, is a very large tumor the color of the body and it is common in women and it is of two types.
Either it is natural or accidental. As for the natural, there is no remedy for it, and as for the accidental, it is of two types, one resembling fatty tumors, and the other resembling a tumor that results from the complication of an artery and its incision is dangerous. It should not be exposed to the iron at all except for what is small from it, if you probe and examine it with a speculum and find that it resembles a fatty tumor and is not attached to any of the veins, then cut it as you would cut a fatty tumor. And remove it with whatever sac it contains, if it is in a sac, otherwise extract all of it, and then treat the area as appropriate.
Chapter forty-fifth.
On the incision for types of tumors.
Tumors are of many types, and I have mentioned all their types in the division. It is necessary to tell here the difference between a tumor and an abscess, as it is problematic. I say that an abscess has heat, fever, and severe pains until the boiling of the pus subsides. And the putrefaction continues, at which time the fever and sharpness subside. A tumor is not accompanied by heat, fever, or pain. It contains a peritoneal sac, which is its own specific envelope, and it appears the color of the body. Its beginning is like a lentil seed, and it becomes like a melon, larger or smaller.
It is of two types: either fatty or containing moisture. The colors of the moisture are many, as I mentioned in the division. If you intend to treat a tumor, first probe and examine it with an instrument called a speculum, whose image will come later in the chapter that follows this one.
Determine the size of the tumor, then remove the probe and look at what comes out after it. If a liquid of any color emerges, make a simple incision as I have described for all other tumors. If no liquid emerges after the probe, know that it is fatty.
Make a firm incision on it in this manner as I have taught you, and hang it with forceps. Carefully peel the skin from every side and preserve the sac if possible so that it comes out intact with the contents.
If the sac is torn during the procedure and you are unable to remove it intact, which often happens, remove it piece by piece until nothing remains. For if any part of it stays behind, whether little or much, the contents will more likely return to its former state.
If you are overpowered and a little remains, severely cauterize the wound when finished with some sharp caustic agents. Tighten the wound and place something soothing on top of it to calm the hot tumor. Treat it with all other remedies until it heals. If the contents is large, cut its edges and treat them with what promotes healing.
If a throbbing or non-throbbing vein is encountered and bleeding occurs, immediately cauterize the area with powdered litharge and leave it tightened for two or three days until the wound becomes infected and the blood flow subsides. Then return to removing what remains of the contents.
Chapter Forty-Six.
On the Instruments.
There are three types of probes, used for incision and excision, large, medium, and small.
Image of a Large Probe:
Image of a Medium Probe:
Image of a Small Probe:
They are made of tempered steel, square-shaped and tightly fitted to facilitate entry into tumors. These are images of the dilators called "burds," also in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of a Large Dilator:
Image of a central probe.
Image of a small probe.
It is suitable for probing tumors, wounds, fistulas, and abscesses to examine their contents of bones and other things. It is made round, polished and smooth like whetstones, of Chinese copper or Spanish steel, or of copper, iron, or silver; the best are those made of Spanish steel.
Probes can also be made of black lead and are suitable for probing fistulas that have a bend in their depth, so that they can turn with that bend. They also come in three types: long, medium, and short.
Its thickness should be according to the width of the fistula, whether wide or narrow, and its length according to the depth of each fistula. Image of a large lead probe:
Image of a medium lead probe.
Image of a small lead probe.
Images of forceps, which are of many types: there are simple ones, meaning those with one hook, and these come in three sizes: large, medium, and small; there are also blind forceps, which come in three types; and there are forceps with two hooks, also coming in three types; and there are curved forceps with two hooks. And there are forceps with three hooks, also coming in three types. All of these types are needed in their respective places. Image of a large simple forceps: Image of a medium simple forceps. Image of a small simple forceps.
Image of a large blind forceps. Image of a medium blind forceps.
Image of a small blind forceps.
Image of a large forceps with two hooks. Image of a medium forceps with two hooks. Image of a small forceps with two hooks.
Image of a large pair of forceps with three prongs.
Image of a medium-sized pair of forceps with three prongs. Image of a small pair of forceps with three prongs.
These are images of the scalpels with which to incise and dissect flesh and tumors, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of a large scalpel:
Image of a medium scalpel.
Image of a small scalpel.
Its cutting edges are limited, and the other ends are not, so that they may be used in dissecting a tumor when there is fear of cutting an artery or nerve. This also allows the patient to grasp it and find some relief from the burning sensation experienced during the dissection of a tumor.
These are images of probes, which come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of a large probe:
They are made of copper, similar to the kohl applicators, and at one end there is a wide spoon-like part consisting of two layers, with the lancet blade hidden inside, resembling a bird's tongue; it can be moved in and out as desired, as you see.
These are images of lancets which are held between the fingers when puncturing tumors so that the patient does not feel them, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of a large lancet:
These are images of ligatures used to tie off bleeding blood vessels and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of the large ligature.
Make it from copper or from a round tin plate slightly elongated as you see, and it should be towards the softness. These types of basins should be large and small with you to cut blood quickly when necessary and when medicine is not at hand.
But do not use it in cutting blood in every place of the body, but rather use it in fleshy places such as the muscles of the leg and thigh, and the muscles of the arm, chest, abdomen, groin, and the like from fleshy moist organs.
And you can make other small instruments from it that resemble pistachio shells in this image: .
It cuts blood if it bleeds from a cupping place or when cutting a vein or artery. And you can make it round in this image: .
Chapter forty-seventh.
In the treatment of men's breasts.
Which resembles women's breasts, sometimes the breast of some people swells upon reaching puberty until it resembles a woman's breast, remaining warm and ugly. So whoever hates that, it should be cut with a crescent-shaped incision like this: .
From line ~b~ to line ~c~. Then peel off all the fat, then fill the wound with salty medicine, then bring the lips of the wound together with stitches and treat it until it heals. If the breast leans downward and relaxes to its bone as it happens to women.
It should be cut in its upper sides with two incisions resembling the shape of crescents, each connecting to the other at their ends so that the larger line surrounds the smaller one like this: . From line ~b~ to line ~c~, then peel the skin between the incisions, remove the fat, and use what we mentioned of stitching and necessities, and what it needs for treatment until it heals.
If you do not remove the necessary portion due to the patient's anxiety or bleeding, then you should pack the wound with cotton soaked in an escharotic ointment and leave it until it consumes what remains of the fat, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
On tumors that develop under the armpit.
These tumors that appear under the armpit are of a porcine type, solid and containing a sac; some contain moisture. If it contains moisture, then a crescent-shaped incision should be made as follows.
From line "~b~" to line "~j~". Once the tumor has emptied all its contents, pack it with dry cotton and leave it until the next day; then remove the cotton.
Treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals. If the tumor is of a porcine nodule type, incise it as we mentioned for incisions on pigs.  If the wound continues to discharge pus, then apply cauterization as we described previously.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
On incising a tumor that presents near an artery or vein, which is called an aneurysm.
If an artery is wounded and the skin above it heals, a tumor often develops; similarly, a vein may swell and develop a tumor.
The signs that indicate whether the tumor and swelling are from an artery or a vein: if it is from an artery, the tumor will be rectangular and located deep within the body; and when you press on the tumor with your finger, it will feel as though it has a pulse.
A tumor from a vein will be round and located on the surface of the body. Incision on these tumors is dangerous, especially those in the armpit, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body, as they are often very large; therefore, treatment with iron should be avoided.
And whatever of it is also in the extremities or in the head, it should be avoided. Whatever of it is an aneurysm of the artery, make a long incision in its skin and then open the incision with forceps, then dissect out the artery and free it from its adhesions.
Until it is exposed, then insert a needle under it and pass it through to the other side and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places as you were shown in the section on the two arteries that are in the fingers, then scoop out the spot between the ligatures until all the blood in it comes out.
And the swelling will resolve and then use treatment that produces pus so that the ligatures fall off, then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
But if the swelling is from a vein incision, then you should grasp as much of the swelling with the skin as possible with your hand, then insert a needle under the spot that you are grasping with your hand and pass it through with a double thread so that it comes out on the other side. Then tie the swelling well as I described to you tying the neck from both sides at the ends of the thread, and if you fear that the threads may slip, insert another needle with a second thread under the entire swelling where the first needle intersects.
Tighten your threads in four places, then make an incision in the middle of the swelling so that when what is inside comes out, cut off the excess skin and leave what was tied, then apply a dressing soaked in syrup and oil. Then use treatment with twisting and ointments until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
On the swelling that occurs from nerve torsion.
Just as swelling occurs in the artery and vein, so too does it occur in the nerve if there is a blow to it or excessive exertion or similar causes, and this is most common in the wrists and heels.
And in every place where the joints move, it is a soft tumor whose color resembles that of the rest of the body and which in most cases is painless. And if it is pressed hard, the patient feels a numbness similar to coldness, and the tumor is not located deep within the body.
It is under the skin and moves in every direction, not going forward or backward. And whatever part of it is located in the joints should not be treated with iron, for it may cause suppuration. And whatever part of it is located on the head or forehead.
Incise the skin with a scalpel, then if the tumor is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it from its base. And if it is large, hang it on a string and scrape it, then remove it and close the wound with stitches, treating it until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-One.
On Cutting Warts that Appear on the Abdomen.
It often happens that some people have warts on their abdomens and throughout their bodies, called fungal warts because they resemble mushrooms. Their origin is thin, and their head is thick, sometimes with split lips. They can be small or very large.
I once saw a man with two warts on his abdomen that looked exactly like mushrooms, with a thin white stalk sometimes splitting at the lips, and moisture constantly flowing from them. I cut them off and found one weighed about eighteen ounces and the other about six ounces.
To cut them, first observe if the patient is moist and if the warts are white, damp, thin-stalked. Cut it with a wide scalpel and have your cautery ready for there is often profuse bleeding when they are removed.
If bleeding becomes excessive, cauterize the wound immediately. If you find the patient cowardly and afraid of being cut with iron, take a strong lead thread and tie it tightly around the wart described above, leaving it for two days. Then increase the tension on the lead thread, continuing to tighten it.
Whenever a tumor is affected until it is severed and falls away from itself without pain, if the tumor is thick at its base there is some fear and risk in cutting it, especially if it is in the abdomen; but it may be possible to cut half of it or part of it.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return, and then treat it until the wound is healed. Beware of cutting a tumor that is dark in color, insensitive, and looks malignant for it is a cancerous tumor, and I will mention cancer after this.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
On the treatment of a scrotal hernia.
A scrotal hernia can be caused by many things, either from a rupture of the peritoneum on the abdomen, through which fat or intestine protrudes as is seen in other hernias, or from blood that wells up from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or from gas that collects within it.
If it is due to a rupture of the peritoneum and protrusion of fat, then the tumor will be a color similar to that of the body, soft, and painless; its appearance will be different. If it is due to the protrusion of intestine, then its appearance will be even more different than what we have described. If you press it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return; there may also be gurgling sounds. It increases greatly when entering a bath or during strenuous exertion. If it is due to moisture, it will be soft.
It does not disappear when pressed with your hand, and it neither increases nor decreases. If it is due to blood, along with these signs, the tumor will appear darkened. If it is due to growing flesh, then the tumor will be hard, fixed in size.
If it is due to gas, then touching it will feel soft.  The course of action in this case is to look and see if the scrotal hernia is due to arterial or venous blood, or gas; if so, you should refrain from treating it because there is danger and risk involved, as I have already informed you in the chapter where I mentioned tumors that occur from arteries and veins.
If the tumor is before the intestine or the bladder, it should be ordered that the patient hold himself and stand straight, then mark all around the tumor with ink. Then order him to lie on his back between your hands, and cut around the tumor with a wide scalpel on the spot marked with ink. Then extend the middle of the tumor upwards with a large snare, and tie the incision site with a strong thread or silk ligature tightly.
The ligature should be a knot, then open the middle of the drawn tumor above the ligature and insert your second finger. Search for the intestine; if you find it has been caught by the ligature, loosen the knot and push the intestine back into the abdomen. If you find a bladder, extend it with a snare.
Cut off its excess, and if you encounter an artery or vein, tie it firmly and return to your work. Take two needles and insert strong threads into them, enter the needles into the incision you made around the tumor, crossing each other; then tighten the tumor in four places on the needles.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the spot until the drawn flesh decays and falls off by itself, or cut it if it becomes thin and decayed. Then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals. If the tumor is fleshy and grows in it…
or from moisture, you should pierce the tumor as we said and remove the blood or moisture you find in it, then treat it with something that heals the area.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On the Treatment of Cancer.
We have mentioned in the division types of cancer and how to treat it with medicine, and warned against treating it with iron lest it ulcerate, and we mentioned cancer arising in the uterus and warned against treating it.
The ancients mentioned that whenever cancer is in a place from which it can be entirely removed, such as cancer which is found in the breast or thigh, and similar limbs capable of having it completely excised, especially if it is beginning and small; but if it has advanced and become large, it should not be approached.
I have not been able to cure anyone from it, nor have I seen anyone before me who has reached that goal.
Then set the tumor upright so that it can be worked on, then place the pincers suitable for it in the cancerous growth and grip it firmly from all sides with the skin being thoroughly examined so that nothing of its roots remains, and leave the blood to flow and do not cut it quickly.
Rather press the places and express all the thick blood with your hand or as much as you can with instruments, if, during your work, a great hemorrhage occurs from cutting an artery or vein, then ligature the vein until the bleeding stops and then treat it with all appropriate treatment until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On the Treatment of Fistula.
We have previously informed you of the types of dropsy and how the gathering of water occurs, as well as the signs of each type and its treatment with medicine; the type that is treated with iron is the sharp variety alone and the blunted variety and the fleshy variety are not treated with iron at all.
If that fails, and you have treated this sharp type of fistula with medicine and it has not been successful, then see if the patient is excessively weak or if he has another disease besides the fistula, such as…
coughing or diarrhea, and the like, then do not treat him with iron, for it is dangerous. If you see that the patient is strong and has no other disease except fistula alone, and he is neither a boy nor an old man, then proceed as follows: have the patient stand upright before you. and have a servant behind him press his belly with his hands and push the water downwards towards the groin, then take a pointed bistoury of this form:
limited on two sides, long and pointed at the end like a bistoury except that it has a slight bend so as not to go astray during the operation into the intestines and harm them, then observe if the fistula originated from the side of the intestines.
The incision should be made three fingerbreadths below the groin, in a line with it, above the pubis. If the hernia arose from liver disease, make your incision on the left side of the groin, three fingerbreadths away. If it arose from spleen disease, make the incision on the right side, three fingerbreadths away.
The incision should also not be made on the side the patient wishes to lie on so that pus does not flow into that weak spot. Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument and insert the instrument into the incision, raising your hand.
With the scalpel, separate the skin from the peritoneum as if you were peeling it off, a distance of about a fingernail or so. Then pierce the peritoneum until the scalpel reaches an empty space, which is where the fluid is located. Withdraw it and insert the instrument pictured here into the opening.
It is like a tube made of thin reed, fashioned from silver or copper or smooth polished boxwood, with a small hole at the bottom and three holes along its sides, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
Sometimes its end is fashioned into a sharp point like a writing quill, in this manner:
There is a ring at its upper end. When the instrument reaches the fluid, it descends from its hour to the instrument and drains a moderate amount of fluid because if you drain more than necessary in a given time, the patient may die from dissolution of his animal spirit.
Or he may suffer a fainting spell near death, but drain it according to his strength and what indicates this to you are the patient's pulse and complexion. Then remove the instrument and retain the fluid because it is retained by its hour.
This is due to the skin holding the hole in the peritoneum which you were instructed to close in that manner, then reinsert the instrument another day if you think the patient can tolerate it.
And a small quantity also comes out of the water, you do this for several days while on your neck and preserving from error until there is nothing left but a little water; if you are afraid for the patient and leave a lot of water, then treat him by burying him in hot sand.
And a lot of sweating in the bath and the sun and patience with thirst and treatment with drying medicines until he is cured, and it is cauterized on the stomach, liver and spleen after drawing out the water as previously described.
Chapter Fifty-Fifth.
In the treatment of children who are born with their urethra not pierced or the hole is narrow or in the wrong place.
Some boys may come out of their mother's womb with their urethra not pierced, so it should be pierced immediately upon birth.
With a very thin bistoury like this: .
Then place a thin lead pin in the hole and tie it down, holding it for three or four days, so when he wants to urinate, push it aside, then return it; if you do not put in the lead, it is possible that the urine that passes through the spot will not leave it open.
As for the one who has a narrow hole, it is treated with lead as we said for many days until it widens, and those who have the hole in the wrong place - some are born with the hole at the end of the urethra and cannot urinate forward.
Until he lifts his penis with his hand upwards, and it is not born before that the semen cannot reach the womb straight up, which is a very ugly cause, and the way to work on this is for the patient to lie on his back.
Then stretch his urethra with your left hand, tightly and cut the tip of the penis with a blade or a sharp bistoury the size of a pen, as if you were carving something so that its middle protrudes like an urethra, and the hole should be in the middle as it should be.
Preserve yourself from hemorrhage while working, for it often occurs; meet it with what severs the blood and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter fifty-six.
In the rupture which occurs in the scrotum, testicle, blackness and corruption and adhesion of the scrotum to the testicle.
This rupture often occurs in the urethra; it is a malignant fleshy growth, which may be benign or malignant.  The benign type should be suspended with a fine ligature.
Cut it until it is entirely cleansed, then apply cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment and subsequently treat it with palm ointment until it heals. If the rupture is malignant and dark in color, cauterization should be used after cutting and cleansing it.
If the rupture is in the scrotum of an uncircumcised man and part of it is inside the scrotum and part outside, you should first remove the part that is inside until it heals; then treat the external part.
Because if you treat them both together, you cannot be sure that the scrotum will not rupture. It may also occur in women and in the labia there may be blackness and corruption; you should excise all that has become black and threatens to corrupt or has already corrupted.
Then apply honey mixed with pounded and strained pomegranate rind and caraway seeds, and treat it with all usual remedies until it heals. If hemorrhage occurs, use a crescent-shaped iron to cauterize it as follows:
Cauterization is beneficial for both conditions, namely hemorrhage and a wound that has become corrupted. If the testicle becomes firmly attached and detaches entirely at one time, you should insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the patient can urinate on it.  As for adhesion of the scrotum to the testicle.
This adhesion occurs in those whose foreskin is intact and has not been circumcised, and it may occur due to a wound or tumor. It should be scraped off with a blunt probe until the ligament dissolves and the scrotum is freed on all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them upon examination, a portion of the scrotum and foreskin should be scraped off. The foreskin is thin, so it may easily be pierced due to its thinness. Then, separate the foreskin from the scrotum with a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
It is then treated with an astringent solution until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Seven.
On the Purification of Boys and the Treatment of Ailments Affecting Them.
Circumcision is nothing more than the separation of a connection, like other surgical procedures. However, since it is an act of our will and its use is particularly common in boys, we must strive to perform it in the best way possible.
The easiest path to safety, I say, is that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their writings because it was not practiced in their laws. It is something we have acquired.
This is through experience, for I have found that the majority of artisans and barbers use purification with a syringe and scissors, employing forceps and ligation with thread and cutting with a nail. I have tried all these methods.
I have not found anything better than purification with scissors and ligation with thread because purification with a syringe often causes the skin to retract, as the foreskin has two layers, and the upper layer may be cut while the lower layer remains.
This often necessitates another cut and renewed pain. Purification with forceps does not guarantee the cutting of the tip of the penis because it may enter the hole. As for purification with a nail, the skin may slip, ruining your work, or the boy's skin may be naturally short...
Very often they are born this way and do not need to be cleansed, and I have seen this. As for cleansing with scissors and ligature with thread, experience has revealed its benefit because the scissors cut proportionally due to the blade on top being like the blade on the bottom.
So when you squeeze your hand, the blades being proportional, cut to an equal measure and at the same time, so that the ligature becomes like a wall for the skin of the penis on all sides, and no error occurs with it whatsoever. The first step in this procedure is to trick the boy.
Especially if he is one who understands a little, you should make him believe that you are only tying the thread to his penis and leaving it until another day; then rejoice him and delight him in every way that he can comprehend, and then have him stand upright before you.
Do not have him sitting down; hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that the boy does not see them at all, nor any of the instruments. Then insert your hand into his penis and blow on the skin, lifting it upward until the head of the penis protrudes.
Then cleanse it of any filth that may have accumulated, and tie the designated spot with a doubled thread; then tie a second ligature a short distance below it. Hold the lower ligature firmly with your thumb and index finger, and cut between the two ligatures. Then quickly lift the skin upward and expose the head of the penis, and allow the blood to flow for a short time; this is best and least likely to cause swelling of the penis. Then dry it with a damp cloth and sprinkle dry, burnt pumpkin ash over it – this is the best remedy I have found, or alternatively, powdered orris root, which is also excellent.
Then quickly lift the skin upward and expose the head of the penis, and allow the blood to flow for a short time; this is best and least likely to cause swelling of the penis. Then dry it with a damp cloth and sprinkle dry, burnt pumpkin ash over it – this is the best remedy I have found, or alternatively, powdered orris root, which is also excellent. Then apply a poultice of cooked egg white beaten with rose water and fresh rose oil to the area; leave it on for a day, and then treat it with all the usual remedies until it is healed.
And this is an image of the scissors which are suitable for cleansing.
Let it be a sharp, straight-bladed pair of scissors with a nail file and let the length of the blades be equal to the length of the handles. As for the mistake that occurs during cleansing, it may turn the whole or part of the skin inward upon cutting, so it should be stretched from your moment with your fingernail before the place swells.
Cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, pull it with a string and cut it. If three days have passed and what is under the head of the hemorrhoid remains swollen and warm, leave it until the hot swelling subsides and then remove it gently.
Cut it according to what is available to you, and preserve the head of the hemorrhoid, for if some of the head of the hemorrhoid is cut off, it will not harm that, so treat it with what heals the wound from the necessities that we have described in the article on necessities.
And if some of the skin is cut off above the amount and it shrinks upwards, that will not harm much either, so treat it as we have mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Eight.
On the Treatment of Urine Retention in the Bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is due to its blockage by a stone or solidified blood or pus or growing flesh and the like, so if you treat that with what we have mentioned types of treatment described in the division.
And if the urine has not been released and you see that its retention is due to a stone previously harming in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be on his knees crouched, then ride a man on his back and extend his abdomen to his back, and let the patient himself hold as much as he can.
This will then force the neck of the bladder to push the stone back so that the urine is released. If it does not release as mentioned and the matter becomes severe for the patient, then you should use its removal with a device called a catheter, which has this image: .
It is made of silver, thin and smooth, hollow like a bird's feather quill in its delicacy, long to about a palm and a half, with a delicate funnel at its head. The way to attract urine with it is to take a doubled thread and tie a wick or cotton firmly at its end.
You insert the end of the thread into the bottom of the catheter and cut it with scissors so that a bit of the wick will enter the tube to block it like a plug. Then you grease the catheter with oil or butter or egg white, and have the patient sit on a chair.
You relax his bladder and urethra with moist ointments or warm water and oil, then gently insert the catheter into the urethra until it reaches the base of the urethra, then bend the urethra upwards towards the scrotum and push the catheter inside.
Until the urethra is bent, then push the catheter further inside until it reaches near the prostate gland. Then tilt the penis downwards with the catheter still inside and push it until it reaches the bladder. The patient will feel that it has reached something empty.
This is done in this manner because the passage through which urine flows has bends. Then, you pull the wick with the thread slightly tight so that urine follows the wick; then you remove it and urine will flow out; and repeat with another catheter.
You continue to do this until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter Ninety-Five
How to Inject the Bladder with Syringe.
The instruments suitable for this are made of silver or ivory, hollow with a long thin tube. You intend to drip water and medicine through it using an instrument called a syringe. This is its image:
It is made of silver or hollow ivory with a long tube on the narrow part, all hollow except for the end, which has three holes in it; two on one side and one on the other as you see.
The hollow space where the cannon is should be sized so that it is fully plugged, and when you pull something wet with it, it will be drawn in, and if you push it, it will be pushed away like what is done to the nozzle which throws oil in sea battles.
So if you want to introduce moisture into the bladder, insert the tip of the syringe into the moisture and draw it up with the cannon; the moisture will be drawn into the hollow of the syringe, then enter its end into the urethra as we described in the catheters, then push the moisture with the cannon.
That moisture will reach the bladder in its proper place until the patient feels it, and this is also a drawing of a delicate injector that injects the bladder:
It is made of silver or a spadroon, its top resembling a small funnel, and below it is a groove in which the ribbon is placed; then take a camel bladder and put the moisture you want to inject into the bladder in it, then tie it tightly between the grooves with a doubled thread.
Warm that moisture slightly over the fire, then insert the tip of the injector into the urethra and then pull your hand on the bladder with the moisture tightly until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you don't have a bladder, take a piece of thin cloth and make a circle out of it, pierce it all the way around, then insert a tight string into those holes as they rotate, then gather the circle as you would gather a tablecloth after putting what you want of moisture, ointments and water in it.
Then tie it into the apparatus and do with it as you did with the bladder, squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter Sixty.
On the Extraction of the Stone.
We have mentioned in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicine, and we have mentioned the difference between a stone generated in the kidney and a stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of all that, and we have mentioned the stone in which work is done by hand and incision.
It is the stone generated specifically in the bladder and lodged in the urethra, and I will describe it with a clear and concise explanation.
I say that the stone generated in the bladder is most common in boys, and among its signs is that urine exits the bladder resembling water in its thinness.
Sand appears in it, and its mention is scratched and tampered with, and it often dangles and then spreads, and the buttocks protrude with many of them, and boys are easily cured from it until they reach fourteen years old, and it is difficult in the elderly, while young men are moderate between that.
And the one whose stone is larger is easier to treat, and the smaller ones are the opposite. So if we turn to treatment, it should first be injected into the urethra with an injection that removes all the filth in its canal, for it may prevent the presence of the stone upon examination.
Then the urethra is taken with its legs, shaken and stirred downwards so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder or jumps from a high place several times, then he sits between your hands upright with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder becomes all sloping downwards, then examine it.
And feel it from the outside, if you feel the stone in the space, hurry up and cut it open, if it doesn't fall under your hand at all, then you should smear the index finger of your left hand with oil if the patient is a boy or the middle finger.
If it is a healthy boy, you enter it into his seat and search for the stone until it falls under your finger. Then you move it little by little towards the neck of the bladder, then press it with your finger and push it out towards the place where you wish to cut.
You order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand, and you order another servant to extend his right hand over the anus and with his other hand to extend the skin under the anus towards the place where the incision will be. Then you take the dissecting forceps whose picture is this: .
You incise between the seat and the anus, not in the middle but to the side of the left testicle, and the incision should be on the same level as the stone. Your finger is in the seat while you press it outwards so that the incision is wide from the outside and narrow from the inside, as much as possible for the stone to exit.
Do not press too hard, for perhaps the finger in the seat will press the stone at the incision and it will come out without difficulty. Know that some stones may have angles and corners, making them difficult to remove.
Some are smooth and resemble an acorn, they roll easily and it is easy to remove them. If the stone has angles and corners, you should enlarge the incision a little. If it still does not come out, you must trick it, either by gripping it with a tight forceps whose tip is like a file.
This will grip the stone so that it does not slip away, or you can insert a delicate instrument with a blunted end under it. If you still cannot remove it, widen the incision a little. If blood gets in your way, cut it with a scalpel.
If there are more than one, push the largest one into the bladder opening first, then incise over it. Then push the smaller ones afterwards. You do the same if there are more than two. If it is very large, know that making a large incision over it is ignorance because it exposes the patient to one of two things:
Either he will die or he will always have the continuous dripping of urine because the place will not join at all, but try to push it out so that it comes out whole or break it with forceps so that it comes out in pieces.
Then, when you have finished your work, cauterize the wound with frankincense and patience and a bandage and tighten it, and make a poultice over it moistened with oil and syrup or rose ointment and cold water to soothe the hot swelling, then let the patient lie on his back and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Then, when the bandage is removed, wash the place with plenty of water and oil, then treat it with nabath ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals. If there arises in the wound a hot swelling, redness, pain, or something similar, such as blood freezing in the bladder and urine being withheld from it, which is known by the blood coming out with the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will lead to corruption of the bladder and its suppuration; then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and treat each type according to its appearance until it heals.
And it is necessary during all treatment times to bind the thighs together so that the medicines placed on the spot are fixed; if the stone is small and has entered the urethra and become embedded there, preventing urine from exiting, treat it with what I have described before it reaches the incision.
I often dispensed with this treatment, as I have tried it, and that is to take a steel iron speculum whose shape is:
Triangular with a sharp end inserted into a handle, then take a thread and tie it to the penis under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, then gently insert the steel speculum into the urethra until the speculum reaches the same stone.
You turn the stone in your hand a little at a time while aiming to pierce it until you pass through it from the other side. Then urine will flow from its hour, and then you bind your hand on what remains of the stone outside the penis; it will crumble and come out with the urine, and the patient recovers.
If this treatment is not prepared for you, an obstacle prevents you from it, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone, then cut on the stone in the same penis between the ligatures, then remove it.
Then you loosen the ligature and cleanse the coagulated blood that has become in the wound, but it is necessary to tie the thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder and the other ligature above so that when the thread is loosened after the stone comes out, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to lift the skin upwards when tying the upper thread so that it returns upon your release and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter Sixty-One.
On Removing Stone for Women.
Stones rarely occur in women. If one of them suffers from a stone, its treatment is difficult and prohibited for many reasons, one of which is that the woman may be a virgin, and the second is that you will not find a woman who allows herself to be examined by a doctor.
If she is a virgin or one of those who are closely related, and third, you will not find a woman who is skilled in this craft, especially working with her hands, and fourth, the incision site for the stone in women is far from the stone's location itself, so it requires a deep incision.
There is danger in that. If necessity calls for it, then a female physician who is skilled should be taken, which is rarely found; if she is not available, ask for a chaste and kind male doctor or bring a midwife who is skilled in the affairs of women or a woman who has some indication in this craft.
She should then open it and order her to do everything she is ordered to do in the examination of the stone, starting with seeing if the woman is a virgin. If so, you should insert your finger into her vagina and search for the stone. If you find it, press it under your finger.
Then order her to be incised; if she is not a virgin and is old, order the midwife to insert her finger into the vulva of the patient and search for the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it very hard.
If she finds it, she should push it down from the mouth of the bladder to below as far as her strength allows until it reaches the base of the thigh; then incise her opposite the middle of the vulva at the base of the thigh from whichever side she feels the stone.
Her finger should not be removed from the stone while pressing it underneath, and the incision should be small at first; then insert the probe into that small incision. If she feels the stone, enlarge the incision as much as she knows the stone will come out of it. Know that there are many kinds of stones.
Some are small and some are large, some are smooth and some are rough, some are long and some are round, and some have branches.  Know their types so that you can determine what you want. If blood overpowers you, sprinkle powdered alum on the spot and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work.
Continue until the stone comes out, and make sure to prepare from the instruments mentioned for removing stones in men to help you in your work. If bleeding overwhelms you and you know that the pulse of blood is from a severed artery, place the ligature on the spot.
Tighten it with ligatures, tightening them firmly and leave it, do not tamper with it again; and leave the stone and do not remove it, for you may kill the patient. Then treat the wound. When the sharpness of the blood subsides after a few days and the area becomes infected, return to your work until the stone comes out.
Chapter Sixty-Second.
On incision for watery tumors.
Watery tumors are a collection of moisture in the white membrane that lies beneath the skin of the testicle surrounding the egg, called the scrotum. It may also be in a special membrane prepared by nature on one side of the egg.
Sometimes it is mistaken for another egg, and it occurs between the skin of the testicle and the white membrane we mentioned, but this only happens rarely. These tumors arise from weakness that afflicts the testicles, which then directs this material to them, or they may develop after a blow to the testicles.
This moisture can be of many colors; it may be yellowish, reddish, dark purple, or watery white, which is the most common. The signs by which it is recognized are…
Where water collects, if it is in the white membrane we mentioned, the tumor will be roundish and slightly elongated, like an egg. The testicle will not be visible because the moisture surrounds it on all sides.
If the moisture is in a special membrane, the tumor will be roundish on one side of the testicle.
Therefore, a person may mistake it for another egg. If the moisture is between the skin of the testicle and the white membrane, it will be palpable. To determine the color of the moisture, probe the tumor with the square-shaped instrument whose image precedes this passage; judge its contents by what comes out after probing.
If we turn to treatment with iron, the patient should be ordered to undergo bloodletting if he is able, and you see that his body is full. Then, he should lie on his back on something slightly elevated and place many cloths beneath him. You should then sit to his left.
Order a servant to sit to his right, extending the patient's penis to one side of the scrotum and toward the direction of the lower abdomen. Then, take a wide scalpel and incise the skin of the scrotum lengthwise from the center toward the perineum.
The incision should be straight and parallel to the line that divides the scrotal skin in half until it reaches the white peritoneum. You should then carefully dissect it, taking care not to cut it, and your dissection should be done more from the side that is adherent to the testis.  You should extend the dissection as far as you can.
Then widen the peritoneum filled with water using a broad instrument and evacuate all the fluid.  Next, separate the edges of the incision with specula and elevate the peritoneum upward, not touching the scrotal skin that contains it. Cut the peritoneum as much as you can, either in its entirety or in pieces.
Pay particular attention to the thin side, for if you do not thoroughly cut it, you will not be safe from the water returning. If the testicle protrudes outside its skin while you are working, and after you have finished cutting the peritoneum, return it to its place and then bring the edges of the scrotal skin together with sutures.
Then treat it like any other surgical wound until it heals. But if you find that the testicle is diseased from some other condition, then you should ligate the vessels in the spermatic cord to prevent bleeding, and then cut the testicle from the spermatic cord and remove the testicle. Then treat it as we have previously described.
If the collected fluid is on both sides, know that it is hydrocele in both.  Make an incision on the other side as you did on the first, and if it seems to you that the operation can be done as one, do so, then wipe away the blood.
Insert wadding that has been steeped in oil or rose ointment into the incisions, and place another layer of wadding that has been steeped in syrup and oil over the testicles. Observe the abdomen carefully and put a folded rag, which is called a bandage, on top. Tie it from above with a bandage that has six ends in this manner:
Then two cloths are taken, sewn together and stuffed with teased wool according to this example, and the ends by which it is tied are made of cotton or damp wool. They are gathered tightly in a trouser belt, and one end is taken to the buttocks up to the back.
The second is taken towards the groin, and the ends are placed on the thighs from below, and the remaining ends are placed on the armpits. All the tightening is gathered in a trouser belt. This truss may also be made by cautery instead of incision with an iron.
It is done by taking a fine, pointed iron and cutting into the skin of the scrotum, protecting it as we have described, until the white peritoneum containing water is exposed. Then take another iron like this:
It resembles a Greek eye, then apply it to the peritoneum while protecting it until all the moisture comes out. Then stretch the peritoneum with tweezers and scrape off the containing layer with the iron and cut it as much as possible so that you eradicate all of it and preserve the testicle, do not touch it with fire.
Know that this procedure is safer and further from bleeding and better than working with an incision. If, during the incision or cautery, you encounter a hot swelling, bleeding, or anything else, you should treat it as best suits the situation as previously described.
If the patient is cowardly and cannot endure this procedure because of its ugliness, let him use a bandage as I will describe, which if it proves successful for you according to the evidence we have presented.
Since the trusses are watery, the patient should sit on a high chair and then place the swelling below with a wide spatula, making the bandage long and the opening wide so that all the water flows out. Then place cotton on the spot and tie it.
Let him dress the remainder of the wound and then treat it until it heals. If water continues to seep out when you press it, this is because the white membrane obstructs the mouth of the wound and prevents the water from escaping.
Then you should insert a goose feather or the instrument with which water is extracted from lovers' ears, the illustration of which has been presented previously, or widen the opening of the wound slightly.
Know that water may return and collect again after six months or so; if it does, press it in the same manner and the patient should rest for a few days.
Chapter Sixty-Third.
On Incisions in the Flesh and Their Treatment.
Know that incision on these fleshy parts is a great danger, often leading to death; therefore, we advise leaving them alone and avoiding any interference. I shall mention the work involved and the types of swelling.
I say that many tumors may occur in bodies, composed of tissues similar to the testicles; these arise from various causes, either from excess humors flowing into the testicles or from a blow. The color of the tumor is the same as the body and it does not contain any fluid.
The tumor may be hard, and sometimes it is stony in texture, dark-colored, and insensitive; this can occur from the complication of arteries swelling as mentioned before, or from the swelling of veins. If the swelling comes from distended arteries, you will recognize this by the dispersion of the tumor.
If you press it with your fingers, nothing will disperse; this type should not be tampered with at all. As for the swelling that comes from distended veins, it does not dissipate when pressed by the fingers. This kind may be incised, along with all other flesh.
This involves making an incision in the skin of the scrotum, then pushing the testicle upwards and removing it from the white peritoneum. You must free the spermatic cord from its vessels, tie off the vessels, and cut the spermatic cord after freeing it from all sides of the testicle; if the testicle has adhered to those growing tissues.
The egg should be removed and cut. If the adhesion is between some of the peritoneal folds or between blood vessels, all of that adhesion should be freed and cut in a circular fashion.
If the growth of flesh is in the place of adhesion that is behind, it should all be cut and the egg removed as we said. Once your work is done, dress the wound abundantly with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with all other remedies until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Fourth.
On the Treatment of Adhesions with a Hernia.
A hernia is a twisted swelling, somewhat resembling a bunch of grapes, with relaxation of the intestines and difficulty for the patient in movement, exercise, and walking. The treatment of this condition is very similar to what has been mentioned previously.
However, it is necessary to mention the action taken by those who came before us. I say that the patient should sit on a high chair and then push the intestine down. Then grasp the skin of the scrotum with your fingers along with the vessels that are close to the penis.
Have an assistant grasp and stretch it firmly, then make a wide incision with a sharp knife, making sure the cut is in line with the vessels until the vessels are exposed. Then dissect them from all sides as I described to you when stripping the arteries in the groin. Insert a needle with a double thread into them.
Tie it at the first place where the hernia appeared, and also tie it at the end. Then make a vertical incision in the middle along the length of the body and remove all the foul and corrupted moisture that has accumulated there.
Then treat the wound with all the remedies you would use for any other surgery that requires time to heal. There is no problem if the vessels feeding one of the intestines are cut off, as long as there are enough blood vessels remaining to nourish it. If the hernia involves all the vessels, then one of the intestines should be removed along with its vessels so that the remaining testicle does not lack nourishment. If vessels are cut before they wither and are useless.
Chapter sixty-fifth.
In the treatment of intestinal fistulas.
This fistula occurs from a rupture which appears in the extended peritoneum on the abdomen towards the groins, where the intestines protrude from the hernia into one of the groins.
This hernia is either from a rupture of the peritoneum or from its extension, and these two types occur from many causes, either a blow, a jump, a shout, lifting something heavy, and so forth. The sign, if it is from an extension of the peritoneum, is that it occurs little by little over a long period.
And it does not happen suddenly, and the tumor is level to a depth because the peritoneum compresses the intestines, and the sign, if it is from a rupture of the peritoneum, is that it occurs from the beginning with great sudden pain and the tumor appears differently under the skin nearby.
This is due to the protrusion of the intestines and its passage outside the peritoneum, and sometimes the omentum protrudes with the intestines; this fistula is called intestinal and omental. It may also be with flatulence, and pus may flow in the intestines and become lodged there, resulting in the death of the patient.
This is because it causes severe pain and rumbling, especially if pressed, and treating these types of ailments with iron is dangerous and should be avoided. The treatment plan is to order the patient to return the intestines to their inside with his hand if they return.
Then he lies on his back between your hands and raises his legs, then you extend the skin next to the groin upwards and cut all the scrotal skin lengthwise, then insert speculums into the edges of the incision according to how much is needed to open it.
The incision should be as long as the egg can come out, then you dissect the peritoneal layers under the scrotal skin until the white, firm peritoneum is exposed on all sides. Then insert your index finger into what is behind the egg.
Between the white peritoneum beneath the tunica albuginea and the second peritoneum, adhesion is released behind the testicle. Then with the right hand, it is folded into the scrotum and simultaneously the white peritoneum is extended upward with the left hand, and the testicle along with the peritoneum is elevated toward the incision.
Order the servant to extend the testicle upward and you release the adhesion behind it completely, then search with your finger to make sure there is nothing of twisted intestine in the hard white peritoneum. If you find any, push it down into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread twisted from ten threads and insert it at the end of the peritoneum beneath the scrotal skin, next to the incision. Then cut the ends of the twisted thread so that there are four threads. Then interlock them on top of each other solidly and tie the peritoneum we mentioned as being beneath the scrotal skin tightly on both sides. Then wind the ends of the threads and tie them securely so that nothing from the vessels supplying it can reach it. This is done so that a hot tumor does not develop and also to make a second tie outside the first one, further away by less than two fingers. After these two ties, leave a length of peritoneum beneath the scrotal skin equal to the thickness of a bone.
This is done so that a hot tumor does not develop and also to make a second tie outside the first one, further away by less than two fingers. After these two ties, leave a length of peritoneum beneath the scrotal skin equal to the thickness of a bone. Cut off the rest entirely in a circular fashion and remove the testicle with it. Then make an incision below the scrotal skin that bleeds freely as described previously, and use wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound and apply the bandage we have described.
The white peritoneum we mentioned, after it has been cut, should be cauterized carefully to prevent bleeding which often occurs. Leave the bandage until it falls off by itself. If it is slow to fall off, soak it in hot water and apply something that makes it sweat so that it will come loose.
Then treat the wound with all surgical treatments until it heals.
Chapter sixty-sixth.
In these windy hernias, I have never seen anyone dare to treat them with iron. The ancients mentioned that it should be made as we described in the hernias with a femoral ring, which is to gently tie the vessels below after the incision.
Then make an incision in the middle and treat the tumor with what opens it so that the vessels fall out and treat the wound as we mentioned until it heals.
Chapter seventy-sixth.
In a hernia that occurs in the groin.
A hernia may appear in the groin, as we have said, where it occupies a place and none of the intestine descends into the scrotum. And if any did descend, it would be slight and would always return.
But if time passes, the fissure in the peritoneum increases so that the intestine and omentum descend into the scrotum, and this occurs from the extension of the peritoneum which, as we said, is found in the groin. And this happens because the peritoneum extends, then relaxes and the place swells and protrudes. Its treatment is with cautery as previously described.
It may also be treated with iron in the following manner: Let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then make a transverse incision at the warm hernia site, about three fingers wide. Then, suture the peritoneal layers beneath the skin.
Until the underlying white peritoneum is exposed, take a ligature and place it on the spot arising from the peritoneum, pressing it deep into the abdomen. Then suture the two spots arising on either side of the ligature to the peritoneum and sew them together.
Then pull the ligature end, do not cut the peritoneum at all, and do not touch the testicle or anything else as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal hernias. Then treat it with general surgical treatment.
If the threads break, they should be cleaned and the wound sutured until it heals. Then the peritoneum will contract and the hernia will not grow.
Silk is best in this place because it is closest to safety.
Chapter eighty-six.
In relaxation of the scrotum.
Often the skin of the scrotum relaxes in some people without the flesh inside relaxing, and its appearance is unsightly. Therefore, whoever wishes to treat it should put the patient on his back.
He should cut away all the relaxed skin on top of the tough skin, then bring together the two lips. If you wish to sew first, sew the excess relaxed skin with three or four stitches and ensure they are secure, then cut between the stitches.
Then treat it like all other surgeries until it heals and the stitches fall out.
Chapter ninety-six.
On castration.
Castration is forbidden in our law.
Therefore, I should not have mentioned it in this book of mine, but I did so for two reasons: one so that it would be known to physicians in case they are asked about it and know how to treat those afflicted by it; the other is that we often need to castrate some animals for our own benefit.
Such as rams, stallions, cats and the like of these animals. I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by incision and cutting. As for that which is done by crushing, its method is that we sit the animal in hot water until its testicles relax, soften and dangle.
Then crush them with your hand until they dissolve and are no longer discernible upon touching. As for castration by incision and cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand, then tie the cords and make one incision on each testicle.
Even if the two testicles protrude, cut them off after you have skinned them, and do not leave upon them any of the tunics except the thin tunic which is on the vessels; this kind of castration is better than that which is done by crushing.
For crushing may leave some of the testes so that the animal desires copulation, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
On the Treatment of Hermaphrodites.
Hermaphrodism in men occurs in two types, one of which is when it appears below the space or in the skin of the testicles between them, a shape as if it were a woman's vulva with hair and urine may flow from the one that is in the skin of the testicles.
As for women, there is one type which occurs above the vulva on the pudendum like a small man's testicles emerging outward, one of them as if it were a man's penis and the two resembling testes; and the treatment of the three types.
The two types in men and the one type in women should have that excess flesh cut off so that its trace is removed, then it should be treated with the treatment of all other surgical wounds until it heals. As for the second type in men from which urine flows that is in the skin of the testicles, there is no work to do on it nor any benefit at all.
Chapter Seventy-One.
On the Excision of the Clitoris and the Flesh Arising from the Vulvas of Women.
The clitoris may sometimes grow beyond the natural size until it becomes prominent and unsightly, and in some women it may even enlarge to such an extent that it resembles that of a man's and can cause copulation.
Therefore, the excess of the clitoris should be grasped with your hand or forceps and cut off, without being too deep in the incision, especially at the root so as not to cause bleeding.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds until it is healed, and as for the growing flesh, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
And perhaps it protrudes outward like a tail. Therefore, some of the ancients call it the taillike disease, so it should be cut off as the penis is cut off, and treated until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Two.
In the Treatment of Prolapsus.
Prolapsus is when a woman's vulva is not pierced or the hole is small, and it is either natural, with which she was born, or incidental, which arises from a previous cause. Incidental prolapsus comes from an excess of fleshy growth.
Or it is from thin or thick peritoneum, which may be found deep in the uterus, at its sides, above it, or below it, and it prevents intercourse, conception, childbirth, and sometimes menstruation. Recognition of this condition is made by a midwife through examination.
If the obstruction is visible and nearby, and if it is not visible, examine it with her fingers or a speculum. If the obstruction is from thin peritoneum and is close to the labia, proceed to pierce it. Do this by placing something resembling stirrups on the labia, then place both thumbs of both hands together.
The woman should be lying on her back with her legs spread, then stretch the labia forcefully until the thin peritoneum is pierced and the obstruction opens. Then take some wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the area. Have intercourse with the woman every day so that the area does not heal together again.
If the peritoneum is thick and dense, it should be cut with a wide spatula resembling an aspen leaf. If the obstruction is from fleshy growth, hang it with forceps and cut it off. Have pain-relieving medications on hand that do not cause burning, such as gum arabic, mastic, frankincense mixed together with egg white.
Then a wide lead tube is used so that the wound does not heal quickly, it is held for several days and a dry linen wick is used, then it is treated with all the treatment of fusion until it heals, and if another piece of flesh grows in the womb, it should be cut in this manner.
Unless it is a cancerous tumor, a cancerous tumor in the womb is not treated with iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Third.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts and red pimples that appear in the vulvas of women.
Hemorrhoids are a swelling of the veins until a lot of blood flows from them constantly, and if hemorrhoids develop, they become warts, and I have mentioned their types and signs in the classification, and we will mention them here.
What can be treated from it and what cannot be treated, I say that hemorrhoids and warts, if they are deep in the womb and do not appear to touch, there is no treatment for them with iron, and what is in the mouth of the womb and touches it is what is treated.
The woman should enter a cold house, then extend the warts with a scraper or a coarse rag and cut them from their roots, then put on it, when blood flows, one of the hemostatic astringents without lubrication.
Such as quince, rue, frankincense and the like, then raise her legs to the wall for an hour, then lower them into cold water, if the bleeding continues, sit her in a decoction of senna, pomegranate peel and henna and the like, then take barley flour, knead it with honey and vinegar.
And bandage it on her back, if the bleeding stops, otherwise insist on pressing the breasts and nipples without any conditions, then take a wick and dip it in the juice of purslane or the juice of lamb's tongue or the juice of willow branches with henna syrup and apply it to the place.
If the swelling subsides, treat the area with ointment until it heals. As for the red wart, it resembles the heads of millet, rough in appearance. It should be cut off as described for calluses and treated until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Four.
On the incision of a carbuncle that appears in the uterus.
Many types of tumors can appear in the uterus, such as cancer, stony tumors, ulcers, fistulas, gangrene, warts, hemorrhoids, fissures, and hot tumors. I have mentioned all these diseases, their types, and their signs in the division.
In this article, we should mention the hot tumor that appears in the uterus if it is one of the tumors that collects for a period of time and how to incise it with iron. It should be examined to see if the pain in the beginning of the tumor is sharp with pulsating, inflammation, and fever.
And if you see it red when touched, do not rush to incise it and treat it with what helps ripening until these symptoms subside. Then, the woman should sit on a chair with two seats and lean on her back.
Gather her legs towards the lower abdomen and let her thighs be parted. Her arms should be placed under her knees and tied with a suitable band.
Therefore, the midwife sits on the right side and uses the instrument that opens the cervix, whose image will come later. If you want to use this instrument, estimate the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters from the instrument does not exceed the depth of the uterus.
If the instrument is deeper than necessary, it will harm the patient. Therefore, pads should be placed on the lip of the cervix to prevent the entire instrument from entering the depth of the uterus. The spiral that runs in the instrument should be at the top side.
And you hold the instrument while the servant turns the screw until the neck of the womb is opened; then, when the abscess appears and is touched by the hand, if it is soft and delicate, it should be cut at its head with a broad scalpel. And when all the matter has been discharged.
A soft wick should then be put into the wound, soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringents; and the wick should come out of the incision in the neck of the womb, and pure wool soaked in water which has been boiled with baker's yeast should be applied externally on the womb and the pudendum.
Then it should be treated after two days with a salve suitable for that purpose until it heals.
And the womb and the wound may be washed by injecting it with water and honey, then with water which has been boiled with the root of marshmallow or long angelica; and it should return to the salve afterwards. If the abscess is hidden inside the womb.
The use of iron for its treatment should be avoided, but it should be treated as mentioned in the division above.
Chapter Seventy-Fifth.
On teaching midwives how to treat living fetuses if they are born in an unnatural way.
The midwife should first know the signs of natural childbirth. These are: When a woman feels pressure downward and longs to smell the air, it becomes easier for her to endure labor.
The fetus is quickly expelled. Know that this childbirth occurs in a natural manner, and the fetus emerges headfirst with the placenta either accompanying it or hanging from its cord. If you see these signs, pressure should be applied to her abdomen so the fetus exits quickly.
If it descends onto his head, the placenta will descend with it and be cleansed of those superfluities well. And besides this birth, it is unnatural and blameworthy because the fetus may come out on its feet and put out its hands before its head and legs.
Or one of his hands or one of his feet may come out, or his head and hand may come out, or he may come out folded, and perhaps turn on his back, and so forth from these blameworthy shapes. Therefore, the midwife should be skillful and gentle with all these things and beware of error and mistakes.
And I will explain each shape and how to manage it so that you can recognize it and act accordingly. If the fetus comes out headfirst, which is the natural way, and this is difficult for the woman and labor is prolonged, and you see her strength has weakened, seat her on a chair and order women to hold her steady.
And apply a poultice of cooked fenugreek and soft ointments to her womb, then the midwife inserts a small speculum between her fingers and makes an incision in the placenta with it, or cuts it with her fingernail until the moisture inside flows out, and she presses on the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, the woman should be injected with a fenugreek decoction mixed with sesame oil, and then after the injection she should be made to cough and sneeze by tickling her with a feather while her mouth and nose are held shut; for the fetus will come out at that moment. If the fetus's hand comes out first, it should be gently pushed back in little by little.
If entry is not possible, place the woman on a raised platform and raise her legs above it, then shake the platform on the ground while holding the woman so she does not fall during the shaking. If the hands still do not enter and the fetus is dead, cut off its hands and draw out the rest of the fetus.
Or bind his hands with a cloth and pull them moderately, for he will come out, exiting on his legs. If the fetus exits on its legs, it is necessary to push them upwards and then turn the fetus little by little until it is straightened. Then take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
If they come out to the thighs, order her to move and push it with the hand, for it will come out. If it does not come out as we have described, or otherwise return the fetus a little until it becomes in its natural form, then it will come out smoothly. If it refuses what we have all described.
Take saliva of rue, saliva of fenugreek, sheep tallow and frankincense dissolved and beat all together in a mortar very well. Then apply it to the woman's vulva and lower abdomen, then sit her in lukewarm water until she reaches the climax.
If you see that her lower part has loosened, make a suppository for her of rue and let her hold it. If she holds the suppository for an hour, then seat her on a chair, and push her and cover her mouth and nose and squeeze her lower abdomen lightly, for the fetus will come out in its time, exiting on its knees and hands.
If it comes out in this way, take care to insert its hands little by little, then let the woman lie on her back and lower her legs down while she is lying on a bed with her hands held together. Then squeeze over her abdomen lightly. Then remove what is under her legs from the pillows so that her lower body is upright. If the fetus does not come out, take hold of both her legs and move them strongly. Then squeeze over the pubis lightly until the fetus ascends upwards. Then let the midwife insert her hand and straighten the fetus little by little.
And order the woman to recline so that the fetus comes out, the coming out of the fetus being opposed and delayed because one of its hands is stuck.  Seize the hand and push it back; if she is unable to push it back, make the woman stand and have her walk; if she is unable to walk, then lay her down on...
...her bed and shake her legs vigorously, then use the pessary that I have described from the speculums; if she is seized by a contraction, then seat her on a chair and then proceed to push back the hand and straighten the fetus into its natural form.  Make the woman sneeze and order her to recline so that it comes out.
If the fetus comes out on its head with its arms outstretched and its face toward its mother's back, the midwife should grasp the fetus' hand and then turn it a little at a time, straightening it gently.  And if it becomes straightened, apply to the mother's vulva what we have described of oil and speculums.
Then encourage her to move a little at a time; and if she does that, seat her on a chair and order her to lean to her right side, then encourage her to recline and make her sneeze with candied fruit (kandus), for it will come out. If the fetus comes out standing upright on its side.
If it descends into the mouth of the womb in this manner with the placenta, tear the placenta with your fingernail until it is emptied of moisture; if it clings to the face and neck of the fetus, cut it from the origin so that it does not suffocate and die, then push the fetus back inside until you make it right.
And order the woman to recline several times, for it will come out easily. Regarding twins or multiple births, know that twins very often are born and three or four may also be born and live, though this is rare.  As for five, it is something outside of nature and they do not live at all.
And they are surrounded by a single placenta, even if they are numerous, and they are separated by a dividing septum between them, attached at the base of each one of them. And they may be delivered as a single fetus is delivered easily and naturally, or they may be delivered in a monstrous delivery, as we have described.
If one of them becomes obstructed during delivery and assumes one of the unnatural forms we have mentioned, then treat it as we have described. And let the midwife be gentle and do what she does carefully and patiently, and devise a plan for every form that presents itself to her, leading to safety.
Remember that fetuses conceived in the womb may be miscarried; there may be one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more than ten conceived.  It has been confirmed to me that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them conceived.
By the estimation of the Most Wise, All-Knowing One, all of this should be known by the midwife, for she may encounter such a situation someday and thus deal with it appropriately.
Chapter Seventy-Six.
On the Extraction of a Stillborn Fetus.
If you have treated the stillborn fetus as mentioned in the section on treatment and it has not been delivered, and you are compelled to proceed manually, then you should examine her. If the woman is healthy and strong and does not exhibit any symptoms that might endanger her, she should lie on a bed on her back.
Her head should be inclined downwards, and her legs should be raised; an attendant should hold her steady from both sides, or she may be tied to the bed so that her body does not move when the fetus is extracted.
Then the midwife should moisten the mouth of her uterus with soft ointments, composed of mallow sap, fenugreek, and flaxseed; then she should anoint her hands with these ointments and saliva, and gently insert them into the uterus. Then she should seek a location where to insert the forceps on the fetus and corresponding places.
Look and see if the fetus is coming out head first, then insert pins into its eyes or temples or mouth or palate or under its chin or collarbone or in places near the ribs or under the shoulder blades.
But if it is coming out feet first, then in the groin and the middle ribs; and you should hold the pin in your right hand and make its loop between the fingers of your left hand, insert your hand gently and embed a pin in some of those places that we have mentioned.
Until you reach something hollow, then embed another pin or a third if needed so that the traction is equal and does not lean to one side; then extend it evenly and do not make the extension only straight but move it to every direction.
To make it come out easily as is done with a molar when it is extracted; and in between that, the extension should be slackened. If one side becomes stuck, then the midwife should smear some fingers with oil and insert them from that side to turn what is stuck. If part of the fetus comes out, then move the pins to other places.
She should lift it a little to do this until the whole fetus comes out; if a hand comes out before anything else and cannot be pushed back due to compression, then a rag should be wrapped around it and pulled until it all comes out, after which it is cut.
Either at the wrist joint or at the elbow; and thus it should be done with the other hand and the legs. If the fetus's head is large and experiences pressure during delivery, or if there is accumulated water in its head, then a pointed forceps should be inserted between the fingers.
And pierce the head with it so that the water comes out, or insert it with a device called a trephine, the image of which comes with the images of all other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
Likewise, if the fetus has a large head by nature, the skull should be cut or crushed with a forceps as we have said, and then the bones should be extracted with forceps. If the head comes out and is compressed at the neck, it should be cut until the moisture in the chest drains.
Then the chest will contract; but if it does not contract and delivery is not possible, cut as much as you can. If the lower abdomen is warm or contains pus, it should be punctured so that the moisture drains from it.
If the fetus is on its legs, pulling it out is easy and straightening it to the mouth of the womb is simple. But if it is compressed at the abdomen or chest, it should be pulled with a cloth wrapped around your hand and the abdomen or chest should be cut so that what is inside flows out.
If all the other limbs are removed and the head returns and is stuck, let the midwife insert her left hand. If the mouth of the womb is open, she should insert her hand into the cervix, seek out the head with it, and pull it towards the mouth of the womb with her fingers; then she should insert a spoon or two spoons and pull with them.
If the mouth of the womb has closed due to a hot, inflamed tumor, it should not be forced. Instead, wet, fatty substances should be poured on it, poultices should be applied, and she should sit in water that softens and moistens.
If the fetus is on its side and can be straightened, use what we have mentioned for a living fetus. If this is not possible, cut it in pieces and remove it.  Nothing of the placenta should be left inside at all. After you have finished your treatment, apply what we have mentioned for treating hot tumors that occur in the womb.
If bleeding occurs, she should immerse herself in astringent water and use all other treatments. I have seen a woman who became pregnant, the fetus died inside her, and then she became pregnant again.
Then the other fetus also died, and after a long time she developed a tumor in her abdomen which swelled until it opened and began to discharge pus. She was called for treatment and I treated her for a long time but the wound did not close, so I applied some strong drawing ointments to it.
A bone then came out of the place, and after some days another bone came out. I was astonished by this, for the abdomen is a place where there are no bones. I concluded that they were from the bones of the dead fetus, so I searched the wound and removed many bones from it, bones of the head of the fetus.
I continued to do this until I removed many bones from it, and the woman was in the best of health. She lived for a long time, with a small amount of pus still discharging from the place. Indeed, I have only brought this rare case here.
For it contains knowledge and assistance for what the physician, the maker with his hand, attempts in treatment.
Chapter Seventy-Seventh.
It contains images of the instruments needed for extracting a fetus.
Image of a screw with which to open the mouth of the womb:
This is the instrument with which books are bound, it has two screws at the ends of the wooden pieces except that this screw should be finer than the one for binding books and should be either ebony or boxwood, and each piece of wood should be as thick as two fingers.
And their curve is towards a finger, and their length is a palm and a half. In the middle of the two pieces of wood are two ridges of the same wood, which have been firmly fixed into them; their length is half a palm or a little more, and their width is about two fingers or a little more. These two ridges...
are what enter the mouth of the womb to open it when you turn the screws. Image of another instrument similar to that, but finer and lighter:
It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of callipers, but it has two points at its end as you see, each point being about a span long and two fingers wide. If you wish to open the uterus with it.
Seat the woman on a bed with her legs spread apart, then insert these two points into the mouth of the uterus while holding the handle of the instrument below between her thighs. Then open your hand as you do with callipers, to whatever extent you wish to open the uterus. So that the midwife can achieve what she wants. Image of another speculum mentioned by those who came before.
Image of the instrument which pushes the fetus.
Image of the forceps used to grasp the fetal head.
It resembles forceps, with teeth at the end as you see. It can be made rectangular like callipers as shown in this image. It has teeth like a saw to cut and sever.
Image of another instrument for expulsion.
Image of a sound.
This sound is slightly thicker so it does not break when the fetus is grasped with it. Image of a sound with two spikes.
Image of two wide forceps for cutting the fetus.
All of these instruments, the more varieties there are and the better they are made by the craftsman, the quicker his work will be and the higher his standing will be among people. Do not scorn any instrument if you have it prepared, for necessity may arise for it.
Chapter seventy-eight.
On the expulsion of the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, you should order the patient to hold her breath and then cough it up with a speculum while pressing your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out this way, well and good; otherwise, take a measure.
Make a hole in the lid and put in it herbs that are open for the mouth of the womb, such as fennel, chamomile, anise, chamomile, lavender, and mint; all these drugs or some of them. Immerse them in water and put them on the fire. Then place a silver tube on the hole in the lid of the vessel and the other end in the mouth of the womb.
Hold it until the vapor reaches the bottom of the womb, then sneeze as we said; for the placenta will come out quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to dip her left hand in sheep fat or the saliva of a dog.
Then insert it into the vagina and search for the placenta; if she finds it, grasp it and pull it out little by little until it comes out. If it is stuck deep in the womb, insert the hand as we have described until she finds the placenta; then draw it out gently and with compassion.
So that the womb does not fall out when pulled hard, but it should be moved gently to the right and left sides, then increase the amount of pulling; for it will respond then and get rid of adhesion. If the mouth of the womb is closed, we have described the treatment by sneezing and the treatment with the vessel and herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, beware of violence in pulling again, but you should tie what came out from the womb to the thigh of the woman and then inject her with the four-fold ointment; for it will soften it after a few days.
It will dissolve and come out, but if it rots, a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, and this harms the patient; so you should use the appropriate fumigation.
Therefore, since some of the ancients tried fumigation with aloeswood and dried figs, a picture of the instrument used by women to fumigate themselves when they have menstrual retention and the placenta.
It is made of lead shaped like a funnel or of copper, the thin end is placed in the nostril and the wide end on the fire and the incense is put on the embers, hold it until that incense goes and replace it with another.
Chapter Ninety-Seventh.
In the Treatment of the Unperforated Fistula.
Many boys may be born with their fistulas unperforated, often closed by a thin membrane. Therefore, the midwife should pierce this membrane with her finger; otherwise, let it be incised with a sharp bistoury, taking care not to touch the muscle.
Then place a wick soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat it with ointments until it heals. If you fear that it will close again, insert a lead tube into the orifice for many days, removing it when the child desires to defecate.
It may also happen that the fistula is closed by a retracted wound or a tumor, which should be incised and then treated as we have described, with dressing and packing.
Chapter Eighty.
On the Treatment of Fistulas Occurring in the Lower Regions.
Fistulas occurring in the lower regions are a complication and thickening that occurs near the anus, either externally or in the surrounding space, from one side or another; they may be single or multiple.
When this complication suppurates, a watery, white fluid or thin pus discharges from it. Some of these fistulas may extend to the rectum and intestines; others are not penetrating. Those that are penetrating can be recognized by the passage of feces and flatus through them when the patient defecates.
Sometimes worms emerge from them. Fistulas in the surrounding space may penetrate to the bladder and the urethra; others may penetrate to the hip joint and the coccyx. A fistula penetrating to the anus is also known, but not all fistulas are penetrating.
Insert your index finger into the anus and insert a fine probe into the nasor from copper or iron if there is no bend in the nasor, but if there is a bend, insert a fine lead probe or a horsehair.
Until you feel the probe or hair in your finger, if you do not feel it at all and nothing of feces, wind, or worms appears from the hole as we have said, then know that it is impassable, so hasten to treatment.
And if the nasor is passable to the bladder or to the urinary tract, its indication is the urine coming out from it and its refusal to be united with the place by medicines, but if it is passable to the thigh joint or the coccyx, its sign is the probe reaching there.
If there is no bend to the bone and pain exists in a certain direction and pus constantly comes out of it, and treatment does not work in it and it does not unite with ointment, these passable nasors are all incurable.
And its treatment is a futile effort for whoever undertakes it from ignorant physicians, but as for the one that is impassable and not chronic, healing is expected with iron as I will describe and what I have tried, which is to lay the patient down on their back between your hands.
Extend their legs upwards and their thighs sloping towards their stomach, then insert a copper or lead probe if there is a bend in the nasor until you know where the probe ends; if the patient feels it towards the anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe in your finger having penetrated by itself, exposed without feeling any fascia or flesh between your finger and it, then know for sure that it is passable; so do not labor on it, as there is no healing from it as we have said.
They have said that it heals in some people rarely, and of the treatment which is hoped for its benefit is to heat a thin iron according to the width of the nostril as previously mentioned, and insert it heated into the nostril until it reaches near the septum, then return it two or three times.
Until you know that all of that excess, loose flesh which resembles a bird's feather pipe has been burned, then treat it with a bandage soaked in butter so that the burned flesh comes out, and then treat it with cooked ointments, for if he heals.
Otherwise, it will not heal by any other treatment ever, and if you insert the probe and it does not reach your finger at the septum and there is a thick veil of flesh or peritoneum between it and the probe, and you see the nostril as follows on the surface of the skin, then at that time cut the skin from the beginning of the nostril. And you pass with the incision while the probe is in the nostril until you reach with the incision where the end of the probe has reached, and then the probe is released and falls, and then clean out that excess flesh which resembles a bird's feather pipe so that nothing remains of it.
Then treat it with cooked ointments until it heals, and if the blood overpowers you and stands between you and your work in cutting that flesh, then the best thing to do and the quickest benefit is to cauterize it with fire or a caustic drug because cauterization by fire combines two good states: burning that excess flesh.
And cutting the blood and drying the moisture, then treat it with a bandage soaked in butter or powdered sulfur mixed with oil until the place festers and that burned flesh comes out in the pus, then at that time treat the wound with cooked ointments that grow hard flesh.
And these are the medicines which have astringent and drying properties, for if it closes up it heals and you need not fear a return, but if the nostril has reached the depth of the septum and is far from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the septum and explore with it.
If you feel the probe and there is a veil of peritoneum or flesh between you and it, and it is close to penetration, then the work in it is only on the path of hope and desire. This is because you should use one of three methods: either cauterize it as we have said.
Or you may cut it until you reach its bottom so that you can insert the probe and treat it from nearby, but do not overdo the incision lest you cut the muscle surrounding the anus, which would cause the patient to have involuntary bowel movements. Then treat him as we have mentioned; perhaps he will be cured as we have said.
Or you may penetrate that veil and puncture it after cutting it near the anus as we have said, either with a probe or with another sharp-pointed instrument. Then clean out all the adhering flesh in the incision as thoroughly as possible.
Then suture the entire wound, along with the incision and the upper opening, until it is closed, leaving the fistula open inside the anus. This will be easier for the patient, and the fistula may even heal in this condition.
And if you insert the probe into the fistula and it is located on a side of the anus, toward the body surface and the skin around the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end like a shoemaker's awl in this manner:
And insert into it a twisted thread of five strands or so, then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its bottom. If it is perforated in the edge of the anus from the inside nearby...
Then pull the thread out of that hole by inserting your finger into the anus and pulling out the end of the thread. Gather both ends together and tie them tightly, leaving it for a day or two.  Whenever the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well so that the flesh between the two ends will be severed and fall off. Then treat the wound until it heals and is cured.
If the nostril is not perforated, perforate it as best you can, but if it is deep, do not do so for fear of cutting the muscle. Then proceed with it as we have mentioned until it heals.
The image shows a pointed scalpel with which to incise the nostrils. One edge is extremely sharp, and the other edge is not sharp so as not to cut what is unnecessary as you see.
Chapter Eighty-One.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids that bleed and their excision, as well as the treatment of fissures.
Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus, resembling red balloons or grapes, and come in small and large sizes, and blood always flows from them.
They can be single or multiple, and located outside the anus at its edges. However, those that are outside the anus are usually less moist and produce a yellowish fluid or a small amount of continuous blood flow. They are the color of the body.
The treatment for those located inside the anus is to order the patient to defecate and strain until the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids are visible to you. Then quickly grasp them with forceps or your fingernail and cut them at their base. If the forceps do not hold them due to moisture and relaxation,
grab them with a rough cloth or a piece of toasted bread, or pull them with your fingers and then cut them. After cutting, sprinkle some sharp dust on them to act as cautery, or cauterize them as previously described in the chapter on cautery.
Then treat it with all other treatments until it heals. If the anus does not protrude, inject the patient with an injection containing a mild irritant to wash out what is inside and encourage it to protrude quickly when the patient strains. The treatment of hemorrhoids outside the anus is simple and easy.
Take it with your fingernail or hang it on a thread and cut it, then treat it as we mentioned until it heals. And whoever dislikes cutting with iron should use its core in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it in a needle.
Then draw the wart upwards and pass it through the needle at its origin from the other side, and wind both ends of the thread below the needle while it is obstructing and tighten the wart tightly, then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this to all the warts and leave one without coring it.
So that pus drains from it, then place a rag soaked in rose oil or cerate on the seat and put it on the seat, and order the patient to rest, then leave him until the warts fall off. And when the warts fall off, treat them with ointments and all other treatments until they heal.
As for the treatment of anal fissures, it often arises from dryness and constipation. If it persists and medicine does not work, it should be scraped with a scalpel blade or your fingernail until it becomes moist and the upper scab that prevents it from healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals properly. If it does not heal, repeat the scraping more intensely than the first time until it bleeds and sheds, then treat it, for it will be cured.
Chapter Eighty-Two.
On the Treatment of Inverted and Non-Inverted Warts, Dry Warts, and Plantar Warts.
A wart is a round nodule the color of the body, resembling a nail head, found throughout the body, especially on the soles of the feet and toes. It causes pain when walking.
It should be incised around the wart, grasped with forceps or a thread and removed from its base, then treated. If you wish, cauterize it as previously mentioned in its chapter. As for dry warts, each one is a small, rough, adherent, round protuberance on the surface of the body.
It often occurs in the hands of boys and its treatment is to lengthen the wart and cut it or cauterize it with silk thread or a hair until it falls off. If you wish, cauterize it as previously mentioned with fire or a caustic drug.
Inverted and non-inverted warts may also be removed with the instrument I have mentioned in the treatment of moles. Moles are also small, thick, adherent bumps on the surface of the body that go deep down; if they are affected by cold, one feels a burning sensation like that of an ant bite.
It occurs throughout the body, and most commonly on the hands. Its treatment is to take a tube made from a goose feather or a strong eagle feather and place it around the mole so that the tube forms a circle around it; then turn your hand with the tube until you cut what is around the mole.
You make it go deep into the flesh and the mole will detach from its base; if you wish, you can do this with a copper or iron tube in the same manner.
The top of the tube should be constricted and twisted to make it easy for the fingers to hold and turn it. If you wish, you can cauterize the mole as previously described in the section on cauterizing warts.
Chapter Seventy-Third.
On Instruments Used for Injections in Cases of Hemorrhoids, Diarrhea, and Colic.
An injector may be made of silver, porcelain, or beaten and hammered copper. Small and large versions of this instrument may be made depending on the user. Those used to treat young boys are small, and for those whose hemorrhoids are narrow or painful, the injectors should be very fine.  Image of a large injector:
The upper funnel where the syringe is attached is wide, and it has a collar where the syringe is fastened as you see. Its lower end, which enters the rectum, is constricted and very smooth; there are two holes on one side near the tip and one hole on the other side.
The opening of the wound should be the width of the penis or a little wider, and the tube into which you put the medicines should be made from an animal bladder or sheepskin, shaped like a small dish with a diameter of one span.
It should be pierced with many holes, spaced evenly around it, each hole the width of a finger. Then a tightly spun thread made from two strands of ten threads or so is passed through these holes and used to gather up the tube like a small dish. Once medicine is put in, the top of the injector should be firmly squeezed between two stones and then injected. This is a diagram of the tube and the opening.
To inject it, fill the bladder or tube with warmed medicine as much as the patient can tolerate. Be careful that it is not too hot or too cold. Then the patient should lie on his back and raise his legs upward.
Place a cushion or blanket underneath him, then grease the tip of the injector with ointment, egg white, fenugreek saliva or something similar. Then gently insert it into the anus. A servant should hold the tube with both hands and squeeze firmly until all of the contents are emptied into the intestine.
Then remove the injector and have the patient raise his legs against the wall. If the medicine urges him to defecate, he should hold it in as long as possible. If he sleeps with it all night, it will be most effective. If injecting for diarrhea, hasten its expulsion by repeating the injection until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful tumors in the anus, use a very gentle and smooth injector, unlike those used for children. This is a diagram of a gentle injector with its skin stretched tight:
Chapter Eighty-Four.
On Surgical Procedures.
I previously mentioned the treatment of cysts in the section on cauterization, but I will now describe their complete treatment by hand and medicine. Surgical procedures vary depending on what is being operated on and where the wound is located.
For surgical wounds are numerous, such as a blow from a stone or a cut from a sword or knife or a stab with a spear, stick, arrow, and the like of many things.
As for surgical wounds according to the locations on the body, such as a wound that occurs on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and so forth of the organs.
And I will describe the treatment of some wounds to make them a measure and a law for all other wounds, and I begin with simple head wounds, especially since the complex ones will be mentioned at the beginning of the third chapter of this book.
I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no bone fracture, then if it was from a blow of a stone or something like it and the skin had only been split and the wound was large, and I feared for the patient the occurrence of a hot swelling, then I hastened and dissected the scalp to its place. Do not delay this and let out blood for him to the extent of his strength, unless something prevents him from being bled, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is slight, let the bleeding be done opposite the injured side.
Warn the patient against filling himself up, drinking and coarse foods, for if something prevents him from being bled, let him reduce his food and not approach meats or drinks, and bear on the wound if a hot swelling occurs, cotton soaked in rose oil alone or with a drink that has astringent properties.
And if you are confident that there will be no hot swelling, then bear on the wound if it is soft with its blood and has not been changed by the air I will describe to you shortly, but if it has been changed by the air, then bear on it some ointments.
Until it produces pus, then treat it until it heals, if the wound was large and from a sword cut or something like it, and its lips did not come together with sutures, then bring them together by stitching as I describe in stitching abdominal wounds.
If the skin has been stripped from the bone and hangs, and its adherence is only slight, cut it off. Then treat the wound with medications that promote the formation of firm flesh in place of the skin, and instruct the patient to eat strengthening foods such as heads and trotters, etc.
If putrefaction occurs in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, cut away all the putrefied flesh, wash it, and then treat it. If there is an artery or vein bleeding from these wounds and the bleeding does not stop with medication, search for the artery.
If you find it, do not amputate it unless necessary; cut it with a scalpel and ligate it. If needed and the aforementioned methods are ineffective, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. If these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is easy: leave them covered with this poultice while they are bloody.
Before the air changes it, the poultice is made as follows: take one part frankincense, two parts mastic, and three parts slaked lime or unslaked lime; grind all of them, sift them, and fill the wound with it. Bandage it tightly so that it adheres well.
It will coagulate with the blood, then bandage it tightly with strips of cloth and leave it undisturbed as long as there is no swelling; for the medication will not separate from it until it heals. Lime alone may be used if frankincense and mastic are unavailable.
This same procedure can also be done with a dressing on many large wounds if it is applied skillfully and tightly bandaged, as long as the wounds are fresh and bloody and have not been changed by the air. However, if they have been somewhat altered by the air, especially in summertime,
then applying this poultice is ineffective; treat it instead with some stimulating ointments or apply a gruel of barley flour made with water and honey until it produces pus, then treat it further with all appropriate remedies until it heals.
If a fracture occurs with the wound, and it is slight, draw it together with a ligature. The treatment of head fractures has already been mentioned, in the chapter on neck surgery. If the wound is in the neck, its treatment differs not from that of a simple head wound.
If a nerve or artery in the neck has been severed, and it is a nerve, there is no remedy except to avoid treating it with anything that constricts severely, such as ligatures or bandages, for these injure and inflame the nerve.
Nothing cold should be applied to the wound at all, for the essence of the nerve is cold, and its connection with the brain, which is the noblest of organs, would be harmed. Treatment should consist of soft remedies, such as rosewater washed with fresh water repeatedly moistened with oil or violet ointment.
If it is also washed with fresh water and all other medicinal stones in this manner, and moist ointments are applied, but if the wound is large, use sutures or bring its lips together with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has depth and a collection of pus has formed in its lower part, lance it at the lowest point. If an artery in the wound has been severed and you see its blood flowing, amputate it, ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary.
If the wound has severed some or all of the cartilages of the larynx, but the vocal cords are intact, bring the edges of the skin together with sutures over the trachea. Do not touch the larynx itself but restore it to its natural shape and then bind it tightly, leaving it for several days.
Then treat it with ointments that constrict and dry it until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, examine it. If there are bone fragments, draw them all out or as many as possible. Leave those you cannot reach until the wound has granulated and healed, making their removal easier.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder we have described. If a bone becomes putrid and necrotic in the wound, treat it with what will be mentioned in its chapter, in thoracic surgery and that between the shoulders.
If it is a stab wound from a spear or knife and you see a hollow, look to see if air comes out of it when the patient breathes. If so, know that it is a mortal wound. But if there is no hollow and it is fresh with blood, do not put powder in it at first, nor tighten it lest blood be retained in its cavity.
For if it reaches the heart, it will kill the patient. But put an attractive ointment in it and apply it twice during the day. If you do not have ointment available, put a worn cotton ball into the wound to absorb the moisture that comes out of it, and let the patient sleep on his wound.
So that what gathers in it may solidify. And if the wound has been three days or more and the patient has not experienced tetanus, a bad palpitation, or shortness of breath, and you see that all his other conditions are good, know that the wound is healthy. Treat it with bandaging and all other treatments until it heals.
But if pus forms and discharges continuously, know that it has become necrotic. Treat it as described in its chapter. Let the patient sleep on his wound so that what gathers in it may solidify. And if the wound is on the chest or back, treat it with stitching as previously mentioned.
Whether it is large and requires stitching or small and can be treated with powder, if it has affected the bone and pieces have broken off, search the wound and immediately remove those pieces if they are clean. If they are not clean, leave them until...
the wound becomes putrid, for then it is easier to remove them. As for all other acute wounds that occur in the rest of the organs, their treatment follows the same rules as those we have mentioned.
Chapter Eighty-Fifth.
On abdominal surgery, the protrusion of intestines and their suturing.
The rupture which appears in the abdomen may be large or small or medium, the large one from which intestines or several intestines may protrude, their introduction and suturing being more difficult and harder.
And the small rupture may also be difficult in another way, it being necessary that its return should be more difficult, and if the intestines are not promptly returned to their place they swell and thicken, making their introduction difficult; therefore, the best ruptures are those of medium size, since the return of the intestines is not as difficult with them as it is with these two types.
Know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways; two types of sutures are suitable for suturing the abdomen and for suturing all other surgical wounds, and the other two types are general for all surgical procedures, although they are more specific for suturing the abdomen.
And I will describe them to you one by one with explanation, saying that if the wound is small and some intestines protrude from it and their return is difficult, this is due to one of two things: either the smallness of the rupture as we said, or the intestines having been swollen before by cold air.
If so, it should be heated by dipping a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water alone, or which may have been cooked in it saffron and roses and sprinkled on the intestines until the swelling subsides.
A drink containing astringents may also be used, and it is better than water alone in resolving swelling. If you see that the swelling has subsided, moisten the intestines with water which has been cooked with henna or sesame; this will make its entry easier.
If it is still impossible for it to return after this treatment, then make a small incision in the rupture with the instrument used for making fistulas. The first treatment, if successful, is better than an incision; however, one resorts to an incision only when necessary and all other methods have failed. This is the image of the instrument:
One of its sides is curved and limited, the other is not limited. The thin end should not be as fine as a lancet, but rather slightly blunt; it is an instrument resembling a small spatula, as you see. If the wound widens and the intestines protrude, they should be returned to their natural form.
Its proper place, if possible, is best. But if the tear is wide and in the lower abdomen, the patient should lie on his back with his legs raised higher than his head. If it is in the upper abdomen, his head and chest should be raised higher than his lower body.
Similarly, if the tear is on one side of the abdomen, always aim to have the side where the surgery is being performed raised higher than the other side. This should be done for both major and moderate surgeries.
For minor surgeries, position the patient as best you can. Then have a gentle assistant hold the entire tear with his hands, bringing the edges together and revealing a small portion at a time to the person suturing.
This is the general description of a single stitch: take one or more needles, depending on the width of the wound, and leave a distance from the edge of the tear equal to the thickness of a fingernail. Insert one needle without thread into the edges of the skin. Insert it into the peritoneal edges beneath the skin from the inside, so that the needle passes through to the other side. This brings together both the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum, creating four layers. Then tighten a doubled thread around the needle several times on both sides until the wound edges meet firmly.
Leave a distance equal to the thickness of a finger and insert another needle, then secure it with the thread as you did with the first needle. Continue in this manner with as many needles as needed until the entire wound is closed. Use needles that are of medium thickness.
Because very fine needles quickly cut flesh and thick ones have difficulty entering the skin, it is necessary for them to be of medium thinness and thickness.  It should not be inserted into the edge of the skin near the wound.
So that the flesh is not quickly cut and the wound does not open before it heals, nor should it be too far apart in suturing so that the wound cannot heal. Then, cut the ends of the needles so they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps and make for him pads of linen cloth from each side to hold the ends of the needles.
Leave them until you know that the wound has healed. This type of suturing with needles is thus best for minor surgeries because it may suffice in its stitching with one or two needles or so.
As for the description of suturing for a second intention wound, it is to gather together by stitching the four edges, meaning the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum at once with a needle containing a twisted thread moderate in thinness and thickness; then, if this needle passes through those four edges, return the needle from the side where you began.
Let the thread fall entangled from above the wound so that the stitching is according to the stitching of a sack which is tightened with it and place between each stitch and stitch a distance equal to the width of a little finger. This type of stitching is known to all people.
With this stitching, I operated on a man who had a wound in his abdomen inflicted by a knife. The rupture of the surgery was more than a handbreadth and he had eviscerated nearly two handbreadths of the middle intestine and the rupture was in the middle of the abdomen.
I returned him after his intestines had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours. The wound healed in about fifteen days, and I treated him until he recovered and lived for many years afterwards, acting normally in all of his affairs. The physicians had judged that he would not recover at all.
It is amazing that I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where there were no medicines. So I would put cotton on the wound twice a day and commit to washing it with honey water until it healed.
As for one of the special types of suturing, I mention it according to the words of Galen, which is to begin the suture from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside. And when the needle passes through the skin and into the muscle going straight along the entire length of the abdomen.
I left the edge of the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle and passed the needle through its other edge from inside to outside in the other edge of the suture. And when I pass it, I pass it again in this same edge from the suture from outside to inside.
And leave the edge of the peritoneum on this side and pass the needle through its other edge from inside to outside and pass it as you pass it in the peritoneum to the edge of the suture that is in its direction until it passes through completely.
Then begin again from this same side and line it with the edge from the peritoneum on the other side, and bring the needle out of the skin near it, then return it to that skin and line the edge of the peritoneum on the other side with this edge from the suture.
And bring it out of the skin from its side, and do that again and again until you sew the entire surgery according to that example. The description of this suture is that it sews a double suture like fur.
By sewing the peritoneum once from one side with a skin edge and leaving it once from the other side until it is emptied. As for the second type of special suture that he also mentioned, this is his word verbatim.
And it is to sew it according to the example of how some healers sew it, by bringing together each part with its counterpart naturally. They bring together an edge of the peritoneum with its other edge and an edge of the suture with its other edge. This is as I describe to you.
The needle should be inserted into the margin of the peritoneum closest to you from outside and passed into it alone, leaving the peritoneal margins. Then the needle is returned and passed from outside to inside in both peritoneal margins, and then returned again.
And it is passed from inside to outside in the other margin of the peritoneum on the opposite side. This type of stitching is better than the common easy stitching, which is the stitching mentioned before. This is the text of Galen. Some have said that abdominal suturing may be done with two needles. This is done by threading a single thread into both needles and beginning by inserting one needle from your side and passing it to the other side, then inserting the other needle from the opposite side and passing it toward you according to the stitching of the saddle makers.
Know that if a rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, its stitching is more difficult than in any other place in the abdomen. As for treating the wound, its rule in treatment is like that of all other surgeries. That is, if you grasp the wound soft with its blood before the air changes it and return the intestines, line them up, and tighten them, then apply a poultice of saltpeter on it.
If the wound has been changed by air, apply some of the ointments that you prepare until it suppurates and the stitches fall out, and then the peritoneum and omentum unite. Then treat it like all other surgeries until it is healed.
If you do not have medications available, apply soft cotton as soon as pus begins to form and change it twice a day as I have taught you until it is healed. You will not need any other treatment in most cases if the surgeries are simple. If you fear that the wound may involve the major organs,
you should soak soft wool in lukewarm oil or rose ointment and place it around the areas between the groin and armpit. If he feels pain or foulness in his intestines, which often occurs, inject him with a lukewarm black astringent beverage.
Especially if the gangrene has reached the intestine and become a penetrating wound into it, know that what was from the intestines thick is easier to heal and what was thin is more difficult to heal.
As for the intestine known as the fasting one, it does not accept healing from any surgery that befalls it at all, due to the abundance of its large veins and the thinness of its body and its proximity to the nature of nerves. As for if what protruded from the wound was pus and you found it soft, return it according to how you returned the intestine itself.
If a period has passed and it has become green or black, you should tighten it with a thread above the place that has blackened from it so that bleeding does not occur, for there are veins and arteries in the pus; then cut what is below that ligature.
Make the two ends of the thread hanging from below the surgery outside of it to make it easy for you to pull and remove them when the pus falls out and the wound suppurates. As for mentioning the wound that occurs in the intestine, if a tear occurs in the intestine and it is small.
It may be possible to splint it in some people, for I once saw a man who had been wounded in his abdomen by a spear thrust and the wound was to the right of the stomach. I probed the wound and it became straight, from which feces and gas were exiting. So I treated him as if I did not hope for his recovery. I continued to treat him gently until he recovered and the area healed together. When I saw that the area had joined together, I feared for the patient that an accident might happen in his abdomen, but nothing bad happened to him at all, and he remained in the best of health. It is true, he eats and drinks, has intercourse, enters the bath, and relaxes in his service. Some experienced people have mentioned that whenever a tear occurs in the intestine and it is small, it should be sutured in this manner.
Take large ants with heads, then bring together the edges of the wound and place one ant on it with its mouth open. When it seizes hold and tightens its jaws, cut off its head; it will adhere firmly and not come undone. Then place another ant near the first.
Continue to do this with several ants, according to the size of the wound. Then return the wound to its place and sew it up. These heads will remain stuck in the intestine until it heals and is well. This method will not cause any harm to the patient at all. It is also possible to suture the intestine with fine thread as well.
To draw the animal glue out of its container, take one end of the thread from the container and pull it tight. Then tie a fine, spun linen thread to that end, and thread this into a needle. The linen thread, with the animal glue on it, is then used to suture the intestine. It is then returned to the abdominal cavity. This type of suturing with ants and animal glue is merely a matter of hope and experimentation.
If the tear is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy and it will not heal at all.
Chapter Eighty-Sixth.
On the Treatment of Colds and Catarrh.
Know that any wound or swelling, if it becomes chronic and does not heal but instead develops into an ulcer that constantly discharges pus, is called a "naasoor" in general terms, wherever it may be located. We call it a "cold sore."
It is, in fact, a hardened mass of white matter, without pain, that has a cavity like the quill of a bird's feather.
That is why some people call it a "feather." Sometimes it is moist and constantly discharges pus. At other times, the moisture may stop. This moisture can be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
And I presented in the division when mentioning surgeries that every ulcer that does not heal and flesh does not grow in it is due to one of nine causes, one of which is either a lack of blood in the body or its bad quality, or because there is hard flesh inside it and on its lips, preventing the growth of good flesh. Or it is much afflicted with pus and filth, or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the material supplying it is of poor quality, or because the medicine is not appropriate for its treatment, or because a corruption has occurred in the town of the plague type, or because there is a peculiarity in the town.
Or it is much afflicted with pus and filth, or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the material supplying it is of poor quality, or because the medicine is not appropriate for its treatment, or because a corruption has occurred in the town of the plague type, or because there is a peculiarity in the town. As was shown in the city of Saragossa, where the ripening of diseases is difficult and the healing of tumors is slow by nature, or because there is one bone or several bones in it, and I have explained all these causes, their signs, and their treatments with medicine in the division.
And I should inform you here about the treatment of fistulas and colds that occur through manual work, know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body, some of which end in large veins, arteries, or nerves.
Or to the peritoneum, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to a rib from the ribs, or to a vertebra from the vertebrae of the back, or to a joint from the complex joints, composed in a complex manner such as the hand and foot, and some of which lead to a nearby major organ and so on.
So, any of these fistulas on this description are of the difficult diseases that do not accept treatment and working on them is trouble and ignorance. If any of these fistulas have not reached the places I mentioned, then hope and ambition for its treatment are warranted.
And I wanted you to reach that knowledge, so take a speculum of copper or iron if the fistula passes straight and search it with it. If there is a bend in the fistula, then search it with a lead speculum, as lead softens its body.
If the fistula, upon entering and turning towards the bend, has many openings and you cannot detect them with a probe, inject fluid into one of its mouths. The moisture which you inject into it will travel towards the other mouths and flow out.
Then thoroughly investigate in any way possible to determine whether there is bone or nerve, or whether the fistula is deep or shallow, or whether it is a single fistula with many openings. Be sure to ascertain all of this to the best of your ability, through careful questioning and by observing the pain when you press your hand on the area.
And similarly, consider the signs and causes of the tumor. Once you have a clear understanding of all these factors, proceed with treatment confidently.
If the tumor is apparent and close, or in a healthy place far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the places mentioned to you, then cut open the tumor as previously described and remove from it all adhesions, corrupt flesh, and excess flesh.
And remove anything that grows in its mouth, such as flesh or a pustule, and treat it until it heals. If the tumor is deep-seated and on a straight course, then you should cut it open as deeply as possible and then cleanse it of all its corrupt flesh.
Then use twisted lint saturated with sharp medicines and insert it into the bottom of the tumor which you can reach with the iron. Do this several times so that the sharp medicine will consume all that remains in the bottom of the tumor from corruption.
Then force it to heal with ointments that promote healthy flesh growth. If it does not heal in this way, then remove it as previously described. If the cause of the tumor is bone and you have confirmed this, then examine it and cut it open as I told you unless something prevents you from doing so.
If a vein, nerve or major organ is exposed as we said, and the bone is revealed with some corruption and blackness, then scrape it until the corruption is gone and treat it with what promotes flesh growth until it heals. If it does not heal and pus continues to form, as it did before.
Know that you have not reached the complete removal of corruption. Expose everything on it again and thoroughly scrape and clean it with your utmost effort. Then force it to heal. If it heals, good; if not, know that this corruption is deep within a cavity. Expose everything again.
Thoroughly scrape and clean it with your utmost effort. If the corrupt bone is small and you are able to extract it, then extract it with delicate forceps suitable for this purpose.
If there are many bones, draw out all of them and do not leave anything behind. If any ligaments obstruct you, and cutting them presents no danger, cut those ligaments and the flesh, if there is any, and free the bones.
If you cannot draw out the bones at once, cover the wound with something that will cause it to fester and leave it for several days until the flesh and ligaments around those bones become putrid. Preserve the wound so that the incision you made does not close up.
Rather, if you fear that, place upon it cotton wool soaked in powdered sulfur mixed with oil or cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. For if those ligaments fester and the bones are softened, it will be easy to draw them out.
But if it is one large bone, such as the shinbone or the thighbone and so forth, and only its surface has decayed, scrape it deeply until that blackness and decay are gone, then bind up the wound. But if a large part of it has decayed and the decay has reached the marrow of the bone, it must be removed.
Cut away the whole bone to where the decay ends; then treat it so that it heals and fuses together. I will tell you about a young man who had an injury in his leg, as an example and help for your treatment: this young man was of mature age.
He was about thirty years old and he had pain in his leg, caused by something moving inside his body until it reached the leg and a large tumor developed, with no external cause. Time passed and doctors made mistakes so that the tumor opened up.
A great deal of material flowed out and he was treated badly so that the leg became ulcerated, with many openings all discharging pus and bodily fluids. A group of doctors treated him for about two years, but there wasn't a skilled surgeon among them.
When I reached him, I saw his leg and the humors flowing from those openings in a great stream, and the man had become emaciated and his color yellowed. I then inserted a probe into one of those openings and it led to the bone, and then I explored all the openings.
I found that some of them led to others from all sides of the leg, so I proceeded and made an incision along one of those openings until I exposed some bone, which I found decayed, eaten away, blackened, putrefying, and pierced through until the hole reached the marrow. Then I spread open what had been revealed.
I was able to remove the decayed bone and I believed that there was nothing in the bone except for that decay which I had cut out and spread, as though I had eradicated it. Then I dressed the wound with astringent medications for a long period, but it did not heal. I then returned and exposed the bone again, above the first exposure.
I found the decay adhering to the bone, so I spread open what appeared of that decay as well, and then I tried to dress it, but it did not heal or join together. I exposed it again, and I continued to cut away pieces of the bone, attempting to bind them, but they would not heal until I had removed about a handbreadth's worth of bone.
I removed it with its marrow and then dressed it with medications, which healed quickly. This repetition of work and incision was necessary because of the weakness of the patient, his poor constitution, and my fear for his life, as he would frequently suffer a faint spell from excessive vomiting. He recovered completely.
Flesh grew solidly in place of the bone, and his condition improved. His strength returned, and he was able to move about without any harm. If a bone in any part of the body has been broken...
it should be spread in this manner: take a bandage and tie it to the end of the broken bone, ordering someone to pull it upwards. Then make another bandage of thicker wool than the first one.
Then bind it upon the flesh beneath the bone and extend its end so that the flesh is drawn downwards, while you expose the flesh from the location which you wish to spread lest the saw injure the flesh; and place a piece of wood or board firmly underneath the bone from below.
For if you do this, the saw will not be prevented from cutting the corrupted bone, and the sawing should be above the place of corruption a little so that there is no corruption in the cavity of the bone, and it does not appear outwardly to the sense, lest you are forced to saw it again.
But if the bone is corrupted and is not protruding but joined together, and the corruption is in its middle or some part of it, then expose the flesh from all its sides, then place the board underneath and saw it from the first side where the corruption is.
Then when you finish sawing it, saw it from the other side, and let the sawing be a little distance from the corruption as we said. But if the corruption is in a joint, cut the corrupted joint itself and saw the bone where it joins on the other side.
But if the corruption is in connection with two joints, there is no artifice except excision. But if the corruption is in a hand metacarpus or a foot metacarpus, the matter in treating it is very difficult, but you should pare away the corruption however it appears to you, and excise and purify it in any way that you are able.
And by any artifice that becomes possible for you, as long as a vein or nerve does not obstruct you, and know that saws and cutters for cutting these bones are many according to the position, setting, thickness, thinness, size, and smallness of the bones, as well as their solidity and sponginess. Therefore, you should prepare for each type of work a tool corresponding to that work.
And know that the operations themselves may guide you to the type of instrument that you need if you have long practice and knowledge in the arts of this craft, for he who is skilled in his craft and has witnessed various types of diseases. He may deduce for himself the instruments suitable for each disease and I have illustrated for you at the end of this chapter several instruments.
You should make them examples to be followed and a measure by which to measure others, God willing, Image of a saw:
Image of another saw:
Image of a small saw:
Image of a large saw:
The head of this scalpel is shaped like the head of a nail, hammered and engraved with a design like that of an escalpellum, but it is suitable for scraping the heads of joints if they become spoiled or a large wide bone. Image of another small scalpel:
Image of a broad scalpel:
Its upper arch and blade are made of iron and its handle of wood, shaped like a tight cone. Image of a scalpel with a cavity:
Image of another delicate scalpel:
Image of another scalpel with a hooked end:
Image of a small scalpel resembling a probe:
Image of another small section:
And its end is like a pestle, it acts in many places for scraping bones. Image of a scalpel suitable for scraping what has been pierced from the bones:
Its tip is triangular with sharp edges, made of Indian iron, and all the scalpels and sections we mentioned should be made in the same way. Image of a scalpel:
Chapter seventy-eighth.
On amputating limbs and sawing bones.
Limbs may become gangrenous either from an external cause or an internal one, and if you treat that gangrene with medication and the treatment is unsuccessful and you see the gangrene advancing in the limb unimpeded.
It is necessary to cut off that member where the corruption has reached so that the patient may be saved from death or from a great affliction which is greater than the loss of the member, and a sign of this happening to him is that the member becomes black until you think that fire has burned it.
Or it putrefies after the blackness until that putrefaction strives towards what is next to that member and takes hold of the whole body, so hasten to cut it off; likewise if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain creatures such as the sea scorpion or viper or centipede and the like.
If the corruption or sting is in the tip of a finger, cut off the finger and do not delay for the corruption to strive towards the hand; likewise if it has seized the hand, cut it off from the base of the wrist and do not delay for the corruption to strive until it seizes the forearm.
Likewise, if it seizes the forearm, cut off the arm at the elbow in the joint itself; if you see that the corruption has spread towards the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder at all for in that there is the death of the patient and use other treatment according to one's ability.
And you do the same with the leg, if the corruption has seized a toe, cut off the toe at one of its joints; and if it has seized the instep, cut off the entire foot; and if it has ascended to the knee, cut off the thigh at the knee joint.
And if the corruption has reached above the knee there is no remedy except to leave it and abandon the patient to death; the method of cutting off or excising a member is to tie a ligature below the place you wish to cut and another ligature above the place.
One attendant extends one ligature downwards and another attendant extends the upper ligature upwards; then you yourself pare the flesh between the two ligatures with a wide spatula until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or excise it; and you should place pieces of linen from all directions.
So that the saw does not touch the correct place and the patient suffers extra pain and a hot swelling, if bleeding occurs during your work, quickly staunch the place or apply some astringents to it, then return to your treatment until you finish.
Then bind the injured limb with a bandage suitable for it and treat it until it heals, and I will tell you an example of a man who had this exact ailment in his leg. It happened that there was blackness in his leg along with a burning sensation like fire.
This corruption first occurred in his toe, until it seized the whole foot. The man cut off the foot from himself when he saw the corruption advancing in the limb with the intensity of pain and burning he was experiencing.
After a long time had passed, this same corruption appeared in the index finger of his hand. He came to me and I repelled that evil with the remedies I applied to his hand after cleansing his body. But the evil did not relent and continued to advance in the other finger.
The corruption seized his hand, and he urged me to amputate it, but I refused him hoping to repel that evil and fearing for him upon amputating his hand death because the man's strength was failing. When he despaired of me, he went back to his town.
News reached me that he amputated his entire hand and was cured. I only told this story to be helpful in cases of this type of disease, and to serve as a guide to act upon.
Chapter eighty-eight.
On the treatment of abscesses and how to inject them with medicine.
If a swelling occurs in some fleshy organs and lasts for a while until it gathers pus, then bursts or opens and all the pus inside it comes out, leaving the place empty like a vessel...
Skin that is like cloth, thin and not severely damaged so as to affect the bone, nerve, or ligament, deserves to be called a hidden place, not a protector, unless its duration lengthens until corruption affects one of these organs.
Then it is called a protector or a cicatrix, and its treatment is to cut all that skin as it runs, especially if it has become thin and like cloth and you are sure that it will not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
If you hope that the skin will adhere and its corruption has not reached that extent and there is thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with injection. That is, look at the hidden place; if it is large and the pus emanating from it has a foul smell, inject it with Egyptian medicine.
This is vinegar, oil, honey, and ginger in equal parts collected in a vessel and cooked over fire until the medicine thickens and comes to the consistency of honey. Then take what you need and thin it with water and honey, and inject it into the hidden place, tighten its opening, and leave the medicine inside for two hours.
Then press it out; do this for several days until the hidden place is cleansed and the stench goes away. It may also be injected with ash water if this medicine is not available to you. This is done by taking the ash of vine wood or oak wood and pouring water over it.
Then strain it and inject it until you are sure that the hidden place has been washed. If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, inject him with water and honey mixed with a little powdered ginger.
Or inject him with honey and drink mixed together, for honey cleanses and washes, while the drink adheres to the hidden place, especially if the drink has astringent and drying properties. If you do this several times and are sure that the corruption of the hidden place has gone, then inject it with something that promotes flesh growth.
Such as taking some of the palm marrow and dissolving it in rose oil and astringent syrup, or injecting it with some of the other medicines and ointments whose properties we have established in the treatise on ointments, if the opening of the fistula is narrow so that the injector cannot enter.
Then widen it a little with an iron instrument, or insert a wick soaked in Egyptian ointment or the ointment called "sericon" until it widens. Likewise, if the opening is also wide, bring its edges together with stitches and leave an opening large enough for the injector to enter without difficulty.
And if the opening from which the pus flows is elevated, cut it at its lowest point so that the pus drains downwards, for if pus becomes trapped in the depths of the fistula, it will prevent the flesh from growing there.
If you cannot cut the fistula downwards as you wish, then position the limb so that the pus flows easily, according to what is possible for you; make sure nothing at all becomes trapped inside.
As for the poultices applied externally to the fistula and how they are applied, take one of the appropriate medicinal pastes and spread it on a linen cloth, making sure it is large enough to cover the entire fistula. Then, cut a hole in the cloth opposite the opening of the fistula, making it slightly wider than the fistula itself. Spread some soft ointment on another piece of cloth the size of the hole and place it over the first cloth, leaving a space between the ointment and the fistula's opening to allow pus to drain freely. Do not remove the large cloth until later.
For several days, and the one covering the opening of the fistula should be removed at all times so that any pus that has accumulated can drain out. This will allow you to determine whether the discharge is copious or scant, mature or immature.
Also, examine the site of the abscess itself to see if its owner feels pain there or not, and whether there is swelling or not. Then, if your treatment continues in this way and you see that the material coming out is slight at the mouth of the abscess.
Know that the abscess may have adhered or nearly adhered, so then dissolve it the next day or on the third day. And when you dissolve the wound, replace the cloth with another and renew the ointment. If thin pus comes out of the abscess after a long time, do not despair of its healing.
For its healing is near because some people have a slow growth of flesh in their wounds and others the opposite. If pus that is not ripe comes out of the abscess after many days, know that the abscess has not adhered. If the healing of the abscess is delayed.
And if its matter lasts, increase the drying medications, and let them be in their composition moist and in their strength dry, such as palm ointment if it has been increased with an excess of colophony. And the most effective treatment is to take palm ointment.
Dissolve it with rose oil and sprinkle aged, moderately thick syrup on it, then knead it in and use it. You may also do something like this if you do not have palm ointment available: honey, if you cook it until it becomes viscous, and use it. Or take myrrh, patience herb, and cinnamon, crush them all, and sprinkle them on the honey while it is over the fire. Then apply it to a cloth and tighten it over the abscess, or coat it with cooked honey until it thickens, sprinkle medications on top of it, and place the cloth over it and tighten it.
Long angelica, the root of asphodel, common asarabacca, and centaury may also be used, either singly or in combination. Crush them, sift them, and sprinkle them on the honey you have described, and use it. If the matter of the abscess lasts and does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption within it.
And if it affects the bones, or any of the solid nerves, or the ligaments, treat it as we have previously described for dislocations.
Chapter Ninety-Eight.
On the treatment of ingrown nails, diseased nails, amputation of supernumerary fingers, and separation of conjoined fingers.
An ingrown nail is a large amount of flesh that grows under the toenail of the big toe or foot, and perhaps in all the other fingers. If it is neglected for a long time, it swells and becomes a hot tumor.
Or it may become putrid and rotten until it eats away at the base of the nail, and perhaps destroys it altogether.  The decay may even reach the bone, making it smell foul, and the tip of the finger becomes swollen with a livid color. If you treat it as described in the division and your treatment is unsuccessful...
...then you should cut away all the excess flesh that grows from under the nail with an iron instrument, and then cauterize the wound afterwards; for cautery is very beneficial in this case. But if the bone is sound and the nail itself is also sound...
...and the angle containing the nail has pressed the flesh inward, causing it to fester and become inflamed, then you should place a fine splint under the angle of the ingrowing nail, lifting it up, and carefully cut away that flesh.
Then apply caustic medicines to the remaining flesh until it is all gone, and treat it with ointments until it heals. But if the decay has affected the bone, then you should cut out that bone and remove it, for it will not heal as long as there is a decayed bone present at all.
If you see gangrene and decay advancing in the finger, then amputate it at one of the joints, as previously mentioned, and treat it until it heals. If a nail receives a blow or bruise and there is severe pain, you should first lance the affected area.
Then the nail is split with a sharp, obliquely angled knife from above downwards, and care must be taken not to reach the flesh beneath the nail with the incision, for this would cause the patient severe pain and lead to the growth of excessive flesh in that place. The area is then treated with something to relieve the pain.
As for the extra finger that sometimes occurs on some people's hands, it may be all fleshy, or it may have bones in some parts, and it may even have a nail. The growth of some of them may occur at the base of the joint of some fingers.
Or its growth may be in some parts of the finger, and that which grows in some parts of the finger does not move, while that which grows at the joint of the finger may move.  Any fleshy part of it can be easily cut off by cutting it at its base with a wide knife.
But the treatment of that which grows at the base of the joint is difficult, so refrain from cutting it. As for that which grows on the finger in one of the phalanges, its flesh should first be cut in a circular manner down to the bone, then the bone should be spread with one of those saws suitable for that purpose.
Then treat it until it heals. As for the adhesion that sometimes occurs between the fingers, this often happens and may be congenital or occur after a wound or burn, or something similar. It should then be split.
So that the fingers return to their natural state, then place between them a wick or a rag soaked in rose oil so that they do not adhere quickly and separate them, or put a thin lead plate between them until the area heals properly.
Similarly, if adhesion occurs between some fingers and the palm, split that adhesion according to what is appropriate and restores the shape of the limb.
Chapter Ninety.
On the Sectioning of Arteries.
Arteries are twisted, thick veins filled with black humor which occur in most of the body's organs and are most common in the legs, especially in weavers, carriers, and porters. It is necessary that you first use a strong cupping to remove the black bile from the body several times.
Then, phlebotomize the patient with a lancet. As for treating it with iron, it is done in two ways: one is to cut and remove the black blood, and the other is to cauterize the vein and remove it entirely. As for cutting, proceed as follows: first, bathe the leg with hot water.
Until the thick, turbid blood dissolves, then bind the patient's leg from above his thigh to below his knee with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place or two places or three wide incisions.
Then draw out the black blood with your hand from below the leg upwards and from above downwards until a sufficient quantity of blood has been released, or as much as the patient can tolerate. Then bind it up and order him to avoid foods that produce black bile. Repeat vomiting and phlebotomy.
When the veins are full and this harms the patient, but as for cauterizing it, proceed as follows: shave the patient's leg if he has a lot of hair. Then take him into the bath and bathe his leg in hot water until it reddens and sweats or have him engage in strenuous exercise.
If a bathhouse is not available to heat the limb, then cut the skin opposite the vein lengthwise, either at its end near the knee or below it near the heel. Then open the skin with forceps and excise the vein from all sides until it is exposed to touch.
When it appears, you see it reddish-purple; and when it is freed from the skin, you also see it as if it were a tendon. Then insert a ligature under it until, when it rises and comes out of the skin, hang it with a smooth blind ligature. Then make another incision near that incision, the length of three fingers.
Then strip the skin from the vein until it appears, then raise it with a ligature as you did and hang it with another ligature as you did first, then make another incision or many incisions if needed.
Then pull and cut it at the end of the incision at the heel, then draw and pull it until it comes out of the second incision; then draw it up to the incision above it, and do this until you draw it from the third incision, the highest of all incisions, until it all comes out and then cut it.
If pulling and drawing does not suffice, insert a strong doubled needle with thread and tie it, then draw it; insert a ligature under it and twist it with your hand in all directions until it comes out; be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, drawing it will become very difficult for you.
A complication will enter the patient; and if you draw it all out, place wool soaked in syrup and rose oil or oil on the surgical sites and treat it until it heals. If the varicose vein is convoluted with twists to various sides.
And it was not on a straight line as we said, you should make incisions on it at each side of its convolutions and twists; then hang it with ligatures until you draw it all out. Be careful when making the incisions that you do not cut or injure the vein, for drawing will become difficult for you if you are careless.
Image of the incision with which the varicose vein is dissected.
Image of the blind snare.
It does not have a barb like other snares and is not sharp at the end so as not to injure the vessel. It is thick and curved, smooth because if it were thin, it would cut the vessel with its curvature. But it should have the advantage of thickness as we have said.
Chapter Ninety-One.
On the ligature of the median vein.
This vein arises in the legs in hot countries such as Hejaz and the lands of the Arabs, and in hot, barren countries with little vegetation, and it may arise in other parts of the body besides the legs. It is caused by putrefaction that occurs under the skin.
As it occurs within living bodies, worms, the pus of abscesses, and worms that develop between the skin and flesh, a sign of the beginning of this vein is that intense inflammation occurs in the leg, followed by the area suppurating, and then the vein begins to emerge from that suppurated spot.
As if it were the root of a plant or animal, and if its end appears, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead weighing from one to two dirhams, tied securely, and left hanging from the leg.
Every time something emerges from it to the outside, wrap it in the lead and tie it. If it grows very long, cut off some of it and wrap the remainder; do not cut it from its origin before it has all emerged because if you cut it, it will contract and retract into the flesh, causing a tumor and putrefaction at the site and a foul ulcer.
Therefore, it should be drawn out and gently pulled until it all comes out and nothing remains in the body. It may emerge from this vein in some people to a length of five or ten cubits.
I have been told that it emerged from a man to a length of twenty cubits. If it breaks off while you are treating it, insert a probe into the hole and pack it tightly with a long bandage along the body so that everything inside it is emptied. Then try to cleanse the area with medicines for several days.
Then treat it with the treatment of tumors, and this vein may have many branches, especially if it appears in the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, so it will have many mouths and a branch will emerge from each mouth. Treat it as we mentioned in the division and what precedes.
The Second and Ninety-Second Chapter.
In the incision for the worm that is generated under the gluteal fold and is called the cow's disease.
This disease is called in some of our countries cow's disease because it often appears in cows and it is a small single worm that is generated between the skin and flesh and crawls throughout the body ascending and descending.
It becomes apparent to the senses through its crawling from one organ to another until it pierces wherever it has pierced in the skin, making a place and coming out, forming it from putrefaction of some humors, as it appears with worms and animals and pumpkin seeds in the abdomen.
And it is expected from its harm that if it crawls in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open inside and come out, thus ruining the eye; this often occurs. If you want to treat it and remove it, it will only be when it is crawling and appearing to the senses.
You should tighten what is above and below it with a strong bandage, then make an incision on it and remove it; if it has sunk into the flesh and you cannot find it, apply heat to the spot with fire until it is burned. The greatest harm that is expected from it is ruining the eye as we have said.
If you see that it has become in the head near the eye, tighten under it on the forehead with a strong bandage, then make an incision on it and remove it. The patient should observe cleansing their body with laxatives for foul and unhealthy humors and abstain from foods that produce putrefaction.
Chapter Seventy-Third.
On incision for the ailment known as nafr.
This ailment which is called nafr in our country is a pain that occurs in some organs and then moves from one organ to another, and I have seen it as I will describe to you.
I was summoned to a sick woman in some distant lands, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a slight swelling in the vein of the forearm. After an hour, I observed that swelling creeping along the vein like a worm ascending quickly to her elbow as fast as quicksilver.
If it moved from one place to another, the pain would cease from that location and settle in the elbow. Then after an hour, it flowed throughout her entire body until it reached the other arm. She then told me that it revolved around her whole body as she had witnessed.
I was astonished by the speed of its transfer from one organ to another, and I had never before seen this ailment with my own eyes in this manner; although I had heard of groups of people experiencing pain that moved from one organ to another, I had never witnessed it myself as I did with this woman.
I concluded that this must be because the woman was from the desert, with a dry physique and visible veins, which allowed this traveling sensation to be perceptible. It would not appear in this way for those who are well-nourished or have moist bodies with concealed veins.
Therefore, if you wish to treat it and the patient feels pain, and it appears to you as we have described, tighten a bandage above and below it with urgency and make an incision over it so that the trapped wind escapes and the area can heal.
However, if you do not see it with your own eyes, treat it by rubbing the body and using remedies that dispel winds and scatter them, such as black cumin seeds, fenugreek, and similar medications.
Chapter Seventy-Fourth.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows may differ according to their types and according to the places where they are located in the body. As for their difference according to their types, some are large and some are small, some are hollow glass and some are solid glass, and some have three corners and four corners.
Some have tongues and some have splinters. As for those that are according to the organs in which they are located, they are of two types: either the organs are major hollow organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and the like. So, when an arrow falls into one of these organs and the signs of death that I will describe to you appear, then you should avoid removing that arrow from it, for death befalls its owner in most cases. And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow has not been concealed in the depths of the organ, take it out and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain, if an arrow hits it and pierces the bone and wounds the dura mater that is on the brain, then a severe headache, pain and dizziness will result from that.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow has not been concealed in the depths of the organ, take it out and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain, if an arrow hits it and pierces the bone and wounds the dura mater that is on the brain, then a severe headache, pain and dizziness will result from that. And redness in the eyes, redness of the tongue, convulsions, confusion of mind, vomiting sometimes, and perhaps blood comes out of the nostrils or ears, and perhaps speech is cut off and the voice goes away, and moisture like porridge comes out from the place of the wound and flows from it like meat water.
If these signs appear, refrain from treating the patient and removing the arrow if it has not come out. As for the signs of the arrow if it hits the heart and was close to the left breast, and he felt as if it had been embedded in something solid, not something empty.
And perhaps the arrow had a movement resembling the movement of the pulse, and black blood would flow from the wound, followed by coldness in the extremities, cold sweat, and fainting. Know that death is inevitable. And a sign of an arrow if it injures the lung is the outflow of frothy blood from the wound.
The vessels following the neck swell, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes with a loud respiration and desires to inhale cold air. If the arrow has struck the diaphragm in the chest, it will be close to the small ribs and respiration will be great with severe pain.
He sighs and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved, and if the arrow has struck the liver, severe pain follows and blood resembling the liver in redness issues from the wound. If the arrow has struck the stomach, perhaps something undigested will issue from the wound with the food.
Its sign is apparent, and if the arrow has struck the abdomen and become fixed in it, and some excrement issues from the wound or pus or an intestine that has been perforated, there is no hope for his treatment nor for extracting the arrow. If the arrow has struck the bladder and urine emerges.
And something protrudes from it outwardly and the pain intensifies upon the patient, then know that he is doomed. But as for all other organs such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, upper arm, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, leg, and similar organs, they have been spared in most cases.
Provided the arrow has not encountered an artery or nerve, and the arrow is not poisoned, I will tell you of some things that I have witnessed concerning these arrows so that you may deduce your treatment from them. A certain arrow had struck a man in the fleshy part of his eye at the root of the nose.
I extracted it for him from the other side beneath the cartilage of the ear, and he recovered without any harm occurring to his eye. I also extracted another arrow for a Jew which had struck him in the cartilage of his eye beneath the lower eyelid; the arrow had become obscured, and I could only grasp its small point which adhered to the shaft.
It was a large arrow, one of the hard composite arrows with a square iron head that was smooth and had no ears. The Jew recovered without any ill effect occurring to his eye. I also extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian; the arrow was Arabic.
He had two ears which were split and a spear had gone deep into his throat, so I worked carefully until I removed it and the Christian recovered.  I also removed another spear from a man who had been pierced in the belly, and we thought he would die.
When thirty days or so had passed and his condition did not change, I split the arrow and worked on it until I removed it and he recovered without any ill effects. I saw a man who had been pierced by an arrow in his back, and the wound had closed around it.
Seven years later the arrow came out at the base of his thigh. I saw a woman who had been pierced by an arrow in her belly, and the wound had closed around it. The arrow remained, and her condition did not change; she felt no ill effects from it in any of her natural actions.
I saw another man who had been pierced by an arrow in his face, and the wound had closed around it. He experienced little pain. There are many cases like this. I removed an arrow from one of the sultan's officers; it was lodged in the middle of his nose, tilted slightly to the right.
The arrow was completely buried. I was called to treat him three days after the arrow wound occurred, and I found the wound very narrow. I widened it with a thin probe and felt nothing. He felt a pain and ache under his right ear from the right incision.
I thought that pain might be from the tip of the arrow, so I dressed the area with a poultice that had drawing and ripening properties hoping that the area would swell and the mark of the arrow would appear. I cut into him again, but nothing happened in that spot to indicate that the arrow had reached it.
I continued the poultice for many days, but nothing happened. The wound closed during that time and the patient remained troubled by its removal for a long period until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me. I then applied a harsh, caustic medicine to the wound for many days.
Until it opened and I probed it, feeling the fine point of the arrow stuck in the wood. Then I further widened the wound with that sharp medicine until the point of the arrow appeared clearly to us and I went along with it for a period of about four months.
Then, when the wound widened and I was able to enter the forceps into it, I pulled and moved it, but it did not respond by coming out. So I continued to soften and maneuver it with various instruments until one day I grasped it firmly with all its limbs, as shown in the figure at the end of this chapter.
And physicians used to rule that the cartilage of his nose could not be joined, but I joined it and the wound healed and the patient recovered completely without anything hurting him at all. And I tell you how I remove some arrows so that this may serve as a measure and guide for what I have not mentioned.
For the details of these techniques cannot be grasped by description nor encompassed in a book, but rather the skillful craftsman measures the little against the much and what is present against what is absent, and infers a new operation and a new instrument when faced with strange emergencies.
If we descend from this craft, I say that arrows are only extracted from the organs in which they have lodged in two ways: either by pulling from the place where they entered or from the opposite side. Those that are removed from where they entered.
Either the arrow is prominent in a fleshy place, so it is pulled out. If it does not respond by coming out at the time it occurred, you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it decays, making it easier to pull and remove. Likewise, if it is lodged in bone.
And if it does not respond by coming out, leave it for a few days as well and try pulling and moving it every day, for it will come out. If it still does not come out after several days, you should pierce around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine awl until you widen the space for the arrow, then pull and remove it.
If the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and has penetrated one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of those symptoms which I have mentioned to you appear from the wound, then desist from drawing out the arrow and leave it until his condition becomes clear after a few days.
Then proceed to draw out the arrow and extract it; but if it is fixed very firmly and does not yield to traction, use trephines around the arrow as I have described to you, then treat the site until it heals. But if the arrow has become concealed in some part of the body. And has disappeared from sensation, then search for it with a probe; if you feel it, draw it out with some instrument suitable for the purpose; but if you are unable to do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow's penetration, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein in that place.
Then make an incision to widen the wound so that you can get hold of the arrow and draw it out; if it has two flanges by which to grasp it, then free the flesh adhering to them from every side by every means possible; proceed even if you are unable to free the flesh in breaking the flanges and splitting them until you succeed.
And if you attempt to extract the arrow from any location, use the twisting of your hand with the callipers in all directions until you free it, and be extremely careful lest the arrow breaks, for then it will be difficult for you to draw it out; if you are unable to do so at that time.
Leave it for days until the flesh around it putrefies, then return to it; for then it will be easier to extract. If hemorrhage occurs, use what we have mentioned concerning its treatment in its chapter. And be very careful not to cut an artery or nerve or tendon, and use artifice.
In any case, you can remove the arrow, and let it be done gently, carefully, and firmly as I have described to you. And it is fitting for you to use, when drawing out the arrow, that the patient should be in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, which is best.
If you cannot do that, use whatever forms you can. As for the arrow which emerges from the opposite side, either something has protruded from it outwards, or you will find the point of the arrow by feeling near the skin, close to the surface and protruding.
So make an incision over it, and let the cut be as wide as the arrowheads will fit, then draw it out, for it will come out easily. If it is stuck in a bone, twist your hand in a rotating motion until the arrow acts upon the bone and widens its own space, then draw it out.
Otherwise, leave it for a few days and try again so that it may come out. If the arrow shaft is still in place, push it in. If the shaft has fallen out and you wish to use pressure, insert the hollow instrument into it so that its cavity enters the tail of the arrow, then push it in with this.
If the arrow is hollow, push it in with an instrument that fits into that cavity, for this will make the arrow come out easily. If the arrow is poisoned, you should cut out all the flesh where the poison has penetrated if possible, then treat it with what is suitable for that.
If the arrow is lodged in the chest, abdomen, bladder, or side and is near what can be felt with a probe, and you are able to make an incision over it, do so and take care not to cut any vein or nerve, then remove it.
Then suture the wound if it needs it and treat it until it heals.
Its ends are shaped like the beak of a bird, made as if it were a file; when it grasps an arrow or anything else, it does not let go. It can be made in large, small, and medium sizes, all according to the size of the arrow and the width of the wound.
Image of the hollow speculum.
Image of the pointed speculum.
This speculum has a pointed end like a stylet to make it easy to insert into a hollow arrow and push it through.
Chapter Ninety-Fifth.
On Phlebotomy.
There are thirty veins in the body which are customarily opened for phlebotomy, sixteen of them being in the head: the two temporal veins behind the ears known as the temporals, the two arteries in the temples that are visible, and the two veins in the hollows of the eyes known as the viewers.
And the vein that stands in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose, and the two jugular veins in the neck, and the two veins in the upper lip of the mouth, and the two veins in the lower lip – these veins being known as the jaw veins – and the two veins under the tongue.
As for the veins that are opened for phlebotomy in the arm and hand, there are five: one of them is the cephalic vein, which is on the outer side and is commonly called the head vein; the basilic vein is the middle vein and is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic vein and is commonly called the body vein.
The basilica, which is located on the inner side, is also called the axillary vein and is commonly called the belly vein; the brachial vein, which is located on the forearm, is the one that adheres to it and appears prominently above the thumb; and the median cubital vein.
It is the vein between the little toe and the next one, in the leg and foot there are three veins, one of which is under the popliteal fossa on the outer side, the second is the saphenous vein and it is located at the heel on the inner side and the femoral vein and it is located at the ankle on the outer side.
And in the other leg there are three veins like them, as for the two veins behind the ears, their incision is beneficial for chronic colds, migraines, scabies and poor chronic scalp sores, and how to cut them off as I describe.
This is done by shaving the head of the patient and rubbing the back of his head in the place of the veins with a rough rag very well, then strangling the patient's neck with a turban until the veins appear and their location behind the ears in the two lower places of the head, so search for them with your finger and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark it there with ink.
Then take a skinny bistoury, which is known as the lancet, and insert it under the vein in the skin until the bistoury reaches the bone, then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut the vein with the skin in a severed piece, the length of the piece being the length of two closed fingers.
Or something like that, and you send from the blood the amount you want, then tighten them with ligatures and leave them until they heal. I have previously mentioned in the beginning of the book their cutting and cauterization. As for the two arteries in the temples, it is beneficial to cut them off for chronic migraines, severe headaches, persistent ophthalmia and acute copious discharge directed to the eyes.
And how to cut them off as I describe to you: tighten the patient's neck with a turban until the arteries appear clearly and their pulse is evident under your finger, then mark it with ink. Then lift the skin from above the artery upwards with your index finger.
The ligature is introduced from below and the artery is raised upwards and severed as was done with the other arteries. You let out blood according to your need, then loosen the ligature of the patient and place your finger on the artery for a while.
Then you place cotton and a bandage on it and tighten it firmly from above, leaving it until it heals. Their mention, cutting, and ligating were previously presented in the beginning of the book. As for bleeding the artery of the forehead, its benefit is after bleeding the temporal artery for chronic facial conditions such as scabies, ulcers, and roseola.
The way to bleed it is as I describe: You constrict the patient's neck with a turban until the artery appears, then you take the instrument called the axe, and this is its image.
You place the forked prong at the head of the axe on the artery itself and strike it from above with a comb or something similar, then leave the blood to flow according to the amount you desire. Then you loosen the patient's constriction and tighten it until it heals.
It may also be opened with a wide speculum, but it should not have a sharp tip like other speculums. Instead, it should have a slightly broad tip and you dissect it carefully because the bone is nearby and a thin speculum might break inside.
As for the two arteries in the temples, their benefit is for eye conditions such as scabies, redness, and ophthalmia, as well as facial diseases. As for how to bleed them, you constrict the patient's neck with a turban, then dissect them while standing above his head. The bleeding should be slightly slanted lengthwise with a small, slightly wide speculum.
Since there is no flesh in this location, a thin-tipped speculum might break. After you let out the desired amount of blood, place cotton on it and tighten it for one night, then loosen it. As for bleeding the nose artery, it is beneficial for acute fevers.
Severe headache and diseases of the face, such as erysipelas which occurs in the nose, especially if chronic, and how to treat it by having the patient stretch his neck then grasp his nose with your left hand and take a thin long forceps.
Insert it into the middle of the cartilage itself between the nasal septum, because the nerve does not appear there for feeling, then blood will protrude from it immediately. You should press your hand with the forceps a little and draw out as much blood as you need, then tie it up for a night, for it will heal quickly.
As for the tonsils, their excision is beneficial for shortness of breath and the onset of leprosy and black diseases that appear on the surface of the skin such as black vitiligo, scabies, and bad ulcers, and how to excise them is by having the patient tie under his neck with a string, and the operator standing on the head of the patient.
The patient sits on a chair then you incise the artery to its length, making a wide incision, a little then draw out from it a moderate amount of blood or according to what you see is needed, then do the same to the other artery then untie the string.
And you tie the arteries with a moderate tightness so that the patient does not choke and leave it until tomorrow, for the wound will heal. As for the arteries of the jaw, their excision after phlebotomy is beneficial for scabs in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, chapped lips and bad ulcers.
That occur in the nose and around it, and how to excise them is by having the patient sit in front of you and tie his neck with a turban then turn back his lips and look at the two arteries which you see one on the right of the lip and the other on its left and distinguish them by their redness.
You will also find thin black vessels around them, so cut them off with a complete incision; if it is difficult for you and you do not know which they are aim to cut the largest and most visible one; similarly do so to the two arteries in the lower lip.
As for the veins under the tongue, it is beneficial to cut them after cupping the temples for the phlegm which may be in the throat from diseases of the mouth and throat. The method of cutting them is that you seat the patient facing the sun, raise his tongue and look under the tongue on one side for a vein and on the other side for a vein, and their color tends towards blackness.
Cut them carefully and do not overcut, for beneath them are arteries; it may happen that there is bleeding from these arteries. As for the three veins which are cut at the elbow, they are the ones habitually cupped by all people, and cupping them is done in two ways.
Either by inserting a wide lancet or olive-shaped one to the vein, or by making an incision with a surgical scalpel (which is called a "nasl" and is pictured here).
It should be wide as you see, so that it is suitable for opening hollow veins which are full and prominent, apparent and thick, and contain thick blood, such as those. And this is a picture of the olive-shaped lancet:
This lancet is narrower and has a finer point, suitable for cupping thin veins which contain thin, yellowish blood. And this is an image of the "nasl" surgical scalpel:
This instrument is suitable for making incisions and comes in various shapes and thicknesses depending on the width and narrowness of the veins. It can also be used to determine other things, and it is well-known among craftsmen.
As for the basilic vein, one of these three veins, its benefit in ligating is that it draws blood from the ulcers which are under the throat and neck extending to the chest and abdomen. The ligator should be cautious when ligating it and be on his guard, for underneath it lies an artery; if he makes a mistake and inserts the scalpel too deeply, he will cut that artery.
This will cause bleeding, so it should not be ligated with a stitching scalpel but should be cut with a scalpel. If the basilic vein does not appear clearly, it should be avoided and another one sought, or some of its tributaries requested.
Or you may ligate the brachial artery in its place, for it is evident and should be cut with a scalpel as we have said. If you wish to ligate it specifically, before stretching the arm, you should feel the spot until you locate the pulse, then mark it with ink.
Then tie the arm and cut the vein obliquely with a scalpel, as we have said, being careful that the incision is made away from the artery's position. When you tighten the ligature and see swelling at the spot you marked with ink, know that this swelling is the artery, so avoid it.
If you see the blood spurt when ligating, as urine spurts from a boy, and it is thin and red, know that it is arterial blood. At this point hasten to place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger; if the bleeding stops, which it often does, tie the arm tightly.
Leave it and warn the patient not to neglect it, and let him be on guard and not move it for several days until it heals. If the bleeding does not stop and overcomes you and no medicine is available at that moment, amputate the artery if it appears to you; its ends will contract and the bleeding will stop.
Or take the shell of a pistachio nut, split it, and take one half and stretch it tightly over the place of the artery with a ligature and bandages until the next day. If the bleeding has stopped, otherwise treat it as previously mentioned with the application of styptic agents to stop hemorrhage, and its blood is not difficult to cut in most cases.
As for the place of the small wound and the ability of the ligature in the arm, teach him. As for the brachial artery, it is beneficial to stop it so that it draws blood from the upper head and lower body because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic as we have said.
The one who dissects it should be on the neck from its division, for under it is a nerve. If he increases in the insertion of the scalpel and hits the nerve, numbness will occur in it which makes it difficult to see. It may not heal at all. This nerve often appears to the senses.
If it is hidden in some people and it is thin and does not appear, you should make your dissection of it a longitudinal incision with the scalpel and avoid the nerve as much as possible. If the artery is between two nerves, dissect the artery lengthwise. As for the cephalic artery, it is beneficial to stop it because it draws blood from the head.
It is useful for eye diseases and it is especially beneficial in this artery if you wish to dissect it; by inserting an olive scalpel or a wide rhinological scalpel because it is the safest of all arteries because there is no artery nor nerve underneath it.
However, you should avoid the head of the muscle only with the scalpel and seek the soft spot. It does not harm it if it is not hit in the first strike to repeat the dissection several times, except that it may swell in some people if it is not dissected in the first strike.
But that swelling does not harm it. As for the method of dissection and its consequences and what should be advanced in its repair, the first thing you should know is that dissection is either used to preserve health only.
As for its use in diseases and what is used to preserve health and maintain it and prevent the occurrence of diseases, cupping should be in one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the cephalic, basilic, and brachial veins, and cupping should be in the early spring when signs of fullness appear.
Cupping should be on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours have passed since sunrise. As for cupping that is used for diseases, it does not have a limited time but whenever necessity and urgency call for it, whether at night or day.
And in every hour and in every time, and children should not be cupped until they reach fourteen years of age, nor should the elderly who have exceeded sixty years of age be cupped. If anyone intends to cup for any reason.
It is necessary that his intestines be cleansed before cupping with a gentle enema if there is a lot of retained filth so that it does not attract to the veins during cupping, from the intestine surplus putrefaction that harms the main organs, and one who intends to cupping should not cup while intoxicated or drunk until that state has subsided.
And cupping should also be avoided after a bowel movement, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive intercourse, fatigue, exercise, staying up late, fasting and everything that weakens physical or mental strength. Then the blood is thinned before cupping if it is thick.
With foods, drinks and medicines if possible, then he enters the bath unless prevented by something or indulges in some exercise to thin the blood, and his cupping should be done in the afternoon as we said, and he intends to clear his chest that day of all bad psychological afflictions.
Such as worries, anger, and fear, and from all physical afflictions such as excessive fatigue and exertion and intercourse and the like. And his assembly prepares things that people have been accustomed to using from kinds of incense, fragrances, amusements and the like, each person according to what he can.
Then the fixer sits on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the patient sits, then he extends his arm and rubs it with his hand two or three times, then he tightens the bandage with the buckle and twists it two or three times, let the tightening be moderate.
Because when the tightening is not moderate, either by excessive tightening it prevents the flow of blood, or if it is relaxed, it also prevents the flow of blood, then after tightening, the patient should rub both his hands together with each other.
Until the veins swell and become apparent to the touch, then the fixer wipes the scalpel with a little of old olive oil in particular, then he places his left index finger on the same vein under the place he wants to dissect slightly so that the vein does not escape the blow. Because some veins are like a cord and they escape when phlebotomized, and some are full of air, so when the lancet is placed on it, it sinks under the lancet and deceives the phlebotomist, and he does not open the vein, and if he opens it, then it will only be a narrow opening.
Therefore, the phlebotomist must be firm and take his time in all these matters, then he lowers the lancet, if the vein opens at that time, otherwise he repeats it again under that place a little or above it quickly if the place does not swell.
If there is swelling or the patient is distressed, leave him for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, as it may bring a hot boil, and he should not enter the bath, then repeat the phlebotomy if he wishes, if the lancet was inserted and the opening was small and the flow of blood was thin.
And if you fear that the amount of blood you want will not come out, reinsert the lancet into the same hole carefully while maintaining its straightness and widen the opening a little, do this quickly before the place swells, for in many people the place may swell with a small opening.
If you see that it is swollen, do not apply anything to it at all for it will not help you. Put some poppy oil on it, for it makes the flow of blood easier and it is better in this place than oil itself or any other unguent.
Use poppy oil in all your vein phlebotomies when the flow of blood is difficult. The elixir Parva and shekhanj also do this if one of them is put on the place, for blood will thin and dissolve if it is thick.
If a large swelling occurs at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially to one who has not been phlebotomized before or whose vein was opened small, hasten and put a sponge soaked in warm salt water on the swelling and bind it for an hour, for it will dissolve.
You should do this after all the blood has come out of the vein itself or from another vein. If something black or green remains in the place after a few days, it does no harm; if you wish, apply some patience and myrrh dissolved on it.
Or some juice of the coloquintida or the like; a swelling and a protuberance often occur after phlebotomizing the basilica vein. Place your hand on it; if it feels soft when you press it, then that protuberance is bad, so beware of putting anything of what we mentioned on it.
For it may have bled arterial blood, but compress it with something astringent so that the place hardens and then treat it with all the other remedies until it heals. You should draw a quantity of blood from each person according to his strength and what color predominates in his blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see that it is thick, let it flow out until it thins; and if it is sharp, let it flow out until its sharpness goes away. One who is full and strong and needs to have a large quantity of blood drawn at once
To widen the incision for bloodletting, and the lancet should be wide; but if he is weak, then the opposite of that. It should be brought out in several times, and the hole should be narrow. The best thing to use for bloodletting is a sharpened, polished scalpel, split not stitched.
This type of bloodletting is safe from hemorrhage and severing nerves, it is the best and safest compared to bloodletting by crosswise and lengthwise incisions. And whoever is used to fainting during bloodletting should be given before bloodletting something of bread soaked in pomegranate water or syrup.
If he is sharp and the blood comes out in three or four times, if he has a cold temperament, then let him take before bloodletting bread soaked in wine syrup or in sweet honey syrup with spices, or in good fragrant syrup.
If fainting occurs during bloodletting and its cause is the excessive blood loss, then he should be given meat broth and light fragrant syrup and use aromatics with aloes wood and rub his chest with it, and use all that we mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting.
Whoever wants to relieve their arm and loosen their blood again, it is necessary for someone whose bloodletting was for much vomiting and their strength is weak, to let out a little blood, a little at a time, according to the strength on consecutive days.
But whoever wants to relieve their arm and loosen their blood again, and their body is strong, they should do that after seven or nine hours from their first bloodletting. But whoever wants to draw blood from their body to the opposite side it inclined to, it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the second or third day.
But whoever has a lot of blood in their body, which has become hot and intense and caused fever, it is necessary to draw out all the blood at once and take out a large amount and widen the incision until fainting occurs after you have agreed on all the conditions of bloodletting. And place your hand on his pulse when the blood flows so that death does not occur at the membrane, for this often happens if the ignorant person is careless and negligence occurs, and it should not be done if you wish to release the arm and let blood flow again.
And if the mouth of the vein has closed and blood is difficult to remove, do not pinch it hard or twist it forcefully, for that is very bad. Rather, either leave it until it softens again, or move the point of the scalpel to loosen the coagulated blood in the mouth of the vein.
Or apply some salt dissolved in water, or apply some of the Faruq antidote or the shakhnanza, and pinch it lightly until the blood comes out. If the vein has become swollen, leave it alone.
Do not touch it until the swelling subsides. If necessity requires you to let blood again, then either soften it above that spot or soften it in the other arm or in another vein.
As for bleeding the arm vein, it should be bled instead of the cephalic and basilic veins if they are not present or hidden because it is composed of them. The way to bleed it is to have the patient put his hand in hot water until the arm turns red and the vein appears clearly, then tie a bandage above it with moderate tightness.
Then bleed the vein slightly obliquely, neither wide nor long, and let the opening be wide. Make the incision above the wrist joint by a little. If the blood does not flow easily, return the hand to the bowl of hot water and let the blood flow into the water.
Until you have obtained the amount needed. If it is summertime, you may dispense with returning the hand to the hot water. The blood flows more easily into the hot water during wintertime. Bleeding this vein is safer than bleeding all other veins. Because there is no striking vein or nerve beneath it, as for cupping the left hand, it is beneficial for liver ailments, and the manner of performing it is to tighten the wrist of the hand with a bandage or your hand after immersing it in hot water until the veins swell.
Because there is no striking vein or nerve beneath it, as for cupping the left hand, it is beneficial for liver ailments, and the manner of performing it is to tighten the wrist of the hand with a bandage or your hand after immersing it in hot water until the veins swell. It becomes quite evident to the touch, then cup it slightly, and even if you cut it off entirely, it will not harm it in any way. Do not press deeply with the knife, for underneath is the nerve of the fingers, and the place is bare of flesh, then return the hand to the hot water.
Leave it so that the blood flows, for if you do not return it to hot water, the blood will congeal in the mouth of the vein and cease to flow. And when you have drawn out as much blood as needed, apply ointment and salt to the vein so that it does not heal quickly.
And you should do the same for every narrow branch. As for the benefit of cupping the left hand, it is beneficial for ailments of the spleen, and you perform it in the same manner as you did with the second, as for cupping the saphenous vein, its benefit is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body such as ailments of the uterus.
And retention of menstruation, kidney diseases, chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs, and suchlike diseases. As for the manner of performing it, immerse his leg in hot water and massage it until the veins swell then tighten above the ankle joint with a bandage and the vein is located near the heel, visible towards the big toe.
And from it branch out many smaller veins in the leg, so cup the widest one or at the heel where they converge, for this is best and safest. But if you cup on the front of the leg, be careful of the nerves beneath it.
Cup it slightly as if you were about to cut it off, and let the knife be sharp. And if the blood does not flow easily, let him immerse his leg in hot water again and leave the blood to flow until it is emptied. If the one who cups misses the vein on the first try...
Let him make the incision a little higher up, for the spot is safe and there is no fear of danger if you are careful of the nerve as we have said. So do you with the saphenous vein in the other leg. As for the femoral vein, its location is as we have said, at the back of the thigh on the inner side.
And the benefit of phlebotomy for hip pain if it is from hot blood and how to perform it: You should have the patient enter a bath, hasten, and tightly bind his leg from the hip to just above the heel with four fingers using a thin, long bandage; for it will not appear otherwise.
And if it appears, phlebotomize it in any position that suits you, either by torsion which is best, or by cutting it off with a knife or splitting it open; for its location is safe and it is very subtle in most people, so if you do not find it.
And if it does not appear at all to the sense, then phlebotomize some of its branches which appear on the back of the foot toward the little toe and the next one, being careful of the nerves and sending out as much blood as you wish.
Then release the binding and place cotton on the phlebotomy site and bind the area; for it will quickly heal.
Chapter Sixty-Six.
On Cupping and How to Use It.
Cupping instruments may be of horn, wood, copper, or glass. Cupping is performed in two ways: cupping with incision and bloodletting, and cupping without incision.
This type of cupping without incision is also performed in two ways.
And the temples, which are the two sides of the neck on both sides, and the jugular notch, which is below the lower jaw from the mouth, and the shoulder depressions, and the buttock depressions on the coccyx, and the elbow depressions, which are in the middle of the arms, and the leg depressions, and the wrist depressions.
Cupping draws blood from the thin, delicate veins scattered in the flesh. Therefore, strength is not lost as with venesection. Cupping should not be used with fire or without fire for any disease caused by fullness until the whole body is emptied.
If cupping is necessary due to illness or habit, we use it at any time: at the beginning of the month, at the end, and in the middle, and at any other time.
This is because some people, when they have an excess of blood that needs to be removed by cupping, experience heaviness and headache. Others experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. Still others experience itching on their face and sides, darkness, and swelling around their eyes. And some itch where the cups were placed.
Some laugh excessively, some taste blood in their mouth and their gums bleed, and some spit up blood. Others sleep more, and some see blood, redness, fighting, and wounds in their dreams, and similar things. Whenever we see something like this...
especially if it occurs in the middle third of the month, we order cupping after two or three hours have passed. As for the benefit of puncturing cupping, it helps with heaviness in the head and watery discharge into the eyes.
However, this should only be done after the whole body has been emptied. This type of cupping can be a substitute for cephalic phlebotomy. It is important to avoid using it on someone with a cold brain or a cold, as it will greatly harm them.
Therefore, it should not be used by the elderly and those with cold diseases, and those who habitually use it will suffer forgetfulness.
Therefore, you should order the barber to lower his hand with the cupping instrument slightly downwards so as to avoid causing forgetfulness. As for cupping on the shoulder, it is a substitute for bloodletting from the temple and bloodletting from the basilic vein.
Therefore, it is beneficial for asthma, shortness of breath, headache, cough and fullness. Cupping on the shoulder should be raised slightly because if it is done lower, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for cupping on the temples, it is beneficial for headaches, ophthalmia, migraine, spasms and toothache. It is a substitute for bloodletting from the basilic vein. You should order the barber not to press deeply with the cupping instrument so as not to sever an artery and cause bleeding.
As for cupping under the chin, it is beneficial for sores in the mouth and gum disease, and other diseases of the mouth. It may replace bloodletting from the temporal artery which is located in the lips. As for cupping on the shoulders, it is beneficial for palpitations caused by fullness and heat.
As for cupping on the abdomen, it is beneficial for what bloodletting from the three veins, basilic, temporal and cephalic, achieves because it draws blood from all those fine veins in the flesh and draws those fine veins from thicker ones so that the attraction reaches the three thickest veins.
You should order the barber not to press deeply with the cupping instrument because this area is bare of flesh and underneath it are nerves and arteries. As for a single cupping instrument applied on the coccyx, it is beneficial for hemorrhoids and sores in the lower region.
The barber should be ordered to have a large speculum, and it should be made of brass because the place requires strong pressure, and perhaps a glass speculum might break, and many conditions are stipulated for it. As for the leg specula, their fullness is less than what is evident.
Because it draws blood from all over the body and is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys, womb, and bladder, it brings on menstruation and is beneficial for pimples and boils, and acts as cupping for the veins and arteries, except that it weakens the body greatly and fainting occurs in most people. The benefit of cupping the arteries is close to the benefit of cupping the legs.
How to apply the cupping glasses: first place the empty glass and suck moderately, do not leave the glasses on for long but rather place them quickly and remove them quickly so that the humors are drawn evenly to the spot, repeat this process continuously until you see the spot has reddened and opened.
When redness appears, then tighten and gradually resume sucking, then look at the condition of the bodies, for whoever has soft flesh with lax pores, it should only be tightened once so that the place does not become ulcerated.
Order the barber to widen the suction and deepen it a little, and adjust the suction gently and with delicate movement. If the blood is thick, he should tighten it twice: the first time to open a path for the thin blood and its water, and the second time to thoroughly extract the thick blood.
If the blood is very cloudy, repeat the suction a third time to achieve the goal. In general, if we want to extract a little blood, one tightening is sufficient, but if we want to extract a lot of blood, we tighten more times. And if we think that the blood is thick,
It is necessary to make a deep incision, and the proper depth of the incision is the skin only, what should not be used when applying cupping glasses and water, and what the phlebotomist warns against. As for those whose skin is thick, hard, rough and has narrow pores.
It is necessary to smear the places of cupping with opening, softening and dissolving ointments. As for in summer time it is like ointment of Khara (a type of gum) or violet ointment or sweet almond ointment or pumpkin seed ointment.
As for in winter, it is like narcissus ointment or lily ointment or chamomile ointment or hyacinth and the like. If the humor is thick and cold, let the ointment be that of marjoram or rue or bean oil or caraway and the like.
If the phlebotomist has wide pores and soft flesh, it is necessary to abstain from ointment, and these should wash their cupping glasses after cupping with rose water or cold water or fox grape water or pumpkin water or melilot water and the like. As for those whose blood has a lot of moisture...
...they should wash their cupping glasses with vinegar or the water of tamarind and sumac and the like. As for those whose humor is thick, they should wash their cupping glasses with old wine or marjoram water or caraway decoction or chamomile and the like. Cupping should be avoided in the bath and after the bath.
Rather, it should be used an hour or two after leaving the bath, and no one should sleep after cupping. What the phlebotomist and the one who is cupped should do before and after cupping.
First, it is necessary to see if the phlebotomist or the one who is cupped is bilious and his blood is mostly sharp and inflamed. He should take cold foods like pomegranates, dandelion with vinegar, lettuce, syrup of vinegar and marshmallow, etc. And let his food be poultry, lamb meat, sparrow hawks, and the like.
And whoever has a cold temperament should be given honey drinks, syrup of marshmallow or vinegar syrup with benzoin, and take moderately aged aromatic wine which is between old and new wine. He should be ordered to eat little and his food should consist of sparrows, pigeons, thrushes, and young white doves. Drinks on the day of cupping and bloodletting should be more than food.
And it may be necessary to give some people, at times, the faruq antidote or musk medicine or shalti before cupping and bloodletting or after them to strengthen the principal organs and thin the blood.  It should not be given to those who are emaciated.
As for cuppings without a condition, they are the ones that are placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, scrotum and the location of the kidneys and right hip because these organs cannot tolerate a condition on them, but rather it is desired to draw blood from one organ to another.
Such as placing the cupping on the breasts for the ailment of shivering or using it to draw away cold wind that may have lodged in the organ, such as placing the cupping on the abdomen and scrotum, because it loosens the organ and heats it and takes away pain by dissolving that wind.
It may also be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stone in them, for by its strong suction it may open the blockage or remove the stone from its place. It also does this when placed on the liver and spleen when there is wind that disturbs them. These cuppings may be used empty with suction only.
It may also be used with fire and may also be used filled with lukewarm water in cases of sciatica, filling the cupping, which should be large, with hot water alone or with water that has cooked some herbs suitable for this purpose.
Then it is placed full on the area, held and removed, and repeated as needed. This is an image of the cupping used with fire:
Its mouth shall be the width of two fingers open, as we have depicted it, and its depth shall be half a palm. There shall be on its side, near its middle, a small hole the size into which a needle can enter, made of Chinese copper or yellow copper with a thick rim.
It is a smooth, flat, rolled surface so as not to injure the member when placed upon it. In its center there shall be a transverse groove made of copper or iron where the candle with fire shall be placed. This speculum may be made larger or smaller than what we have described according to the diseases.
And as for the way this speculum is used, it is not the same for the genitals of boys and thin men as it is for those of adult males. As for how to place this speculum with fire upon the member, you should take a tightly wound wick with fire made of linen or a small candle made of pitch and place it on the center of the hardened rod that is in the middle of the speculum.
So that the fire ascends upward toward the bottom of the speculum so that the patient's body is not burned, then it is placed on the member and the finger is held on the hole we mentioned until, when we grasp the speculum as needed, the finger is removed.
And the steam escapes through that hole and the speculum loosens at its place, then you remove the wick as described and replace it if needed. As for the speculum used in the disease of fistula with water, there is no hardened rod or hole in it.
And it is used only by filling it with water and placing it on the member. This is its illustration:
And this speculum, the larger it is so as to hold a lot of water, the better it is.
Chapter Seventy-Nine.
On the Suspension of the Leeches.
Leeches are used in most cases for members where specula cannot be placed, either because they are small, such as the lip and gums, or because the member is bare of flesh, such as the finger and nose.
How to use it is to aim for the leeches that are in fresh, pure water from streams, then leave them for a day and a night in fresh water until they are hungry and nothing remains in their abdomen. Then the body is evacuated first by phlebotomy or cupping, then the affected limb is wiped.
Until it reddens, then place the leech on it. When it is full, it will fall off. If possible, suck the area with a syringe, for this is more beneficial. Otherwise, wash the area with vinegar then with plenty of water, and massage and squeeze it. If bleeding persists after the leech falls off, and this is a hemorrhage, soak a linen cloth in cold water.
Place it over the area until the hemorrhage stops. If the blood is excessive, sprinkle powdered alum or turmeric or something similar from astringents on it until the bleeding stops, or apply half a peeled fig to the area.
Leave it until the fig adheres to the area, for the blood will stop. If it is necessary to reapply the leech, do not use the same leech if possible. If the leech refuses to attach, wipe the area with fresh blood.
Or insert a needle into the area until some blood comes out, then place the leech. It will stick to the spot if it senses blood. If you want it to fall off, sprinkle something on it, such as patience or salt or ash, and it will detach.
Chapter Three.
On Surgery.
This chapter is also about what is needed in the craft of medicine, which is setting broken bones and dislocations.
Know, my sons, that this chapter may be claimed by ignorant physicians and laymen who have never browsed through the books of our predecessors or read a single letter from them.
For this reason, this art has become extinct in our country, and I have never encountered anyone who was skilled in it at all. And I only gained what I gained from it through my long reading of the books of the ancients and my eagerness to understand them until I extracted the knowledge of that from them, then I adhered to experimentation and training throughout my life.
And I have drawn for you in this chapter everything that my knowledge has encompassed. And I have put my experience into practice after bringing it closer to you and freeing it from the branches of prolixity, abbreviating it to the utmost extent, explaining it to the greatest clarity, and illustrating for you many pictures of the instruments used in it.
For it is an increase in explanation as I did in the two preceding chapters, and there is no power except with God, the Most High, the Great.
The First Chapter.
In it are general and comprehensive matters concerning the breaking of bones which must be presented before we begin to mention the broken and dislocated members one by one, it is necessary that we mention at the beginning of this chapter some general sayings and chapters. You are compelled to understand them first and grasp their truth, you and anyone else who is eager to learn this honorable craft besides you.
So I say that whenever one is affected by a fracture or dislocation or sprain or fall, it is necessary to hasten first to reduce it or loosen it or both of them. Unless something prevents it, such as weakness of strength, or the one affected by that is a child or an old senile man, or the time is extremely hot or extremely cold.
Then he should limit his diet to cold legumes and poultry meat and avoid drinks and thick meats and overeating any food that fills the veins with blood until the swelling is safeguarded and you do not expect a discharge of material into the affected area.
Then let the patient return to his former regimen by which he was accustomed. And if the broken bone is being set, the patient should be nourished with very nourishing, thick, and firm foods, such as barley porridge, rice pudding, lentils, chickpeas, and beef tripe. And eggs, tender fish, thick drinks, and the like. For by this regimen the fracture will unite more quickly and better. Know that broken bones in robust men and the elderly cannot rejoin and fuse to their original nature.
Because of the dryness and stiffness of their bones, they may sometimes join and fuse, but only if the bones were extremely soft, like those of young boys. However, nature produces something resembling glue on all sides of the broken bone. This is thick and adheres to it, drawing it together until the pieces are held firmly in place.
It binds them together until they reach the utmost strength and firmness as they were originally, so that nothing hinders his actions.
That is why it is necessary for the patient's food to consist of those things that have firmness, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said. Know that fractures may differ in type according to the difference in the organs, for a fracture of the leg bone is unlike a fracture of the skull bone, and a fracture of the rib bone is unlike a fracture of the spine.
And so are all the other organs, each different from the others. We will go on to describe each type of fracture in detail in its own chapter.  It is also possible for the type of bone fracture itself to vary.
For it may be a clean break without any splintering, or it may be a lengthwise fracture with splinters and both detached and attached bony fragments. The fracture may also occur with a wound and rupture of the skin, or it may be a slight crack.
For each type there is a particular trick in setting it, as will be mentioned in detail in its place. One of the signs by which a fracture is recognized is bending, protrusion, and tenderness to touch, and crepitus when pressed with the hand.
So when there is no apparent bending in the place, nor crepitus, nor tenderness on feeling the bone, nor disturbance by the patient and he experiences little pain, then there is no fracture. It may be a sprain or a slight crack or a minor fissure. Therefore, it should not be moved at all by traction or pressure.
Rather, apply to it the medications that will be mentioned later as appropriate for the location, and then bind it with gentle compression. Know that when a bone is broken and divided into two without splintering, each part has separated from its counterpart.
You should hasten to straighten and set it as soon as possible before a hot swelling occurs. If a hot swelling does occur, leave it for several days until the swelling subsides, then set it in any way you can with gentleness and skill.
Know that setting and straightening it is easier than a bone in which splintering has occurred. It is then compressed as will be mentioned later. But if there are bone fragments, the fractured limb must be extended on both sides, whether it is an arm or a leg.
Either with your hands if the limb is small, or with cords, or with a cord and your hand. The limb should be placed in its natural position on a level surface so that when the broken bone ends are extended, you can then push those protrusions back into place with all the skill and gentleness you can muster.
Do your utmost to avoid causing pain or discomfort to the patient. Strive to join one bone to the other in the best possible position. At that time, you should touch and feel them with your hand. If you notice anything amiss, correct it and set it as best you can.
Beware of excessive tension and forceful probing, as many ignorant people do, for they often cause harm with their actions, introducing a hot cautery or probe into the member, as I have witnessed them doing repeatedly.
Then, after proper alignment and tightening, ensure that the limb remains still and at ease. Warn the patient not to move it while awake or asleep, when turning, restless, or during bowel movements, and all other movements as much as possible.  Have them strive for a position of the limb that avoids pain.
Should the patient feel pain or discomfort in a particular position, they should move to another where there is no pain and still ensure that position remains level and straight.
So that the limb does not become crooked if forced, as for how to splint a broken limb, I will describe it to you. Know that broken limbs vary in size and shape, so what is small like an arm, finger, forearm, etc.
Should be wrapped with soft, thin strips of cloth. But what is large like the thigh, back, or chest, should be wrapped with wide, sturdy bandages, for a broad bandage is necessary to secure and bind a large limb evenly on all sides without any irregularity.
Then, after you have finished setting it, apply the appropriate plaster. Place a soft pad over the fracture site, then begin wrapping the bandage directly over the fracture itself, three or four times depending on the limb, tightening your hand slightly with each wrap and then leading it upwards from the fracture site.
Tighten it less than the bandage over the fracture, then space the wrap slightly away from the fracture site and loosen the tension gradually until you achieve a secure position. Then take another bandage and wrap that as well over the fractured area.
Then take the bandage and apply it to the lower side of the fracture, doing so with the same tension and looseness as you did with the first bandage above. Then place between the layers soft tow or linen cloth to equalize the deformity of the fracture.
If there is a deformity, do not put anything in it; otherwise, apply another bandage over it, and then fix splints firmly on these bandages, unless there is swelling or hot inflammation in the limb.
But if there is swelling or hot inflammation, apply something to soothe the swelling and reduce it. Leave it for several days; then fix the splints on it. The splints should be made of half-canes that are wide, carved, and skillfully prepared, or they may be made of ravenwood.
These splints can be made from pine, palm leaves, reeds, or any other suitable material. The width of each splint should be as follows and in this exact shape.
Except that the splint placed directly on the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the other splints. The length of the splint should be made according to the size of the broken limb. Figure of the Splint:
Then tie another bandage over the splints with the same tightness as the first bandage, and then tie it firmly from above as we have mentioned about tightening, which should be tighter at the site of the fracture. The further away from the fracture, the looser the tightness.
The threads should be of medium thickness, not too thick or too thin, and preferably made from damp linen, because if the threads are too thick, as I have seen foolish people do by making their threads from twisted linen strips, it is a grave mistake.
This is because the tension with thick threads will be excessive, and thin threads are also unsuitable because they will not provide the desired tension. There should be no less than the width of a finger between each splint.
If the patient is hurt by the ends of the splints after they are tightened in the correct places, put something soft like tow or wadding underneath them so that he will not be hurt by them. As for a fracture with a wound and a rupture in the skin, we will deal with that separately.
Know that not every broken limb should be splinted from the first day, for if the limb is large, splints should not be applied to it until five or seven days or more have passed, depending on your confidence in preventing a hot swelling.
This is the description of the bandages that were used by those who came before us, which are placed on fractures, dislocations, and sprains. It is a general bandage that is short, binds fractures, and suits most temperaments, especially boys and women, because it is not excessively hot or cold.
Take some bran from a mill, which is the residue of flour that clings to the walls of the mill during grinding. Knead it as is, without sifting it, with egg white, making the dough neither too thick nor too thin, and then use it.
Here is the description of another bandage that binds fractures, dislocations, and sprains. Take ten drachmas of each of: mastic, frankincense, acacia, rue, myrrh, and sugar; five drachmas of each of: saffron and patience; twenty drachmas of aloe wood; and twenty drachmas of Armenian or Roman clay. Pound all of these ingredients together and mix them with aloe wood water or egg white if the patient's temperament is hot, then use this bandage. It is excellent for binding bones together quickly and suits most people due to its moderation.
Here is the description of another bandage that is also good for fractures and sprains. Take ten drachmas each of myrrh, mastic, and white frankincense; five drachmas each of saffron and patience; six drachmas of acacia; and twenty drachmas of Armenian clay. Pound all of these ingredients finely, sift them, and knead them with water or egg white, then use the bandage.
Description of a poultice for joints and bones that have become dislocated from their places, and to relieve the pain accompanying them, as well as bone ache and fracture; take purified wool, dip it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area. This poultice does not possess the power to heal.
But it is excellent in relieving hot swelling and expelling pains, especially. Description of another poultice that heals a broken bone; take the leaf of the common fig and the leaf of wild poppy and pound them all together and apply them damp. Description of a shorter poultice used when a bone fracture is set.
And you want to analyze the rest of the swelling, take from the root of marshmallow and chamomile and nard and caraway flour from each one part, pound all together and knead it with plaster if the member is not inflamed; but if it is inflamed, knead it with coriander water or with water and use it.
Description of another poultice stronger in resolution than the first, used when a hard swelling occurs after setting a bone; take from the root of marshmallow and flaxseed and fenugreek and rosemary and marjoram and nard and chamomile from each one part.
Pound all together and knead it with watercress water or fresh water or plaster, all that according to the heat of the member and its calmness; as for Hippocrates, he did not mention in his book to put on the broken member when setting it.
Except for cerate made from wax and oil only, and described to be medium between thickness and thinness; as for Galen, he saw that on the broken member when setting it, things which have hollows with some heat should be placed, such as myrrh and frankincense and mastic, as we mentioned.
Description of a poultice beneficial for weakness and pain; take tragacanth and sesame seed and human hair from someone who has recovered or bird feathers and marshmallow and salt all equal parts, pound and strain and knead and apply as a poultice. And as for the amount that should remain of the bandage.
Then it is dissolved, that is to say, you should look and see if the patient does not experience pain or rubbing or movement of the broken bone from its place; then do not dissolve it for many days. If he experiences severe rubbing or disturbing pain or swelling in the place.
Then hasten to dissolve it at once and do not delay that at all, and remove the dressing from it. Then take a soft cloth or a sea sponge moistened with lukewarm water and wash the place with it until the rubbing subsides and the pain is relieved; then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Then apply to it wool dipped in vinegar and oil or rose ointment and tie it on for a night until you are safe from the hot swelling and the swelling of the limb subsides and its pain goes away; then return it to gentle tension and a light dressing, and do not tighten it as you did the first time.
And be kind to him until he recovers. If you see that the swelling, redness, pain, and swelling, and all the symptoms have disappeared altogether and needed a dressing and tension, return it as you did at first, whether or not anything of what we mentioned happened in the limb.
Then do not dissolve it except after three days or four or five or seven, and it may be left for twenty days, all of that depending on what appears to you from the condition of the limb as we said until, if necessary, the bone is broken and the flesh is close to congealing on it.
Then also increase the tension at that time more than all your first tension and also increase the thickening of the patient's food as mentioned above. If you see that the place of the fracture has dried up and become weaker than it should be, know that food is prevented from reaching it.
So wash it with lukewarm water every time you dissolve it, and let that be every three days, and lighten the tension a little, for by this deed food is carried to the limb and it heals quickly. As for what ignorant bone-setters do, breaking the limb again.
If it is not first set correctly and then straightened, it is a great error on their part and a serious deception. If it were correct, those who came before would have mentioned it in their books and acted accordingly. I have never seen any trace of this from anyone among them. And the right course is not to do it.
Chapter Two.
On Accidental Fracture of the Head.
There are many types of accidental fracture in the head, with different shapes and diverse causes. Some fractures may result from a sword blow, completely splitting the bone until it reaches the dura mater beneath. Just as a chisel cleaves wood.
This type of fracture is therefore called chisel-like. Or, a sword may cleave only part of the bone, splitting its surface but not penetrating to the end; this type is called a complete avulsion. The wound from these fractures may be either large or small.
Other fractures may be crush injuries or contusions, caused by a blow from a stone or a fall onto one. This type of fracture may penetrate almost to the membrane beneath the bone, or it may be located on the surface of the bone.
The wounds from these fractures are also either large or small.  There are also subtle fractures within the bone, at the hairline, which manifest as slight headaches.
This type is therefore called a hair-line fracture. There are also fractures caused by a fall or blow from a stone, which drive a portion of the bone inward, creating a depression in the area, similar to what happens to copper when struck, causing part of it to indent.
This is most common in moist skulls, such as those of children. All these types of fractures may have both loose and fixed fragments, and their treatment will be discussed in detail later. We will identify all these types of fractures through examination.
And examine it with probes, and extract the corrupted flesh from upon it. As for the hairy type, it is known by exposing the bone and rubbing and smearing it with ink; for the fracture will appear black. As for the treatment of the fracture, first look at the patient's symptoms.
If you see from his symptoms a clear indication of fear, such as vomiting bile, extension and loss of mind, cessation of voice, fainting, a sharp fever,  the pupils of the eyes being dilated and red, and the like of these symptoms, do not approach the patient or treat him; for death is sure to occur with these symptoms in most cases.
And if you see symptoms that do not frighten you and hope for his safety, then proceed with his treatment. For if the wounded man comes to you immediately after he has been injured, and that was during the winter days.
You should strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case, and if it is during the summer days, you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest what is under the bone of membrane spoils, and those symptoms we have described occur.
But if the fracture of the bone has reached the membrane covering the brain and there was crushing and bruising, then you should cut off the crushed bruised part as I will describe to you, which is to shave the head of the wounded patient.
And expose the bone in any way you are able, and according to the shape of the wound and what relieves the patient, if upon exposing the bone blood flows or a hot swelling appears to you, then address that as is appropriate.
That is to stuff the place with cloths soaked in rose water and ointment, clean the wound until the swelling subsides and the bleeding stops, then proceed to grind the bone and remove it, and this can be done in one of two ways.
As for the first way, it is to cut the bone with a thin, narrow blade and this is its image:
Then you use another section after this section, which is slightly wider than it, and this is its picture:
Then you also use another section which is also wider than the second, and it must be the case that you have several different sections, some of which are wider than others and some of which are shorter than others, and they should be extremely sharp at their ends, and let them be of Indian iron or good steel.
And use gentleness in striking the section so as not to shake the head and hurt it, for if the bone is strong and hard, then it should be pierced around it before you use the sections with awls that they called ungraving awls and not deep-boring awls.
Because it does not exceed the limit of the skull bone to beyond it, so that the awl has a round letter below its sharp head, resembling a collar or a small circle, preventing it from diving and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
And you should take many of these awls, each of which is suitable for the thickness of that bone, so that you have for each skull a pierced amount of its sharp end in length and shortness according to the thickness of that skull, and this is an image of three types. Of awls, large, medium, and small:
As for the method of piercing around the broken bone, it is to place the awl on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced, then move the awl to another location and make the distance between each hole the width of a chisel or thereabouts.
Then cut between each two holes with the sections and do this with as much gentleness as you can, as we said, until you remove the bone either with your hand or with something else from some of the instruments that have been prepared for that.
Such as forceps and fine pincers, and you should be extremely careful that the awl or section touches anything from the peritoneum, and if you strengthen the bone and separate it from the peritoneum if it is attached to it and remove it, then it must be cleaned.
The roughness that remains on the bone is smoothed with another instrument resembling a curette, but it should be thinner and more delicate than all other curettes. If there are any small pieces of bone or fragments remaining, they should be carefully removed with the instruments you have.
The wound is then treated with bandages and ointments, the mention of which will follow. As for the other side of the work, it is very easy and free from danger, as Galen mentioned and praised it greatly, and this is what he said. You should first begin by exposing the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and prominent, so that once you have exposed that part, you can place the tip of this lentiform curette underneath it. And this is its image:
The lentiform part of it should be smooth so as not to cut anything, and the sharp part of it should be on its sides extending lengthwise, as you see, so that the lentiform part rests against the peritoneum and the sharp edge of the curette is in the bone, then you strike the curette from one side.
With a small mallet until you cut through all the bone gently, as it rotates, and you are safe from the membrane, nothing frightening will happen at all, even if the healer is the most ignorant and cowardly of people, yes, even if he were soft.
If there is anything of the membrane still adhering to some parts of the bone, scrape it off with the tip of the lentiform curette itself and carefully free it; for it will be freed without harm or fear.
But if the fracture of the bone did not extend into the membrane and what broke off from the bone was a surface, and roughness and fine fragments remained in it, then you should remove that roughness and extract those fragments with delicate rasps, of which several have been made of different sizes so that you can use whichever one is most suitable and appropriate for each location according to what the work requires.
And the bone should be shaped according to its own form, and one should use in the first scraping of the bone the widest of those scrapers, then after that use a thinner one, and so on until you arrive at using the finest and thinnest of them all.
As for the other small, hairy fissures and fine fractures, treatment suitable to each one should be used, according to what leads to its healing; this is something that is not hidden from anyone who has the least training in this craft and has considered what we have written and explained about large fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed when you remove the bone, you should take a linen rag the size of the wound, soak it in rose ointment, and place it over the mouth of the wound, then take another rag folded twice or thrice. Soak it in syrup and rose ointment, and place it on top of the first rag. Do this as gently as possible so as not to weigh down the peritoneum, then use a wide bandage over it and do not tighten it except enough to hold the wound only.
Leave it with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the hot swelling subsiding, then remove it and afterwards use medicines that have a drying effect, such as asphodel roots, caraway seeds, gum tragacanth, and costmary, and so on.  Make a poultice from these drugs.
Spread it on the wound as it is dry. In general, use a medicine that will cleanse but not sting.  Take great care while treating the wound to keep it clean, without any fat, dirt, or pus accumulating in it at all.
For pus, if it collects on the membrane of the brain, will corrupt and rot it, and as a result of this the patient will suffer greatly. It may also appear in the peritoneum of the head when the bone is exposed, especially if its treatment is neglected.
If a black spot appears on the surface and you see the symptoms of gangrene we have mentioned, know for certain that it is doomed. Even if the blackness occurred due to a medicine applied to it, and if that medicine was strong enough to cause such blackness.
You should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, beat them well together, soak a cloth in the mixture, and place it on the abdomen. Then treat it with the types of treatment that are necessary until it is healed.
Chapter Three.
On setting a broken nose.
Know that the only part of the nose that can break is its upper bridge, either both sides or one, because they are bone. The lower part is cartilaginous and does not break but may suffer bruising, distortion, and displacement.
If one of the bridges breaks, you should insert your little finger into the nostril and straighten the fracture from the inside with your index finger and thumb on the outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this gently and be careful not to cause the patient any pain.
If the fracture is at the top of the nose and cannot be reached with a finger, it should be set with the blunt end of a rod slightly thickened. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same. Set the fracture as soon as possible, ideally on the first day after the break.
If possible, do so; otherwise, after the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling has subsided. Then insert a wick of linen cloth into the nostril if the fracture is on one side, or two wicks if it is on both sides.
Let the wick be thick enough to fill the nostril. Some early setters have said that the wick should be soaked in butter and changed every day, but I do not think so. Instead, soak the wick in egg white mixed with powdered brick dust.
Then the splint is left until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens, and pipes from goose feathers may be inserted into the nose in place of the splint after they have been wrapped with soft rags; this will make the fixation for a broken nose stronger, and so that the patient does not refrain from breathing.
This is not something necessary if you wish to make it, and if you wish to make splints; if swelling occurs in the nose during your work, dress the nose with cotton or cotton wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil or something from the diachylon plaster.
If hot swelling does not occur, it should be dressed from the outside with fine semolina and powdered candy, kneaded with egg white; then a soft compress is placed over it, and the nose is not tied up at all, if the nasal bones are broken in a small way.
Or if they are shattered, it should be incised and they should be removed with the instrument suitable for that; then the incision is sutured and treated with ointments appropriate for healing and closing; if a wound occurs inside the nose, it should be treated with a splint and lead pipes should be used. Until it heals.
Chapter Four.
On Setting a Broken Lower Jaw.
If the lower jaw is broken and there is no wound, if the fracture is only external and has not been broken in two and displaced inwards, then recognition is easy.
If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left-hand index finger into the patient’s mouth, and similarly if it is on the left side, insert the index finger of your right hand, and raise the prominence of the fracture from inside gently outwards.
Your other hand outside the bone will control its setting; if the jaw fracture has been split in two, you should use traction on both sides to straighten it out so that you can set it; if the teeth have become loose.
Or separate it, and tie what you hope to keep with gold, silver or silk thread; then put plaster on the broken bone, and place a folded cloth over it, and a large firm splint or piece of shoe leather equal in length to the bone. Then bind it from above according to what is suitable for tying and fitting so that it does not become loose, and order the patient to rest and be still, and make his food soft porridges; if you think that something has changed in shape in any way, hasten to undo it on the third day.
Then bind it from above according to what is suitable for tying and fitting so that it does not become loose, and order the patient to rest and be still, and make his food soft porridges; if you think that something has changed in shape in any way, hasten to undo it on the third day. Then correct what you bandaged with plaster of Paris mixed with egg white or semolina flour after removing the plaster from it, and place a soft compress on the bandage; as long as that bandage adheres to it and the bone does not change condition, leave it.
Do not undo it until it heals and the fracture becomes strong, for this fracture often strengthens in three weeks; if a hot swelling appears during this time, use what we have repeatedly mentioned to relieve it until that swelling subsides.
If the fracture is with an open wound, and it has healed from the bone fragments or pieces, then be gentle in removing those fragments with what suits you to remove them from the instrument; if the mouth of the wound is narrow, widen it with a scalpel as needed.
Then if you have removed those fragments and nothing remains, suture the wound opening if it is wide; otherwise apply one of the ointments suitable for that purpose. Stitch the wound until it heals.
Chapter Five.
On setting a broken clavicle.
The clavicle most often breaks in front of the end near the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in one of three ways: either it breaks and splits into two without fragments forming, which is the easiest to set;
If the fracture occurs with splinters, it is more difficult to set; or if the fracture occurs with a wound. If the fracture is without a wound, you should have two attendants: one to hold the arm above the broken shoulder and the other to extend the neck towards the opposite side.
Then straighten the fracture with your fingers until it assumes its proper shape and there is neither a bump nor a bend. If you need to extend it further, you should place a ball of linen or wool under the patient's armpit.
The size of the bone should be according to your need; extend and raise the shoulder, and press the ball with your hand until the fracture is straightened as it should be. If you are unable to pull the end of the clavicle outward because it has gone deep, then the patient should lie on his back.
A medium-sized cushion should be placed under his elbow, and the attendant should press down on his elbow so that the deep clavicular bone rises upward. Then straighten the fracture with your fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the clavicle has broken and is moving, you should cut it open and carefully remove that fragment. If the fragment is trapped in the bone, try to cut it with one of the cutters you have prepared for this purpose. After placing the apparatus under the clavicle to keep the fracture in place, which is made of wood or iron, and this is its image:
It resembles a spoon without a bend; its width should be according to the size of the bone, whether large or small. Its length should also be according to what you can work with. Let it have two ends as you see, one wider and the other narrower.
If the wound you incised to remove the bone fragment is wide and you are confident there will be no hot swelling, then bring the edges of the wound together with sutures. If the incision is small or you fear hot swelling, then treat the wound with linen and bandages according to the extent of the incision.
If a hot tumor appears, moisten the rag in rose oil and vinegar or wine and apply it. As for setting a bone if there is no wound or incision, it is to apply on the bone a poultice made of mill dust with egg white. Then place soft padding on it, and then put a ball under his armpit if he needs it; then take a turban that is very long, its width being about a span, and carry a folded bandage over the padding and poultice; then take a splint made from a thin board. Its width should be three fingers and its length the same; then insert it into a rag, and insert that rag with the splint in the part of the turban which falls on the fracture site, then tighten the turban over the fracture as you wind it round. Let it pass over his neck and under his sound armpit, and under the arm of the patient; and wind it several times on each side, as you see that the tightening secures the fracture firmly; this is not hidden from you.
And remember always not to remove the splint from the broken bone. Therefore, you should examine the patient every day, and whenever the bandage becomes loose and you see that the splint has shifted, correct this and tighten the bandage. Then make the patient sleep on his back and put a small pillow under his armpit at night when he sleeps.
So that his arm is raised from his side and the clavicle fracture is elevated with the elevation of the elbow; or bind his arm to his neck, and do not loosen the bandage unless there occurs in the place an accident of abrasion or a swelling for twelve days.
Then renew the poultice if you see a need for it. And continue the tightening and leave it until the clavicle fracture unites and consolidates, becoming strong in twenty-eight days. And it may be less in some people.
Chapter Six.
In setting a fractured shoulder, know that the shoulder rarely breaks in its wide part but rather in its angles. Whenever it breaks in one place or in the middle, which is known by touch, the treatment is applied according to the type of fracture.
Set it and return it to its natural shape as best you can, then apply a mixture of rye flour with egg white and soft lint to the area. Place a bandage of folded cloth on top, and then put a wide splint made of wood over it.
Make the splint thin enough to cover the entire shoulder or slightly wider, and if there is swelling in one part of the shoulder under the splint, smooth it with soft lint until the splint lies evenly. Then tie it securely with a long turban.
Tie it tightly and make sure the splint does not move from its place. Check the bandage every day, and whenever it loosens, tighten it and adjust the splint if it has shifted. Let the patient lie on his right side, and the shoulder will heal in twenty days.
days, or twenty-five days at most. When this period is complete, untie the bandage and you will be safe, for it is one of the bones that is not prone to shattering or dislocation. If a bone fragment protrudes and lies under the skin, cut over it and remove it. Do what was mentioned for a fractured clavicle to relieve any hot swelling that may occur.
Chapter Seven.
In setting a fractured rib.
The chest may break in the middle, which is rare, while its ends are more frequently broken and shattered. If the middle breaks, it will tend to slope downwards and cause severe pain, shortness of breath, and coughing.
And it may happen that blood flows and the indentation in the broken bone becomes apparent, which is not hidden from feeling. To set it, the patient should lie on his back, a pillow being placed between his shoulder blades, then his elbows are pressed down and his ribs are brought together with the hands on both sides, and he is carefully straightened in every way possible.
And it should be held until the bone regains its proper shape, then a poultice and bandage are applied to it, and on top of that a splint is placed made from a thin board of boxwood or willow, or something similar in lightness after it has been wrapped in cloth. Then it is carefully tied over the broken bone so that it does not slip, and the bandage is passed over the shoulder in a circular motion several times and tightened firmly. Then the bandage is checked at all times, and whenever it loosens it is tightened.
And if necessity requires it to be undone at times, if pain, inflammation, or swelling appears in the place, hasten to undo it and remove the poultice. Then rectify what has occurred by treating it accordingly, and replace the poultice if you see fit. And bind it firmly until it heals.
Chapter Eight.
In setting the ribs if they are broken, know that fractures in the ribs occur most often in the thick parts following the back and at their ends in front, because these parts are cartilaginous. This is not hidden from feeling when examining with the fingers.
Set it by straightening the fracture with your fingers as much as possible until the shape is restored, then bandage and bind the broken bone with a splint if necessary. If the rib fracture is angled inward, the patient will experience severe pain.
And it may cause a cough similar to that experienced by one with pleurisy, because the bone presses on the diaphragm and also causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and profuse expectoration of blood. This is difficult to treat, and earlier practitioners have devised many tricks for dealing with it.
Some say that the diet of the patient should be such as to produce wind and flatulence, so that the belly may swell and distend, and the fracture may be driven outwards. We disapprove of this, lest it encourage the formation of a hot swelling. If a swelling has not already occurred, it will cause one to form; and if it has already formed, it will increase and aggravate it.
Some say that a cupping glass should be placed over the seat of the fracture and then drawn off forcibly, which is somewhat like cauterization, except that they fear the cupping glass may draw in extraneous matter to the place on account of its weakness. Others say that the seat of the fracture should be covered with wool steeped in hot oil.
The dressing should be made so as to fill the space between the ribs, so that the bandage may lie flat; if it is wound round a convexity, it will not lie flat. The patient should then be treated for his sprain with diet and medicine, provided he is not suffering from any severe pain which he cannot bear. The bone was found to be pressing upon the diaphragm in a painful manner, and we were afraid for the patient, so we decided to make an incision over the seat of the fracture, expose the broken rib, and place under it the instrument for preserving the peritoneum, which has already been described. We then cut through the bone carefully and extracted it.
We then unite the edges of the wound by sutures if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals. If a hot swelling should appear during this time, hasten to apply dressings smeared with rose oil to the place, and treat the patient internally with remedies to allay the swelling.
He should lie on the side which is easier for him to sleep upon until he recovers.
Chapter Nine.
On the Reduction of Dislocations of the Dorsal Vertebrae and Cervical Vertebrae.
As for the bones of the neck, fractures rarely occur there, sprains being much more common. The same is true of the dorsal vertebrae. If someone suffers such an injury and you wish to know whether it will heal or not... Look and see if his hands have become relaxed and numb and lifeless, and he is unable to move them or spread them or clench them; and if you prick them or stick them with a needle he does not feel it nor find pain in them, then know that he will not recover in most cases for he is lost.
And if he moves them and feels the pricking and sticking, then know that the marrow of the bone has been spared and that the patient will recover with treatment. If a swelling in the back is similarly affected and you wish to know whether it too will recover or not.
Look at his legs; if you see that they have become relaxed and what happened in the hands has also occurred in them, then if he lies on his back the wind and excrement pass involuntarily, and if he lies on his stomach urine passes involuntarily. And if he lies on his back and wishes to urinate but cannot, then know that he is lost; do not concern yourself with treating him. If none of these things occur to him the matter is lighter, and the treatment for what has happened is to aim at soothing the hot swelling.
By placing on the diseased vertebra rose oil alone or with roasted egg yolks, apply this three times a day until the hot swelling subsides, then place one of the reinforcing dressings that has been starched upon the spot and bind it tight with a bandage. Order him to remain still and quiet.
Let him not sleep except on the side where he does not feel pain until he recovers. If, at the time of the injury, a fragment or something else of bone has become detached and healed, then it is necessary to cut open his skin and extract that bone. Then bring together the edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches and treat it with pounded ointments until it heals. If the last bone of the coccyx has been broken, then enter your left thumb into the anus
The broken bone is set with the other hand according to what can be achieved and then it is held in place with a dressing and bandage if necessary, and then it is bound tight.
If you feel a broken fragment in it, cut over it and remove it, and treat the wound as previously described until it heals.
Chapter Ten.
On setting a hip fracture.
Hip bones rarely break; but when they do, the fracture usually consists of a shattering at the extremities and a lengthwise crack with an inward inclination. The patient experiences pain in the area, numbness and a tingling sensation in the leg on the side of the fracture.
To set it, pass your hand over it until you locate the fracture and determine its shape. If the fracture is only at the extremities, set that fracture according to what seems possible to you so that it resembles its natural form.
If the fracture is lengthwise or has inclined inwards, place the patient on their stomach so that you can set the fracture. Once it is set, apply a dressing over it and then put a splint of wood or leather on top and bind it tight.
Do not fear the displacement of the fracture or the loosening of the splint. Level any depressions in the splint with padding so that the bandage tightens evenly. Instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their right side; if swelling occurs, apply a cold compress.
Stop stretching and reset the fracture until the swelling subsides. Apply a poultice as previously described to reduce the swelling, then return to setting the fracture and binding it properly. If there are fragments or splinters at the extremities of the bone, do not remove them.
Do not touch them but set them from the outside as we have said and leave it bound until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
On the setting of a humerus fracture.
The humerus is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, if it breaks, set it in one of two ways. One of them is to take a curved, smooth rod of medium thickness as shown: .
And tie two bands at its ends, then hang it from a high place and have the patient sit on a chair, then put his broken arm on the rod so that his armpit becomes stuck in the middle of the curve of the rod, then hang something heavy from above it.
Or a servant extends it downwards, then the doctor straightens the fracture with his hands together until he returns the fracture to its proper place, and the other way is for the patient to lie on his back and hang his hand from his neck with a band.
Then order two servants, one to hold above the fracture with his hands and the other to hold below it, and have each one extend it to his side, and if you want the extension to be stronger, tie a band under the fracture and a band above it and have each of the servants extend them to their sides.
If the fracture is near the end of the elbow, the middle of the band should be under the armpit and the other under the fracture towards the elbow, and similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, the band should be on that place and on the elbow itself.
Then straighten the fracture gently without violence until it becomes even as it should be and joins a good union, then tighten it if no hot swelling appears, but if hot swelling does appear, leave it loosened until the seventh day and put a cooling poultice soaked in vinegar and rose oil on it.
Until the swelling subsides, then tighten it at that time. The way to tighten it is to hold the bandage on the fracture, then hold a wrap of new cloth over the bandage, then gather the arm on the humerus itself and place his hand open on his elbow.
If the rags and binding are strong enough to support the arm and forearm, then the arm may serve as a splint if nothing prevents this and there is no change in the broken bone. If you fear that there might be a change, use splints.
Place on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than other splints, and leave the width of a finger between each splint. The length of the splints should be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on each side.
Then tighten the bandages as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And your binding should be tightest over the fracture site.
The farther from the fracture, the looser the binding should be. If you see that the splints and bindings are as we have described when setting the limb, then do so.
If you fear hot swelling, leave the binding and splints until the seventh day as we have said, then examine the bandage every three days so that no chafing or bloating occurs or that food is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightness, correcting all of this as we have mentioned.
If you are confident that none of this will happen, do not loosen the bandage except after many days. The patient should lie on his back with his hand on his stomach and a pillow filled with moderate wool placed under his arm.
Check at all times, day or night, to ensure that the shape of the broken limb is not distorted or the bandage loosened, correcting all of this with your utmost effort. Make sure the patient's diet is as we have prescribed, starting with soft foods until the bone begins to strengthen.
Then the patient's diet should be increased. It is customary for the arm and leg to strengthen in forty days, at which time the bandage should be removed, baths should be taken, and ointments suitable for this purpose should be applied. If the fracture was severe and crushed...
Do not undo its ligature for fifty days or two months.
Chapter the Twelfth.
On setting a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones called the radius and ulna, one being smaller which lies next to the thumb, and the other larger which lies beneath the smaller one. Sometimes only the larger bone breaks, or only the smaller one, and sometimes they both break.
When the smaller upper bone breaks, setting it is easy and healing is quicker. When the lower ulna breaks, the fracture is bad and healing is difficult. The worst case is when both bones break together. If the broken bone is the smaller upper radius.
The physician, when setting it, should make the stretch slight and gentle so as to straighten it. If the ulna is broken, he should apply a stronger stretch. And if both bones are broken, he should apply an even stronger stretch.
The shape of the hand should be maintained during setting and stretching, placed extended on a cushion, with the thumb raised higher than all the other fingers, the little finger lowest of all, and the ring finger squared upon itself.
Let the cushion be at a suitable height in front of him so that the patient does not find it tiring.
Then a servant should extend the arm from below, either with his hand or with a bandage, and another servant extends it from above in the same manner. The physician then straightens the bone until he returns it to the best possible shape. If there are bone fragments in the fracture, they are removed.
Return every fragment to its place as best you can. If a loose fragment appears which is threatening the skin and there is no hope of setting it, cut over it and remove it in the manner we have previously described.  If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, there is a separate chapter for it.
You should treat it from there, for if there appears in the first dressing a hot swelling, then apply a poultice of linen cloth impregnated with rose oil and white wax, let it be moderate in thickness, and bind it gently until the swelling subsides.
Then remove the linen cloth and apply a plaster prepared from powdered rye flour with egg white, then apply splints; let the splint placed on the fracture itself be slightly wider and stronger. Know that the number of arm splints is six in most cases.
Whether the fracture was in one bone or in both together, then make your pressure on the fracture site firmer and tighter, and whenever you turn with the pressure upward or downward, make the pressure a little looser as previously mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
Let the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture be soft, damp cloths and not very hard, and let the thread with which it is tightened be linen, especially of medium thickness as we have described, and check the limb and ligaments after a few days.
For if something needs to be corrected, such as a chafing that has occurred in the limb, then the limb should be soaked in warm water until the chafing subsides and the limb should be left untied for a night so that it can rest, then tightening should be resumed.
If the pressure has slackened and the bone has shifted or something similar, correct it all with your best effort. Also see if food is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightness, then you should loosen it a little and leave it for a few days so that nourishment can flow to it, and then tighten it again.
If none of what we have mentioned occurs to the patient, then he should not be released until after twenty days or so. Then hang the patient's arm around his neck and let his arm be moderate; he should restrain himself from tumultuous movements and sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm will be healed in thirty days or in thirty-two, and perhaps it will be healed in twenty-eight days, all depending on the states of temperaments and strengths.
Chapter Thirteen.
In setting a fracture of the hand and fingers.
The metacarpus of the hand and phalanges of the fingers are rarely fractured, but they are often bruised; so whenever a fracture or bruise occurs in the hand.
The patient should sit cross-legged with a chair directly in front of him.
Then he should place his hand on it extended, and the servant should extend the broken bone; the physician straightens it until it unites well. Then a bandage and splint should be applied if there is no hot swelling. Afterward, a splint should be applied over the area.
Having padded it with a soft cloth, if the fracture is downward towards the palm of the hand, make a sphere-like shape from cloth and have the patient grasp it with his broken hand; then tie it securely with a long cloth.
Let the splint be made of supple leather so that it conforms to the bending of the entire hand, and tie it securely. If the fracture is outward, a splint should be placed on top and another below the hand so that the hand remains open and upright.
Then apply a bandage as the hand rotates, interlacing it between the fingers. If a fracture occurs in one of the phalanges, and it is the thumb, straighten it properly and then bind it with the hand; if you wish, you may make a small upright splint to support the fracture.
And let it not move. If the fracture is in any of the other fingers like the middle, index, ring or little finger, straighten it and bind it with the adjacent healthy finger, or bind them all together; this is best. Or place a small upright splint on them.
As we said in the case of a sprain and when you set it after keeping away from a hot swelling, meet it with what is appropriate whenever any of that occurs as has been repeatedly described.
Chapter Fourteen.
In setting a fracture of the thigh.
The femur often breaks and is revealed by feeling because it turns forward and backward, and its setting is done by tightening a ligature above the fracture and another ligature below the fracture while the patient lies face down.
Then each ligature is extended to its side in moderation, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone; but if it is near the origin of the thigh, a soft ligature should be tightened, either from wool or something similar.
At the origin of the thigh towards the groin, the pull should be upward and the other ligature below the fracture; and likewise if the fracture is near the knee, let the ligature be near the knee so that the pull is downward. Then the physician straightens the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.
And the bone unites well, then a bandage and strapping should be applied unless the limb becomes hot and swollen; if so leave it for a few days until the swelling subsides and then return to its treatment.
As for strapping it, a broad firm bandage should be wound twice or thrice over the fracture, and what is left over should remain; then the leg is wound until the heel is at the origin of the thigh and a long thread is inserted between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, with its ends above on both sides.
Then the remainder of the bandage is wound around the leg and thigh, and splints are placed on the thigh at the site of the fracture itself, and one splint is made from them on the tibia bone; then the space between the thigh and the leg is filled with soft rags so that the strapping is even.
Then begin to bind strongly from the middle over the fracture, three or four turns; and the farther you are from the fracture with the bandage, the weaker, gentler, and looser your binding should be.
Then proceed to the ends of the thread which you inserted between the thigh and the leg, and tie them to the following splints above; then pass the ends of the thread down until they reach the ankle of the foot, and tighten them also at the ends of the splints on the other side.
So that the bandage does not slip from its place, then leave it tight as long as the limb does not complain of pain, swelling, or bloating, or anything similar; if any of these occur, hasten to loosen it and correct whatever has happened as we have mentioned many times before.
If there is a fragment of bone that protrudes, it should be straightened if possible; otherwise, cut it off and remove it, and treat the wound as previously mentioned until it heals. It is sometimes possible to bind this fracture from the thigh without adding the leg with splints.
As we mentioned for the humerus and arm, but setting it this way does not cause limping; if you set only the thigh without joining it to the leg, its owner will always limp.
Know that the thigh heals in fifty days or a little more or less, all depending on the difference in temperaments and other conditions.
Chapter Fifteen.
On Fractures of the Patella.
The kneecap is rarely fractured, though it often suffers bruising; if it does fracture, it is either a crack or a fragmentation into pieces, which may occur with or without a wound.
You determine all this by feeling, and set the fractured parts together with your fingers until they unite and meld as much as possible, exercising caution and skill; then apply a bandage and place a splint around it if needed.
And tighten from above the corresponding ligature, then proceed in all cases which we have described in other fractures, such as hot swelling and the like, by meeting every obstacle with what suits it until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
In the setting of a fractured leg.
The leg has two bones, one thick and called the tibia, and the other slender and called the fibula. They are subject to the same types of fractures as the bones of the arm. Therefore, setting it is the same as setting the arm, and the work is one. If both bones are fractured, the leg turns in all directions; if the slender bone is fractured, the leg turns forward; and if the thicker bone is fractured, and this occurs from below, then it is something that will not be hidden from you.
So use traction and alignment and bind the splints accordingly, except that if the fracture of the leg is a severe one with many fragments, the traction should be less and lighter, and you should endeavor to set it carefully.
And in the leg there is something extra to do compared to the arm, which is that when you have aligned the splints and finished all your work, take two small pieces of pine wood which are used for leveling the rooms placed between the cracks of the boards or they can be from palm leaves or the like.
Choose from them those that are slightly thick and not thin, and let their length be along the leg from the knee down; then wrap a cloth twice along the length of each one and place one on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
Let them extend from the knee to below the foot, then tie the two pieces of wood in three places at the ends and the middle. By this restraint, the leg will be prevented from tilting right and left and will be well immobilized; a wooden gutter can also be used along the length of the leg.
And a dressing should be placed upon it to preserve it from movement, and this is especially what should be done in a fracture if there is a wound with it. Then the leg should be examined every day, and great care should be taken of it for swelling or bloating or any such thing. So, whenever any of these things happen, treat them accordingly until it is healed, and the bone of the leg will be joined in thirty days or so.
Chapter Seventeenth.
On Fractures of the Bones of the Leg and Fingers.
As for the heel, fracture does not occur to it at all. As for the bones of the leg, they may be fractured, and the fingers are also rarely fractured, but rather bruised in most cases.
If a fracture occurs to the bones of the leg and you see that those bones are somewhat overlapping, let the patient place his foot on the ground upright as if walking, then you put your foot on what has risen from those bones and press it down and straighten it.
Until it returns to its place, then apply a bandage and splint over it, and place under the sole of the foot a small plate with two flat heads, then tighten the foot firmly with it after wrapping it with rags and whatever else it needs.
If three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones level whether they were broken or dislocated. Do as you see. As for if some of the fingers are broken, force them and straighten them according to what I have described to you for setting the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger along the length of the finger, and let it be slightly wider than it. Then put under the foot this plate that I have described to you and tighten it firmly; if two, three or more bones are broken.
Make a splint for each finger, according to its size, inserted in a soft cloth and tighten the plate at the bottom of the foot, letting each head of the two heads of the plate extend outward from the sole of the foot for proper adjustment.
And you must not forget to fulfill all that we have mentioned to you in the rest of the fractures regarding the symptoms which we have described, and meet each symptom with what is appropriate.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the fracture of a woman's pubis bone and a man's femur.
When a woman's vulva is fractured, seat her upright then incline her slightly towards her back and hold her from behind. Then have the midwife fill her vulva with cotton until it is full and becomes like a ball in her vulva.
Then shake the woman and raise her torso slightly; the cotton will come out until it is at the opening of the vulva like a ball, and the bone fracture will be reduced. Then apply a dressing on her back. Whenever she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton gently so that she can urinate.
Then return it in the same way it was first inserted, and she returns to her original dressing. Do this for seven days or so, for it will then heal. If you wish, you can take a sheep's bladder, stretch a reed tube over its mouth, and insert the whole bladder into her vulva.
Then blow strongly into the tube until the bladder inflates inside the vulva; the fracture will be reduced. Then stuff it with cotton and remain for several days as we have described until it is healed. As for when the pubic bone of a man or woman is fractured, the same method is used to set it.
And it is set in the same way we described for the hip bone. It will not be hidden from you what is correct in these unusual fractures, which rarely occur, especially for one who has some experience and understands this book of mine, yes, because the fracture itself indicates to you in most cases.
The right way to set and bind it, so understand. As for a man, if his thigh bone is fractured like a goose's neck, insert the penis into it, then put a bandage of cloth over it and wrap it. Leave it for three days or so until it heals.
Chapter Nineteen.
In setting bone fractures if there is a wound.
Whoever has a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large like the femur or humerus or the like, should hasten to bleed him as soon as possible if the conditions for bleeding allow, as we have previously mentioned.
If the wound is bleeding, you should hasten to cauterize it by sprinkling powdered alum over it if nothing else is available; then proceed to set the fracture on that same day and do not delay.
If no hot swelling occurs, but if a hot swelling does occur, leave the setting until the ninth day so that the hot swelling subsides and do not approach it at all on the third or fourth day because it will be subject to bad symptoms.
If the broken bone is protruding onto the exposed skin, you should try to return it and straighten it gently with your hands and a slight extension. If you cannot return it and straighten it with your hands, return it with this instrument which is made of iron seven or eight fingers long. Its width should be according to the size of the wound.
Therefore, the physician should have three or four of them, as needed for each type of fracture treatment, and let them be rounded with a slight thickness so that they do not bend when pressed upon during work.
And it should have a sharp end with a bend at its end, the top being thicker and from the middle to the bottom very thin. This is its form:
It is called a "periosteum" in Greek, meaning a small spatula. The sharp bent end should be placed on the protruding bone and pushed once so that when the bone returns and straightens somewhat, it can then straighten the ends of the fracture against each other.
If the broken end is thin and the instrument does not grasp it well, the end of that bone should be cut so that the instrument can take hold of it. If you cannot reduce the bone at all as we have described, cut it according to the shapes of the sections we mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the instruments as you are able, then remove any remaining roughness and thin scales from the bone. If, after reduction, the patient experiences severe, painful distress, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
If you can reduce it to its natural place, do so, for you will greatly benefit the patient. Once you have completed setting the bone, soak a cloth in a dark astringent liquid, especially if it is summer, and do not put anything greasy on the wound.
So that decay and putrefaction do not occur, then use splints when you have finished setting the bone and leave the wound uncovered by cutting a hole in the bandages with scissors to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to tighten the wound with the fracture, for ignorant physicians often do this and cause their patients either death or suppuration or necrosis. Let your binding be loose and gentle, unlike the binding of all other fractures.
If the wound is bad or a large one and you fear some of the poor symptoms we have described, and he experiences worrisome pain in the area, then you should not apply splints. Instead, make him bandages of strong cloth where the splints would be and bind it tightly.
And if, after a day or two, you see that pus has begun to form in the wound, remove the cloth that was placed on it with the astringent liquid and then use compresses and ointments that we are accustomed to treating wounds with, such as the quadripartite ointment and the like. And you should loosen the ligature.
You should inspect the wound every morning and evening until it heals and closes. The affected part should be positioned so that pus flows easily downwards. If, after many days, the wound has not closed or the pus continues to flow, know that there are small bone fragments present.
You should then explore the wound with a probe. If any of those fragments are clean, remove and extract them. If any are not clean and cause pain and inflammation to the limb, cut them into pieces and remove them in any way possible.
If the wound shows signs of coldness, putrefaction, or any other type of corruption, you should treat each condition according to the remedies described in its respective chapter.
Remember this well: if a large bone is broken and you are dealing with a major limb like the femur or humerus, do not attempt to pull it out or reposition it. This often results in death, so leave it until it decays and it may fall out on its own after twenty or thirty days.
Then treat the wound if you see a place suitable for treatment, otherwise leave it alone.
Chapter Twenty.
On the Treatment of Complications Arising from Certain Fractures.
This complication often occurs after a fracture has healed, especially those near joints. It can cause deformity and prevent the limb from functioning normally.
If the complication is soft, use astringent remedies such as mastic, frankincense, myrrh, asafoetida, acacia, or similar substances. Combine some or all of these with an astringent decoction, egg white, or vinegar.
Apply this paste to the complication and bandage it tightly, leaving the bandage in place for many days before removing it and applying a fresh one. Continue this process until the complication subsides, God willing. Alternatively, apply a tight lead plate over the area.
Lead has a property that dissolves everything that is found in the organs. If a concretion has become hardened and severe, and necessity compels its removal, cut it open from above and remove the excess that results, or scrape it with some instruments until it is gone, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In the treatment of a fracture, if it has knitted but the limb afterwards remains weak and unlike its original nature.
If a bone fracture has knitted but the limb afterwards remains weak and frail, this is due to many reasons. One of them is either for the excessive loosening and tying of ligaments in a way that is not appropriate, or for the excessive tightening of ligaments so that nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb, or for excessive prolonged traction, or for excessive movements at an inappropriate time, or for a deficiency of blood in the patient's body and its weakness.
The treatment for this is to nourish the patient and enrich his body so that blood increases within it, use baths, introduce cheerfulness and joy into his life, and so on. Then apply pitch to the limb so that it attracts a great deal of nourishment to itself, or continue to traction it with lukewarm water. So that nourishment flows into it and it returns to its natural form.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In the treatment of broken bones that have knitted crookedly and prevent it from functioning properly.
When a limb, after its fracture has healed, presents with a crookedness or a protuberance of the broken bone, or a complication that disfigures the limb. Unless the limb is prevented from performing its natural function, one should not accept the statement of someone who claims to break the bone again from the beginning, for many ignorant physicians and bone-setters used to do this in our country.
This action is highly reprehensible and leads to great danger, the easiest of which is distortion. However, if the crookedness and complexity are soft, it should be straightened with water in which relaxing herbs such as marshmallow leaf and its root, rosemary, and the like have been cooked.
It is bandaged with relaxing bandages such as well-made diachylon, or saliva from the root of marshmallow is taken and beaten with chicken fat and sherbet ointment and bandaged with it, or a plump fig is taken and pounded with dove's dung and other remedies called antispasmodics.
And complexity is often resolved by continuous gentle massage done with the hands, using movement of the limb in all directions at all times. If the crookedness has been longstanding and severe, and has hardened, and iron treatment becomes necessary.
It should be incised above and the bone connection released, and what remains of the crookedness or bone should be cut into fine sections with great care and gentleness, then the wound should be treated as previously mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
Dislocation is the displacement of a joint from its place, which impedes movement and distorts the shape of the limb, and causes severe pain to the patient.  Therefore, whenever someone suffers a dislocation, they should be promptly treated to relocate it.
Do not delay treatment at all, for if it is delayed, swelling will occur, making it difficult to relocate the dislocation. Therefore, it should not be delayed, nor moved, nor stretched while it is swollen, because this often causes the patient severe pain and spasms.
But if this occurs, one should promptly perform bloodletting on the patient and then leave them until the swelling subsides somewhat, then bathe the limb in hot water and oil, and gently relocate it. Then treat each limb as mentioned in its appropriate place.
And I have also arranged the chapters on dislocations according to the order of the fracture, from the top of the body to the bottom.
Chapter Twenty-Fourth.
In the Treatment of Dislocation of the Lower Jaw.
Dislocations of the jaws are rare, and their occurrence can take two forms: either a slight displacement where they relax a little, or a complete dislocation where they relax fully. Toward the chest, so that the patient's saliva flows and he cannot hold it back, nor can he clench his jaw, and his tongue stumbles in speech; as for a slight dislocation, it often returns on its own quite easily.
But if the dislocation is complete, it should be immediately reduced without delay. The assistant should hold the patient's head while the surgeon inserts the thumb of one hand into the base of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side.
Or he inserts both thumbs if the dislocation is on both sides, and with the other fingers outside, he straightens it; he then instructs the patient to relax his jaw and let it go in all directions, while the surgeon straightens the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to reduce them, especially if both jaws are dislocated, apply a compress soaked in hot water and ointment to facilitate their return; do not delay the reduction as we have said. Once they are back in place, aligned, and the patient's mouth closes without relaxing, then place bandages of cloth over them with splints made of wax and ointment.
Then tie them gently with a loose bandage. The patient should sleep on their back, with their head elevated between two pillows so that they do not move it to the right or left, and they should refrain from chewing anything but have soft food prepared for them.
Even if the pain subsides and the jaw heals, let him eat what he desires, but let him do so gently and not force open his mouth when eating, drinking, or yawning until the jaw is healed and cured.
If the jaws are difficult to bring back together after they have become separated at any time and do not return to their place, it often results in fevers and constant headaches, and sometimes the patient's stomach will erupt and he may vomit repeatedly; then if you see this, know that he is corrupted.
And often one who suffers from this dies within ten days.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On Reducing a Dislocated Shoulder and Clavicle.
As for the clavicle, it does not dislocate inward due to its connection to the chest; however, it may dislocate outward, which becomes apparent upon examination.  Compel the patient to lie on his back and extend his arms.
Then press the area with your hand with force, and it will return; then apply a bandage and splints to it and bind them tightly. As for its end which connects to the shoulder, it rarely dislocates; but if it does happen to dislocate one day, it should be reduced and set as we have described and as is suitable.
Then apply a bandage, splints and binding to it and order the patient to observe rest and tranquility until he is healed. With this same treatment, the end of the clavicle is also reduced if it has become displaced.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On Reducing a Dislocated Shoulder.
Know that the shoulder dislocates in three ways: one is dislocation towards the armpit downwards; the second is dislocation towards the chest; and rarely, it may dislocate above the shoulder.
And it does not break backwards to the shoulder or forward to the nerve, and most often it breaks and comes out downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with little flesh because it comes out quickly in them and enters quickly.
As for those with much flesh, it is otherwise, meaning that it comes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty. And perhaps some people experience a blow or a fall so the elbow swells and becomes hot, and they think that it has broken, so it should be examined to determine its soundness.
Then you proceed with its treatment, and you recognize the dislocation if it is downwards towards the armpit; if you compare between the dislocated elbow and the sound one, you will find an apparent difference and you will find the head of the elbow in a depression and when touching under the armpit, the head of the elbow feels like an egg.
And the patient cannot raise his hand to his ear nor move it with all its movements. Likewise, if it dislocates towards the chest or upwards, you will find that apparent upon touching and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation can be easily reduced if it is recent or the patient is a boy, and to reduce it, have a servant raise his hand upwards, then place your thumbs under his armpit and lift the joint strongly upwards to its place while the servant raises his hand and extends it upwards.
Then he lowers it downwards, and it will return quickly. If it does not return as mentioned and the dislocation has been for many days, then the patient should bathe in hot water and use a poultice that relaxes and softens, such as cooking the root of marshmallow, fenugreek, and rosemary in water and apply it.
Then the patient lies on his back and you place a ball of wool under his armpit, which should be moderate between softness and hardness, then the doctor puts his heel on the ball and holds the patient's hand with his hand and extends it downwards.
And he will push the ball with his foot, for it will return to its place. And if you wish to return it in this manner, prepare a man taller than the patient and have him stand on the side and insert his elbow under the patient's armpit and raise his armpit upwards until the patient is suspended in the air. And another attendant will pull the patient's hand down to his belly; if the patient is light, something else should be hung on him to weigh him down, for it returns the jaw to its place. It may also be returned in another way.
Another way is to focus on the ground a long piece of wood with a round head like the pestle, not too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient's armpit after placing a soft rag on the head of the wood and the patient standing along the length of the wood.
Then he extends his hand down from the other side and also stretches his body from the same side with force, for the joint quickly returns to its place. If it is difficult to return it by all that we have mentioned, then use this remedy: take a piece of wood about two arm's lengths long. And its width is the size of four fingers and its thickness is the size of two fingers, it has a round head to make it easy to enter deep into the armpit in this way: .
Then a soft rag is tied on the round head so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then it is placed under the armpit and the whole hand and arm are extended on the wood, and the wood is tied to the upper arm, forearm, and end of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a horizontal beam ladder and the hand is extended downwards, leaving the rest of the body hanging from the other side, for the joint enters its place. And if it enters in any way possible, then a ball of moderate size made of wool should be placed under the armpit.
Then a prepared poultice of mill dust, frankincense, and egg white is applied over the entire shoulder as it rotates from above; then the ball is firmly tightened under the armpit and bandaged over the poultice from above, with his hand hanging around his neck.
His hand is left immobile for seven days, and the patient's diet should be light so that the limb may strengthen, for this is quicker for its recovery. Then after seven or five days it is loosened and exercised with movement; if it remains firm and does not relax, it has healed.
But if the joint repeatedly dislocates due to moisture or some other cause, cauterization should be used with three white-hot irons as previously described in the chapter on cautery. If all this is done and the bandage is loosened after seven days, and the joint does not remain stable.
The poultice and bandage were repeated several times, but it did not hold; it fell and relaxed, and you could not raise it upward. Know then that the nerve in the head of the shoulder has been severed, stretched, or relaxed. Therefore, know at that time that the joint will never remain stable in its place.
As for the dislocation which occurs towards the chest and the breastbone, and behind it, it is reduced by pushing and pulling with the hands until it returns. All bandaging and treatment are used in it until it heals. If stiffness develops in the limb afterward and movement is slow.
The patient should frequently use the bath so that the stiffness softens and returns to its original state.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the Treatment of Elbow Dislocation.
The elbow joint dislocates with difficulty and also returns with difficulty. It dislocates in all directions, especially forward or backward. Its dislocation is not hidden from you, as it lies under sight and touch, regardless of the way it has dislocated.
And if you join the dislocated joint to the sound one, it will become clear to you by an obvious sign; the joint will be crooked and the arm will not be able to bend nor touch the elbow with the hand. You should hasten to return the dislocation from its position before a hot swelling occurs for it.
For if a hot swelling occurs for it, it will be difficult to return and it may not heal at all, especially if the dislocation is backwards; for it is the worst of all types of dislocations, the most painful and death often comes with it.
And if it can be returned, let a servant extend his hand with both hands and arms outstretched, while the doctor's hand is above the elbow and below it; he pushes the joint with the thumbs of both his hands or the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is forward, it may be returned by bending the hand once so that the base of its palm strikes the elbow opposite it; and if the dislocation does not return, use a very powerful stretching method; which is to extend the arm by two servants.
And the patient is also held by two servants so that he does not move during stretching, then the arm is rotated in all directions after a folded cloth or a wide bandage is wrapped around it; and if the doctor begins with his hands to massage the joint, let him anoint it with oil so that it will be easier for the joint to slip back into place.
Then the joint is pushed hard until it returns, and after its return, it should be bandaged with a bandage containing a grip and drying with egg white; and it should be tightened tightly and the arm hung from the patient's neck and left for days.
Then it is removed; if the joint is secure in its place, remove the bandage and leave it alone. If you see that the joint has not become firm, reapply the bandage and splint and leave it for days until it becomes firm then remove it. If inflammation occurs after the joint returns and the bandage is removed
If there is stiffness in movement, let him use moistening in the bath and gentle massage and pinching until it softens, or place on the joint a fat sheep's caul, then bind it and leave it for a day and night, then remove it and put him in the bath, and when he sweats, rub the joint with a moderate rubbing.
Then repeat the sheep's caul again and again with entering the bath until it softens, and if you wish to put on him fresh cow dung moistened slightly with butter and bind it, do that several times, for it softens and returns to its former state.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Wrist.
The wrist of the hand is often dislocated, and returning it to place is easier than with other joints; however, it should be hastened as soon as it is dislocated, before the location swells or becomes hot and inflamed.
To return it to place, put the wrist of the patient on a board and have an attendant extend his hand; then the physician places his hand on the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns; however, he must look to see if the dislocation has moved towards the inside of the hand.
Let the patient place the outer side of his hand on the board when extending and returning it. If the dislocation is prominent towards the outer side of the hand, let him place the inner side of his hand on the board so that the physician's hand falls on the same prominence of the joint. If it returns immediately, that is enough; otherwise, bind it with a bandage that reduces swelling.
Leave it alone and do not return to treating it, for it cannot bear it, and you will not be able to return it after a few days have passed; however, the joint remains in its place and does not harm the patient unless his hand becomes weak and unable to grasp anything.
If that happens, then know that the nerve has been severed or crushed, and there is nothing to be done except to bind it tightly with a splint; perhaps this will help, and perhaps it will not help at all.
Then it is softened and trained, for if its movement becomes difficult and there appears some stiffness in it, it should be softened with warm water and rubbed many times until it becomes pliable.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Dislocated Fingers.
Fingers may dislocate in any direction, so when a finger dislocates toward the back of the hand or its palm, extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumb until it returns, then tie the tip of the finger and hang it towards the side to which it dislocated.
Leave it for two days, then release it and extend it until it stands straight that day. If it is at night, tie it in the same manner. Do not stop releasing it during the day and train it with movement and tie it at night. Continue this for several days until it strengthens.
Do the same if it dislocates into the palm of the hand, tying it toward the same side and repeating the first action until it heals. Similarly, do this whenever it dislocates in any other direction.
The Thirtieth Chapter.
In the Treatment of a Dislocated Vertebra.
When a vertebra from the vertebrae of the back or neck becomes completely dislocated or many vertebrae become displaced from their positions, there is no treatment for it because death hastens to the patient.
A sign of this is that the patient's stool comes out involuntarily and he cannot hold it back, and often some of his limbs relax, either his legs or his arms, or one of them. As for if only one vertebra becomes displaced, it often heals.
Displacement can occur in four directions, and the one that occurs backward is called a hump. As for its treatment, observe if the hump has occurred since childhood, there is no treatment for it and it will not heal at all. But the one that occurred from a fall, a blow, or something similar...
The ancients have mentioned it with various methods of treatment in lengthy speech, most of which is not very beneficial. I have summarized this, and a little suffices in place of much of what they have brought forth in terms of approaching the meaning and explaining it, and I have depicted the instrument differently than they have described and explained it.
I say that the prominence that occurs in front of the chest has no remedy, nor is there any cure for it, and neither does the one to the sides. Only the one that occurs in the back can be treated, particularly with what I will describe: which is to lay the patient on his face.
On a flat workbench near a wall, spread a wet rug underneath so that his chest is not hurt, then place an upright wooden plank embedded in a hole in the ground at one end of the workbench toward his head and another wooden plank toward his feet at the other end of the workbench.
Have a servant hold the plank and let it not be fixed in the hole, and another servant hold the other plank in that manner; then wrap a soft, tight bandage around the patient's chest and under his armpits, extending one end of the bandage to the plank at his head and tying it there.
Then tighten another bandage over his thighs and above his knees and at his ankles; then gather all the bandages together and tie them to the plank at his feet, and each servant extends the plank toward him with the bandages, and the planks do not move from their fixed positions.
But they are not fixed as we have said, and the physician places his hands on the prominence firmly until it returns or he places a board on it and then leans against the board with his legs so that it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, take a board about three cubits long.
Carve a place in the wall, which we said should be near the patient, where the end of the board will fit; then place the middle of the board on the prominence, and the physician puts his feet on the other end and pulls strongly until it compresses the prominence.
And return it to its place, and if you wish to make it with the screw that is twisted by hand, it is to insert in the ground at the head of the patient at the end of the bed two pieces of wood each a cubit long, and also at his feet at the end of the bed.
Let there be a span between each piece of wood, and let a hole be made in each piece of wood through which the screw is passed, and all the wood is firmly secured to the ground so that it does not move at all, then insert a round stick which is the screw into which the ligature is twisted in the holes of the two pieces of wood.
And at its end there is a hole in which a stick a cubit long is fixed to be twisted, and the same is done in the other two pieces of wood, then tighten the ligature that was tied on the patient's chest in the screw at his head, and the ligatures that were tied on his legs in the screw at his feet.
Then a servant stands at each screw and twists it with the turner by which the screw is twisted, and the physician straightens the hump as we have described. This is a picture of the screw, the bed and the patient:
Then after the vertebra returns and the position is even, it should be covered with a dried plaster bandage made with egg white then linen cloth, and then place a splint of wood on top of the bandage, which is three fingers wide or so, and as long as the hump was.
And on top of some proper beads, and then it is tied with the appropriate ligature. The patient should use a soft diet until they are healed. If there remains some protrusion in the place at the end of the healing, medicines that relax and soften should be used, along with the board we described for a long time.
A lead plate may also be used for this purpose. Sometimes a protrusion may appear at the end of the dorsal vertebrae and it may be mistaken for a dislocation. This is an extra bone that has grown, and do not treat it with this method as death may occur.
Chapter Thirty-One
In the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the hip joint and the shoulder joint are only subject to dislocation and not to the slight displacement and pitting that affects all other joints. The hip joint dislocates in four ways.
This is because it dislocates inwards, outwards, forwards, and backwards. It most often dislocates inwards and least often forwards or backwards. A sign of inward dislocation is that if you compare the healthy leg of the patient with the injured one, the injured leg will appear longer.
The knee will be more prominent than the healthy one and the patient will not be able to bend their leg at the hip. The area below the hip will be warm and swollen, indicating that the head of the femur has moved there.
The signs of dislocation outwards are the opposite of these. A sign of dislocation forwards is that the patient can straighten their leg completely, but they cannot bend it without pain. There will be pain in the knee and if they try to walk, they will not be able to move forward.
Urine retention occurs, and the hip is swollen. When walking, they land on their heels. A sign of dislocation backwards is that the knee cannot be straightened and cannot be bent before bending the hip. The leg will also be shorter than the other.
The hip is relaxed and the head of the femur is clearly located near the waist. As for correcting the different types of dislocation, if it is an old dislocation that has been endured by the patient without any attempt to reduce it, then there is no treatment at all.
It should not be treated. But if the dislocation is recent and of any of the four types, you should immediately manipulate the joint, flexing it inwards and outwards and moving it from side to side. This may
If it returns and does not require any other treatment, if it does not return this way, a servant with strong arms should be provided to support its leg from below, either with his hands or with a crutch tied to his leg above the knee, and another servant to support it from above.
He should insert his hands under his armpits and then tighten a soft crutch at the base of the thigh, with another third servant holding the end of the crutch. The third servant will support him either from the front from the side of the armpit to the collarbone or from behind to the back.
All of them should support him at the same time so that the patient can raise himself off the ground with his body and remain suspended. This type of support is a common type for all four types. If the jaw returns as we said, otherwise each type from what I mentioned requires specific treatment.
As for its specific return, if the jaw is inward, the patient should lie on his right side and then a crutch should be placed at the base of the thigh between the head of the thigh and the position under the armpit.
Then the bandage is extended upwards from the armpit to the top of the body to the collarbone, then another strong servant takes hold with his arms and embraces the thick part of the affected thigh and extends it outwards with a strong pull, for it will return to its place.
This type is easier than all other types of treatment in which this member is returned, if it is difficult for you and it does not respond to entering into this type of treatment at all, then the patient's legs should be tied together with a strong soft bandage on the heels and knees.
After each one of them is a distance of four fingers and the affected leg is more extended than the other by two fingers, then the patient is hung from the head on a wooden beam that is in the house, and his distance from the ground should be two arm lengths.
Then you order a strong boy to embrace the head of the thigh and another boy clings to the patient, while the other boy who is embracing the thigh pushes strongly; for the joint will return to its place quickly. As for returning a dislocated one if the jaw is outside.
The patient should lie on the bed as we described in Al-Hadba and his bandages should be tightened, especially on his affected leg and chest, then two planks are placed, one at his feet and the other at his head; then an additional plank is placed in the middle of the bed, firmly secured.
It should be wrapped with damp cloths so as not to hurt the patient, the plank being placed between his thighs so that he does not slide down during traction; then each attendant pulls in his direction and the physician straightens the hip with his hands, if it responds by returning.
If not, put the board on him and press as we mentioned in Al-Hadba, except that the patient should lie on his right side. And if the dislocation is forward, the patient's leg should be extended once while he is in this exact position on the bed.
The physician places the palm of his right hand on the affected thigh, then presses it with his other hand; however, the pressure should be extended downwards towards the knee. If the dislocation is backwards, the patient should not be extended downwards.
He should be raised off the ground, but rather placed on something solid, and also his hip should be flexed outwards as we mentioned when he is lying on the bed on his face with bandages tightened.
As we said before, the pressing with the board should also be used on the place where the joint dislocated to. Once the hip joint has returned properly, and the sign of its return will not be hidden from you; it is that you extend the patient's legs.
If you see them level and the patient draws up his leg and extends it without difficulty, know that the limb has returned to its proper place. Then join the thighs and lift the dressing, and tighten it with a turban so that the hip does not move in any direction.
The patient must remain at rest for three or four days, then the bandage and ligature are removed, and the leg is compared with the other. If they are equal in size, know that the fracture has set, and allow the patient to walk. If you see any laxity in it.
Set it again and bandage it tightly according to your initial binding, and leave it for another three days. Then remove the dressing and allow him to walk on it slowly for several days until it strengthens, God willing.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
On the Treatment of a Knee Fracture.
The knee is fractured in three ways: inward, outward, and downward, meaning backward, and it never fractures forward. The sign of a fracture is to order the patient to bring his leg up to his thigh.
If it does not stick to the thigh, know that the knee is fractured. To set all types of fractures, have the patient sit down with his legs extended if he is able, and place a servant behind him to hold his waist and turn him slightly backward. Then you sit on his thighs.
Press your back against his face and place his leg between yours, then firmly press his knee with both hands, interlocking your fingers on his knee. Then, using both hands, forcefully compress the sides of his knee. Another servant extends his leg until the knee returns to its place.
The sign that it has returned is that the leg adheres to the thigh without strain, then bandage it and firmly attach the leg to the thigh. Bind them all together with a bandage for three or four days, then release them. He should only use it for light walking for several days until it strengthens.
If it is impossible to return it in the way we have described, then use strong traction with the bandages which I have previously described for the treatment of the hip until it returns.
Chapter thirty-three.
On the treatment of a ruptured heel.
The heel may detach slightly or completely, and its rupture can be either inward or outward. The sign of a rupture is that you see the heel swollen and prominent in the direction it has ruptured.
As for the treatment of its slight detachment, it is easy to return it by gently pulling it with the hands and straightening it until it returns. As for its treatment if it has completely ruptured, the patient should sit down and a strong servant should hold him from behind his middle.
Then you grasp his foot with your right hand from above and with your left hand below it at the level of the ankle, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and then twice with your left hand, then extend it with your left hand and push the front of the foot with your right hand towards the leg without violence.
You do this twice as we have described, then push the front of the foot towards the leg in the third attempt while pulling at the ankle. If it returns in one or two attempts in this manner and you see the foot straight, otherwise repeat the process, for it will return.
If it refuses to return as we have described, otherwise lay the patient on his back on the ground and fix a strong peg firmly in the ground so that it lies between his thighs after having wrapped a cloth around it so as not to hurt the patient, then the servant holds his thigh.
Then another servant extends the leg either with his hands or with a bandage tied around the neck of the leg, then each servant extends in opposition to the extension of the other, and the peg remains fixed between the patient's thighs so that he does not get dragged down during the extension, and then the physician straightens the rupture with his hands.
Another attendant holds the sound leg downwards, for the jaw returns quickly. When the jaw has returned and you have ascertained its soundness, apply a dressing and splint, and tighten it with strong ligatures, and then bind the foot to the splint with a bandage downwards. Care must be taken to avoid the nerve which lies above the heel behind.
So that the bandage is not tight upon it and causes it pain, then leave it for two or three days; if the bandage becomes loose tighten it again, and then release it on the third or fourth day. The patient must abstain from walking for forty days.
If he wishes to walk before this time, you cannot be sure that the jaw will not dislocate and become useless, and will afterwards refuse treatment; if there should appear hot swelling, what we have previously described in another part of the treatment for abscesses and poulticing should be used until it subsides.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
On the Treatment of Fractures of the Fingers.
That which is broken should be straightened with a slight extension, without violence; this is not difficult but easy. If the fracture is in one of the phalanges of the toes, the patient should place his foot on a level surface.
Or on a board while standing as if walking, then you should place your foot upon that which is broken from those joints, and then tread upon it firmly with your foot until it returns and you see that it has become straight and there is no protuberance in the place.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot which will take the whole foot and has two heads, then tighten it firmly for three days; then loosen it and keep him from walking for many days until it becomes strong and you are safe from its return, if God wills.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On the Kinds of Fracture Which Occur With a Wound or With a Break, or With Both.
When something of this nature occurs and it is treated with surgery and bandaging, death often follows.
Therefore, it should not be undertaken except by one who is skilled in the craft, long experienced, gentle, compassionate, deliberate, neither rash nor bold, and who in the beginning uses only medications to soothe hot tumors, and then leaves the patient alone.
For God's sake, only hope for safety from the disease with the lightness of the illness and if some hope appears to you in it, then turn it away from that hour in the first place before the hot tumor occurs.
If the member returns to what you desired, use the treatment that soothes hot tumors and treat the wound with drying ointments suitable for it. If the fracture is with a broken bone and there are loose fragments in the bone, then remove them. Follow in this what we have mentioned about simple diseases previously in their places.
Strive and purify yourself from entering the path of risk, according to my previous advice to you. This is what will ensure your reputation and safety, God willing.
