The author of this book, when he had completed for you, his sons, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its entirety and reached the utmost goal therein in its clarity and explanation, saw that he should complete it for you with this treatise which is the part of work by hand.
For manual work is in our country and in our time utterly nonexistent, so much so that the study of its science was almost discontinued. And what remained of it were but slight sketches in the books of the ancients, which hands had corrupted and thrown into error and confusion until its meanings were obscured and its benefit removed.
So I decided to revive it and to compose this treatise on it according to the method of explanation, clarification, and abbreviation, and to give illustrations of iron instruments and all other surgical tools, for this is an increase in elucidation and a fulfillment of what is needed.
The reason why there are no skilled craftsmen in our time is that the practice of medicine is lengthy, and its possessor should first become proficient in anatomy, as Galen described it. So that he may understand the benefits of the organs, their forms, temperaments, connections, and separations, and knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, their number, origins, and insertions, as well as the arteries, veins, and their places of origin.
Therefore Hippocrates said that physicians in name are many, but in deed few, especially in manual work, and we have mentioned a part of this in the introduction to this book.
For he who is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned concerning anatomy is bound to fall into error that may kill people, as I have witnessed many times in those who imagined themselves to be experts in this science and claimed it without knowledge or experience.
Indeed, I once saw a ignorant physician who incised a wen on the neck of a woman, and he severed some of the arteries in her neck so that she bled to death at his feet.
I saw another physician who had advanced in removing a stone from a man who had been stabbed in the tooth, and the stone was large; so it crumbled, and he removed it with a piece of bladder calculus. The man died in about three days, and I had been called to remove it; I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that this was beyond my capacity.
I saw another physician who was making a living from medicine among some of the leaders of our country.
A black boy happened to have a broken leg near the heel with a wound, and the physician, in his ignorance, hastily bound the fracture onto the wound with bandages and splints tightly secured and did not leave the wound any room to breathe.
Then he released him to his amusements and left him for days, ordering him not to untie the bandages until his leg and foot swelled up and he was on the verge of death.
I was then called to him and quickly untied the bandages, bringing relief and freeing him from his pain; however, the corruption had become deeply established in the limb and I was unable to restore it.
The corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until he died.
I saw another physician cauterize a cancerous tumor, and after a few days it ulcerated, greatly afflicting its possessor; for when cancer is purely from black humors, it should not be treated with iron at all.
Unless it is in a limb that can tolerate the complete removal.
Therefore, my son, you should know that manual work is divided into two parts: work accompanied by safety and work that usually results in harm.
I have warned throughout this book against work that involves risk and danger, and you should beware of it and refuse to undertake it.
So that the ignorant may not find a way to speak against and criticize you, be cautious and careful in your actions and treat yourselves with gentleness and deliberation.
Use the best path leading to safety and a happy outcome, and avoid dangerous and difficult diseases.
Purify yourselves from what you fear may bring doubt to your religion and worldly affairs, for it is the most enduring legacy for your reputation and the highest rank in this world and the Hereafter for your worth.
For Galen said in some of his precepts, "Do not treat a bad disease and become bad physicians."
This treatise has been divided into three chapters.
The first chapter.
On cautery with fire and cautery with caustic drugs, arranged from beginning to end, with illustrations of instruments and iron for cautery, and everything needed for manual work.
The second chapter.
On incision, dissection, cupping and bloodletting, surgery, and the extraction of arrows and the like, all arranged and illustrated with instruments.
The third chapter.
On splinting, dislocations, and the treatment of fractures and the like, arranged from beginning to end and illustrated with instruments.
The first chapter.
On cautery.
Before we mention its use, it is necessary to mention its benefits, harms, and in what temperaments it is used.
I say that discourse on the benefits and harms of cautery is long, a precise science, and a subtle secret, and many sages have spoken about it.
They differed in their opinions, and I have summarized a little of what they said for fear of being verbose.
I say that cautery is generally beneficial for every bad temperament, whether with or without a material cause; there are two temperaments that it benefits: the hot temperament without a material cause and the dry temperament without a material cause.
As for the dry temperament with a substance, they differed in it, some saying that cautery is beneficial and others the opposite, that cautery is not suitable in a disease that is from heat and dryness because the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
It is impossible for someone to be cured of a hot, dry disease by a hot, dry remedy, and those who say the opposite say that cautery with fire may benefit from a hot, dry disease that occurs in people's bodies. Because when you add the body of a human and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you make the human body cold.
And I say the same because experience has revealed this to me many times, but it should not be imagined by anyone who has not trained and practiced extensively in the art of cautery. And he must have considered the differences in people's temperaments, the states of illnesses themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration.
As for all other temperaments, there is no fear from them, especially cold and wet diseases; all physicians have agreed on them and did not differ about the benefit of cautery in them.
And know, my sons, that the secret of treatment by cautery with fire and its advantage over cautery with burning medicine is because fire is a single element whose action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized and does not harm another connected member except for a slight injury.
Cautery with burning medicine may extend its action beyond the members and may cause a disease in the member that is difficult to treat and may even kill, but fire, due to its nobility and generosity of essence, does not do this unless it is excessive.
This has become clear to us through experience from long service and attention to the craft and standing on the facts of the matter.
That is why I dispensed with lengthy speech, and if it were not inappropriate for this book of mine, I would have presented to you in fire a mysterious secret and how it acts on bodies and negates diseases with philosophical, demonstrative speech that sharpens your understandings.
Know ye, sons, that they have differed concerning the time which is suitable for cauterization and they have made the best time to be spring.
And I say that cauterization may be suitable in every time because the injury resulting from time is consumed in the benefit which is elicited by cauterization. Especially if the cauterization is from necessary, strong pains which cannot bear delay because of what is feared from a destruction that is greater than the slight injury from time.
And do not consider, O sons, what the common people and ignorant physicians imagine, that cauterization which heals from a disease will never have a return, and you make it obligatory.
For the matter is not as they suppose, because cauterization is like medicine which changes the temperament and dries up the humidities which are the cause of the pains occurring.
Except that cauterization is preferred over medicine because of the speed of its success, the strength of its action, and the severity of its power.
And it is possible that the disease may return at some time depending on the temperament of the patient, the strength of his illness, and what prepares itself in his body from gathering excesses and negligence in acquiring them from foods and so forth from those reasons.
Except if the disease for which cauterization is used is a delicate disease and in a member with few excesses and humidities. Such as cauterizing a tooth for pain, and the like, it is possible that the pain may not return in it and this will be at least.
And as for the saying of the common people also that cauterization is the last resort, it is a true statement, but not to what they intend, because they believe that no treatment benefits by medicine or anything else after cauterization has taken place and the matter is otherwise.
Indeed, the meaning of "cautery is the last resort of medicine" is that whenever we have used various treatments for a disease and those drugs have not been successful, and then we use cautery as a last resort and it succeeds, therefore, it is said that cautery is the last resort of medicine. Not according to the meaning which the common people and many ignorant physicians have adopted.
The ancients have mentioned that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, saying this because of the moderation of gold and its noble essence, and they said that it does not cause suppuration at the site of the cautery. This is not true at all.
For I have tried it and found that it only does this in some bodies and not others, and cautery with it is better and more excellent than iron as they said, except that if you heat the iron in the fire from gold, you will not be able to discern when it has reached the degree of heat that you desire for the redness of gold.
And because it quickly cools, and if you increase its heat in the fire, it melts and pours out, causing the craftsman to fall into trouble from this, therefore cautery with iron has become faster and closer to being correct for us to practice, God willing.
And I have arranged this chapter on cautery into sections, organized from the head to the foot, to make it easy for the student to find what he wants, God willing.
Chapter One.
Cautery of the Head: A Single Cautery.
This cautery is beneficial for the predominance of moisture and cold on the brain, which are the cause of headaches and frequent colds from the head to the eyes and ears, excessive sleepiness, toothache, and sore throat. In general, for every disease that arises from cold, such as paralysis, epilepsy, stroke, and similar diseases.
The picture of this disease is that you first order the patient to vomit with a purgative medicine purified for the head for three or four nights, as required by the strength of the patient, his age and his habit.
Then you order him to shave his head with a razor, then you seat him between your hands, squatting, having placed his hands on his chest.
Then you place the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his eyes, and where your middle finger ends, mark that spot with ink.
Then heat the olive iron whose picture is this.
Expose from the bone the head of a needle or the size of a caraway seed, then raise your hand, or else return your hand with the same iron or another if it has cooled. Until you see from the bone what I have mentioned to you, then take some salt, dissolve it in water and soak a cotton ball in it, place it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then apply a cotton ball soaked in butter to it and leave it on until the burning sensation goes away, then treat it with the fourfold ointment until it is healed, God willing.
And they said that the wound, the longer it remains open and discharges pus, the better and more beneficial it is.
And some mentioned that the skin should be burned to the bone and the iron held until some of the thickness of the bone is burned, then the burned part of the bone is removed afterwards and treated.
And others said that one should overdo the burning so that it affects the bone strongly until it falls from the bone like a small chirp or a small flea, and they claimed that steam from the head escapes from that place and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals, and I do not see these two types of cauterization at all except in some people and by way of risk, and leaving it with me is better and safe, if there is any safety. For the head weakens when its natural connection is broken, as we have seen in all other organs.
Especially when the patient's head is weak in nature, the first type of cautery is safest and best for me, and with it I work, so you are safe, God willing.
Chapter Two.
Also in head cautery.
If, in a head wound, there occurs chronic pain and this lasts for the patient and poultices, ointments, cauteries and dressings are used, especially if he has been cauterized with the single cautery that we have described and nothing has benefited him from it then look. If the patient's head is strong in nature and not weak, and he feels intense cold, cauterize another cautery slightly above it. Then cauterize each horn of his head with a cautery until the thickness of the skin is gone and the bone is exposed to the degree we have described. And cauterize a cautery on the back of his head in the place known as the ax, and lighten your hand in this, and do not expose the bone because the patient will feel severe pain from it unlike the pain of all other head cauteries and I will mention this cautery in its place.
The iron with which the horns and back of the head are cauterized should be finer than the iron with which the middle of the head is cauterized, and this is its image.
Chapter Three.
In cautery for non-chronic migraine.
If there occurs in a head wound pain with headache and the pain extends to the eye, let the patient be purged with purgatives for the head and use all the treatment that I mentioned in the divisions of diseases, but if this does not succeed then cauterize it on two sides. Either cauterize with a harsh burning medicine or with iron.
As for cautery with burning medicine, it is to take a single garlic clove, peel it and cut off its ends on both sides, then incise the painful spot from the temple with a wide lancet until there is a subcutaneous place large enough for the clove.
Insert it under the skin until it disappears, then tighten it firmly with a bandage and leave it for fifteen hours. Then untie it and remove the garlic, leaving the wound for two or three days, then dress it.
Cover it with cotton soaked in ghee until the area suppurates, then treat it with ointment until it heals, if God wills. If you wish, you may do this with some caustic drugs which I have mentioned in the eighteenth chapter on caustic drugs.
As for cauterizing it with iron, it is done as follows: heat the iron whose shape is as follows:
It is called a nail iron because its head is shaped like a nail, with some indentations and a small protrusion in the middle.
Then place it on the painful spot and hold your hand while turning the iron slightly. The amount you burn should be about half the thickness of the skin. Lift your hand so as not to burn the artery below, which would cause bleeding. Then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the area, leaving it for three days. Then dress the cotton with ghee, then treat it with ointment until it heals, if God wills.
If you wish, you may cauterize this sciatica with the sharp point of the iron, taking care not to cut an artery in this acute case, especially.
Chapter Four.
On cauterizing chronic sciatica.
If you have treated sciatica with the remedies previously mentioned and those in the classification of diseases, and treatment has not been successful, and you see a cause which cannot be addressed by the first cauterization with medicine or fire. Then heat the pointed iron until it turns white, after marking a line on the painful spot about half a finger long. Leave your hand only once while tightening it so that it severs the artery and reaches near the bone.
But you must be careful of the contact of the jaw that moves when chewing, lest you burn the muscle or the nerve that moves it and cause paralysis.
And be wary of the bleeding from the artery which you have cut, for there is danger in cutting it. Especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is not an experienced practitioner, it is best to leave the work undone.
The treatment of bleeding from the artery will be mentioned in its proper place in this book, God willing. If you see a condition that cannot be treated by these means.
And you saw the body of the patient bearing a wound in the middle of the head, as we have described, and treated the wound until it healed, God willing.
And if you wish, use the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on ligating the artery with an iron having two knives; it is a better and more effective cautery than this.
Chapter Five.
On Cauterizing Earaches.
If pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with laxatives and all other treatments mentioned in the division, but the pain does not go away, then heat the iron called the point, which has this shape.
Then apply it after heating it all around the ear as it curves, or all around them both if the pain is in them. And keep the cautery away from the base of the ear a little after learning the location with ink, making the cauterization about ten points in each ear or thereabouts, then treat the spots until they heal, God willing.
Chapter Six.
On Cauterizing Sores.
The type of sore that is treated with cautery is the one that occurs from phlegm, as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
He avoids the kind that causes hollows and nerve tension.
When you have treated this type of weakness with poultices and fomentations and gargles, and your treatment has not been successful, the patient should be cauterized with three cauteries. One at the base of the ear, the second a little below his cheekbone, and the third at the junction of the lips.
Make your cauteries opposite the affected side because relaxation only occurs on the side that appears sound.
And the cautery should be made opposite the upper part of the ear, under the horn of the head a little, and another on the cheekbone, its length being the length of the thumb.
Lower the cautery with your hand until it burns half the thickness of the skin, and this is the image of the cautery iron, which is a type of surgical knife whose picture has been shown, but it is slightly finer than it, as you see. And the knife should have a little extra thickness, then treat the area as previously mentioned until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
On cauterizing chronic stroke.
If the stroke has persisted and you have treated it as we have mentioned, and your treatment has not been successful, and the patient does not have a fever, cauterize him with four cauteries. One cautery on each horn of his head, and one in the middle of the head as we mentioned, and a cautery on the back of the head as previously stated.
The description of the cauteries is as previously mentioned, and it may also be cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, which will be more effective, then treat as previously mentioned.
Chapter Eight.
On cauterizing forgetfulness.
The one that is from phlegm should first be given to the patient large poultices and herbs that purify the brain.
Then his whole head is shaved and a mustard plaster, as mentioned in the article on plasters, is applied to the back of his head; it is held there repeatedly, for it is a type of cautery.
Do this on the rank itself, which was mentioned there. If he is cured by that, otherwise, make three cauteries in the back of his head, lined up from the top of the head to the nape of the neck.
Make a thickness of a finger between each cautery, then treat the cauteries as mentioned before. If you wish to increase [the treatment] and the patient can tolerate it, make a middle cautery.
If you wish to increase [the treatment], then cauterize the temples and treat them until he is cured. The cautery iron should be olive-wood, as mentioned before.
Chapter Nine.
Cauterization for paralysis and relaxation of the whole body.
You should proceed with the purification of the head with eyepieces and what we have mentioned, then shave the patient's head, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of the head, a cautery on each temple, and a cautery on the back of his head.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck; if, in a case of relaxation of the body, you need more than that and the patient can tolerate it and the illness is strong and chronic, cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of his back. Cauterize deeply until it burns most of the skin, then raise your hand and treat it as previously mentioned until he is cured, God willing. The cautery iron should be olive-wood.
Chapter Ten.
Cauterization for epilepsy.
Only the epileptic whose epilepsy is from phlegm should be cauterized. First, his brain should be purified with large eyepieces and all the treatment mentioned in the division, if the patient is adult and can tolerate taking medicine.
If it is a child who cannot tolerate medicine, let gargles and purified brain washes be used before that by many days, with the improvement of his diet.
Then shave his head, then cauterize one cautery in the middle of the head as previously described in the description and another cautery at the back of it. And on each temple of his head a cautery, if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, cauterize the cauteries mentioned in the case of paralysis and relaxation of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back, and let the iron be olive-like as previously described.
If the ailing one is a child, make the iron delicate in this manner.
Chapter Eleven.
On Cautery for Melancholia.
If the cause of melancholia is foul humors and thick phlegm, cauterize the cauteries we mentioned in the case of paralysis.
If the cause of melancholia is a predominance tending toward blackness and the patient's body is moist and foul, purify his brain as previously described in the division.
Then shave the patient's head, then make a tight cake of linen like a circle, then lower it into the middle of his head while the patient is sitting square and holding on from each side, then take one pound of old sheep tallow.
Then heat it on the fire to a moderate warmth that the finger can tolerate if inserted, then pour it into the middle of his head within the circle and leave it until it cools; do this for the patient once a week with all his other good treatment until he recovers, God willing.
And if you wish, cauterize it with many small dots without holding your hand on the iron, but let it be a branding; for this type of cautery moistens the brain moderately.
Then place upon it cotton soaked in butter or chicken fat.
The Twelfth Chapter.
In cases of watery discharge from the eye.
If the beginning of the watery discharge from the eye becomes apparent with the signs mentioned in the division, hurry and make the patient wash his head and protect it from all moisture and sweat him in the bath on an empty stomach for several days.
Then shave his head and place a cupping glass in the middle of the head, then place two more cupping glasses on the temples if the discharge has just begun in both eyes or on one side if it is in one eye.
Then cut with a hot iron all the veins and arteries under the skin, let the cauteries be long in the direction of the temples, and preserve from bleeding.
If you see anything of it, cut it off immediately with any treatment that is possible for you, and I will come to the wisdom of cauterizing the arteries and cutting them while preserving from bleeding.
And two large cupping glasses may be applied to the nape of the neck under the collarbones.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
In cases of chronic tearing.
If the tearing of the eye is chronic and constant and was previously from the veins and arteries in the outer part of the head outside the skull and you are sure that it is from a cold, thick phlegmatic humor, then apply the cupping mentioned exactly as described for the beginning of watery discharge. One cupping glass in the middle of the head, two on the temples and two in the nape of the neck under the collarbones, and if you need to increase it, apply a cupping glass on each side of the tail of the eye at the end of the eyebrow with a small hot iron.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In cases of foul-smelling nose.
If the treatment mentioned in the division does not succeed, hasten to cauterize the patient's coccyx for three nights, then shave his head and cauterize the middle of it with an olive iron. Then cauterize it with a nail iron twice above the eyebrows, slightly under the hair, and be careful not to cut the artery. This is an image of the nail iron.
Chapter Fifteen.
On cauterization for relaxation of the eyelid.
If an eyelid relaxes due to illness or moisture, cauterize the eyelid once with this crescent-shaped iron.
And if you wish, cauterize above the eyebrows a little twice on each side, keeping them apart from the temples, and let the length of each cautery be along the eyebrow.
Do not overdo the cautery, but only to the extent that one-third of the skin is burned. The iron will be shaped like this.
Chapter Sixteen.
On cauterization of the eyelid.
If its eyelashes turn inward and irritate the eye, then cauterization is done in two ways. Either cauterization with fire or cauterization with a burning medication. As for cauterizing it with fire, order the patient to leave his eyelashes alone beforehand, if he is one who plucks them, until they grow long and even.
For if it is irritated while sprouting, bind his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they grow. And when they have grown and are even, place the patient's head in your lap, then draw a mark on the eyelid with ink in the shape of an ascal leaf.
The beginning of the mark should be near the eyelashes, then place cotton soaked in egg white or in the saliva of a barberry under the eyelid. Then heat an iron shaped like this.
Then it should be cauterized according to the shape you have been taught little by little many times until the surface of the skin, which is like an ivy leaf in appearance, is completely burned. A sign of your work being done well is that you will see the eyelid contracted and the hair raised from the fleshy part of the eye.
Then raise your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then apply cotton wool with butter to it until the scab comes off, then treat it with ointment until it heals if God wills. If anything of the hair returns after a while and the eyelid relaxes.
Then cauterize that spot again as you did first, and if the hair is in the lower eyelid, pluck it until it returns to its natural position so that the hair does not pierce the eye. As for cautery with a burning drug, it is to order the patient to leave the eyelashes alone until they grow long and even.
Then make a shape from paper like an ivy leaf, then take from the common soap and quicklime that has not been slaked one dirham in weight or thereabouts of each, and crush them all together thoroughly, and do this quickly so that it does not dry out. Then spread some of it on the paper you have made in the shape of an ivy leaf and place it on one or both eyelids, and put cotton wool soaked in egg white underneath the eye and the patient's head in your lap.
Place your index finger over the medicine and press it a little, moving it whenever the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine because he will find it pleasurable like fire. As long as he feels the burning, leave the medicine and move it with your finger; but when the burning stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Look and see if you find that the eyelid has risen as it rises when cauterized by fire or cut; otherwise, apply more of the medicine to the spot where the medicine has not affected and has not blackened until your work is complete and the eye becomes contracted, then place cotton wool with butter on it until the scab from the burn comes off.
Then treat it with nabath ointment or another until it heals, and you should be extremely careful that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye. If the eyelid relaxes after a few days and we fear something from the hair is in the eye.
Then apply medicine to that part of the eyelid which has relaxed, just as you did initially, and then treat it until it is healed. This is a picture of an asparagus leaf.
Know that people's eyes vary in size, so your cautery should be adjusted accordingly. This is not a subtle path to correctness for those who have practiced this craft.
Chapter Seventeen.
On the treatment of a nasal polyp that appears in the corner of the eye.
If you treat the polyp as described in the sections on diseases and your treatment is unsuccessful, it should be cauterized in this manner.
Order the patient to place his head in your lap and have a servant hold his head between your hands, holding it still so that he does not move or jerk his head.
Then place a cotton swab moistened in egg white or in the saliva of a sparrow on his eyes, and then heat the iron which is pictured here.
It should be hollow like the quill of an eagle's feather at one end, which is the cauterizing end. If you wish, the other end can be open, or if you wish it can be closed like a pomegranate seed, but this hollow end is best for your work, God willing.
Then squeeze the polyp if it is open and express the pus from it, or if it is not open, open it and remove the pus. Then place the hot iron on it, holding it with your hand until it reaches the bone.
Withdraw your hand slightly when cauterizing, moving it away from the eye towards the nose so that you do not miss with your hand or alarm the patient and cause the iron to fall into the socket of his eye and spoil it. If you reach the bone in the first cautery, then stop; otherwise, apply the iron a second time if needed.
Leave it for three days, then apply cotton wool soaked in butter and treat it with drying ointment until it heals. If forty days pass and it does not heal, apply a sharp, corrosive medicine so that the bone is exposed and prepare it as will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
Another method mentioned by some of the ancients is to intentionally cut the nasion and then place a thin tube in the same incision. This is its image.
Pour into it a weight of lead equal to one dirham, melted. Hold the tube firmly with your hand so that it does not move at all, lest the molten lead flow into his eye. You should place cotton wool soaked in egg white or water on the patient's eye.
For the lead will burn the area of the nasion and heal it in a wondrous way. If the nasion is healed by the cautery and treatment mentioned, then there is no need for anything else. Otherwise, one must resort to using nasal piercing and returning the nasion to its nasal passage as will be explained in its proper place.
Chapter Eighteenth.
On Cauterizing a Harelip.
A cleft often occurs in the lip, called a "harelip," especially in the lips of boys; it happens quite frequently. If you treat this cleft with what we have mentioned in the division and the treatment is unsuccessful, then heat a small, pointed iron like this.
Its cavity should be as sharp as a knife, then place it heated quickly into the same cleft until the cautery reaches the depth of the cleft, and then treat it with cerate so that it heals, God willing.
Chapter Nineteenth.
On Cauterizing a Nasion That Occurs in the Mouth.
If a tumor appears in the gum, palate, or roots of the molars, then it ulcerates and bursts, and a fistula forms from the pus discharge, and if you treat it and it is not successful, then you should heat an iron to a size that fits into the fistula.
Then insert it protected in the nostril hole and hold your hand until the protected iron reaches its depth and end, and do this once or twice, then treat it afterwards with what we have mentioned of treatment until it recovers if God wills.
If the material is cut off and healed, otherwise it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupt bone as will be mentioned in its chapter if God wills.
Chapter Twenty.
On Loose Teeth and Relaxed Gums.
If the gums relax due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine and it does not work, then put the head of the patient in your lap and then heat the iron whose shape will come after this after putting the tube on the tooth.
And insert the iron into it protected quickly and hold your hand a little until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth, then lift your hand and then return the iron several times as you wish, then the patient fills his mouth with salt water.
And he holds it for an hour and then throws it away, for the loose tooth will be fixed and the relaxed gum will tighten and the corrupt moisture will dry up.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On Relieving Toothache.
If the toothache is due to cold or there are worms in it and treatment with medication does not work, cauterization is done in two ways: either cauterization with butter or cauterization with fire.
As for cauterization with butter, it is to take cow's butter, boil it in an iron ladle or in a shell, then take cotton and wrap it around the end of a rod, dip it in the boiling butter and place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold it until it cools.
Then return it several times until the force of the fire reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish, dip a wick or cotton in cold butter and place it on the aching tooth, then put the heated iron on top of it until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
As for cauterizing it with fire, take a copper tube or an iron tube and let there be some thickness in its body so that the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth, then heat the iron which comes in its shape and place it on the same tooth, hold your hand until the iron cools down, do this several times.
Then the pain will go away either that same day or the next day, and after that cauterization, the patient should fill his mouth with good butter and hold it for an hour then spit it out, this is a picture of the iron.
Cauterize with whichever end you wish and to the extent possible, and this is a picture of the tube.
Chapter twenty-two.
On cauterizing pigs.
If the pigs are phlegmatic and have cold humors and do not yield to ripening with medication and you desire quick ripening, heat the hollow iron which has this shape, open at both ends.
So that the smoke comes out from the other end when cauterizing, place it heated on the same tumor once or twice if you need to do so, until it reaches the depth of the tumor, if the tumor is small, make the iron according to the size of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and apply cotton soaked in butter to it until what was burned by the fire goes away, then treat it with ointment and wicks until it heals, God willing.
Chapter twenty-three.
On cauterization for hoarseness of voice and shortness of breath.
If phlegm prevails in the trachea, especially if it is accompanied by a cold temperament, the patient should first be purged with laxatives, and then cauterized with a cautery at the hollow of the throat, in the low position.
Beware of reaching the throat with the cautery, and do not burn more than half of the skin. Then apply another cautery at the nape joint, at the last vertebra, and it should be a nail-shaped cautery as previously described.
Then treat him as previously mentioned until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
On the Cauterization of Lung Diseases and Cough.
If the cough and lung disease are from cold phlegm, and the patient does not have a fever or consumption, and the illness is chronic, cauterize two spots above the clavicles in the low soft empty spaces, and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
The cautery should be nail-shaped as previously described, or if you prefer, cauterize with dots using the cautery called "the point," whose shape was previously described in the cauterization of earache. The points should range from thirty to that number.
Then treat him as previously mentioned until he recovers. You may also make a cautery with three branches in this shape to expedite the cauterization, as you cauterize three spots at once with it. This is the image of the cautery.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On the Cauterization of the Armpit.
If the head of the humerus dislocates due to slippery phlegm, or does not remain in place after being put back so that it repeatedly dislocates with the slightest movement, as we have witnessed, then the joint should first be put back into place. Then the patient is laid on his back or on his right side, and then the skin inside the armpit is lifted upwards with fingers of your left hand if the joint has dislocated inwards.
Then a heated iron with two blades, such as this pictured one, is held.
Then it is cauterized with it until it penetrates to the other side, and the shape of the cautery becomes four cauterizations; it may also be cauterized with a three-bladed iron, in which case the shape of the cautery will then be six cauterizations, and the blades are on the neck of the vein.
And this is a picture of the three-bladed iron.
And one may be added to this number, making the cauterizations eight; then carded wool soaked with salt is applied to the cauterization, and the patient must rest and not move the limb for a time until it strengthens. If the dislocation is upwards, this rarely occurs.
So a single well-done nail cautery is made above the elbow, or many pinprick cauterizations; for the joint will be strengthened and the moisture will depart, and the patient will recover.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On Cauterization of the Stomach.
If cold and much moisture occurs in the stomach, so that it is displaced from its temperament, and catarrhs increase to it, and it has been treated with various remedies without success, then the patient should lie on his back, extend his legs and arms, and then be cauterized with three cauterizations. One cautery under the spoon of the breast, the size of a finger, with a nail iron; and two cauterizations below on either side of the single one, so that the shape of the cauterizations becomes triangular, and they are spaced apart so as not to meet when they heal. The depth of the cautery should be two-thirds the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the cauterizations will be .
In this manner and to this extent no more.
And if you wish, cauterize one large eschar in the middle of the abdomen in this manner.
And the iron with which you cauterize this single eschar should be circular in shape as shown here.
And the stomach may be cauterized in dots for those who fear this cautery, which is to draw dots on the stomach with ink according to the desired size, then cauterize them with a dotted iron and treat them with the previously mentioned remedy until they heal.
Chapter twenty-seventh.
On cauterizing a cold liver.
If pain arises in the liver from coldness and dampness or from excessive flatulence until it departs excessively from its natural temperament, and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned in the division, but this does not succeed. The patient should lie on their back, and three cauteries should be drawn with ink in this shape and size exactly on the liver below the clavicles where the human elbow ends.
And there should be a space of the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and the cauterization should be straight along the body, do not press hard with the iron.
Let the amount you burn of the skin's thickness be half, no more, and the patient should stand on their feet; if they are unable to stand, they should lie down with extended legs and raised arms. This is an image of the iron.
You may be able to cauterize these eschars with a narrow iron if you have experience and skill in the craft, but be careful not to linger on the cautery so that it burns all the skin and reaches the abdomen, as the skin there is thin, know this well.
Chapter twenty-eighth.
On cauterizing a liver tumor.
If an abscess appears in the liver and you wish to know whether that tumor is in the flesh of the liver or in its peritoneum, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will find heaviness and pain without sharpness.
But if it is in the peritoneum of the liver, there will be severe sharpness with the pain and you see that physicians have become weary of treating it, so the patient should lie on his back then apply a poultice to the warm spot with medicated paste.
Then heat an iron in the fire, which is the kind that resembles a plane, and this is its image. Cauterize it with a single application until it burns all the skin and end the cautery at the peritoneum so that all the pus comes out, then treat it with the treatment for abscesses until it is healed.
And this type of cautery should not be used except by one whose training in medicine has been long and who has treated these diseases many times over by experience. Only then should he undertake such work, and leave it with me as the better option.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On Cauterizing a Fistula.
The ancients mentioned cauterizing a cold fistula with the root of zedoary in this manner: take one long, dried zedoary root as thick as your finger, dip it in oil and heat it in the fire. Then cauterize it with a single application between the connection of the clavicle and the neck, and two small cauterizations slightly below the nipple line, inclined toward the side under the chin, and two large cauterizations above the breasts between the third and fourth ribs.
And two more cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclined slightly backward, and another in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach, and three cauterizations from behind: one between the shoulders and two on either side of the spine below the cauterization that is between the hands.
Your hand should not be inserted deeply, but rather a cautery mark should be made on the surface of the skin. Some of the ancients have said that some people used to use an iron poker resembling a spear point which they would heat and insert between the ribs until it reached the tumor itself.
And the probe is removed as we described in regard to liver tumors, and with this cautery there is great danger; either the patient will die immediately or an incurable fistula will develop at the site.
Chapter Thirty.
Cauterization of the Spleen.
If you have treated splenic disease as described in the division and your treatment has been unsuccessful, then cauterization should be performed in three ways, all of which are correct. One is to apply three or four cauteries in a line along the length of the spleen.
These cauteries should be made in the same shape as those for the liver, with a space of the thickness of a finger or slightly more between each cautery. The iron should have the same properties as described for liver cautery and your hand should not be inserted deeply. The patient should lie on their back.
The other method is to raise the skin opposite the spleen where the patient's left elbow ends. The skin should be raised across the width of the body so that the cauteries fall along the length of the body.
Then insert the heated speculum very carefully until it penetrates through the skin on the other side, then withdraw the iron and you will have made four cauteries. If you wish, you may use the three-pronged iron for cautery instead.
Then treat the cautery site, allowing it to drain pus for many days; this is more effective than any of the previously mentioned treatments.
Chapter Thirty-One.
On the treatment of dropsy.
Cupping is only beneficial for dry dropsy, especially if you have treated the patient with the various treatments we mentioned in the division and your treatment was unsuccessful, then four cuppings should be applied around the navel and one cupping on the stomach.
Another cupping should be applied to the liver, and one to the spleen, and two behind his back between the shoulder blades, one opposite his chest and the other opposite his stomach. The depth of the cupping should be close to the thickness of the skin, then the cupping should be left open so that pus drains for a long time.
The patient should not be deprived of treatment after cupping with what is appropriate so that both meanings are combined and healing is hastened. The shape of the iron with which the back is cauterized is nail-shaped, as its image has previously appeared, and the one with which the stomach is cauterized is olive-shaped.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
On Cupping the Feet and Legs.
If the feet of a patient with dropsy become swollen and filled with yellowish water, cupping should be applied on the back of the foot in the depression between the little toe and the next one.
Hold your hand with the iron and do not bend it, then raise your hand and do not return it at all, for it will drain yellowish water. The iron should be shaped like this.
Then, two cuppings should be applied to each leg. The cupping should be done with the sharp end of the iron and should be along the length of the leg, one below the knee and the other below it towards the middle of the leg, and two cuppings on each thigh.
Leave the cupping open without further treatment for a long time so that water drains from it, then treat it with all that we have mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
In cases of diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is from cold and humidity until it weakens the holding and digesting powers which are in the stomach and intestines, and it was treated by various treatments and did not recover, and you see the patient capable of enduring a cautery and of strong power, then perform a large cauterization on his abdomen. As for the cauterization of the stomach, it is done with a circular iron and four light cauterizations around the navel, using a fine nail-shaped iron. One large cautery on the cotton above the pubis or two cauteries.
If you see the humidity is abundant and the patient can endure it, then perform a cautery on the groin and one on each buttock and perhaps add two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one. For this is an effective treatment whose benefit does not fail, God willing.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
On Cauterization for Anal Hemorrhoids.
If there are chronic hemorrhoids in the rectum, many or one, and they were from thick cold humors or corrupted moistures, and they were treated with what we mentioned in the division but the treatment was not successful, then cauterize the patient with three triangular cauteries below the sacral prominence under the coccyx a little.
And one cautery under the navel the size of two fingers, and if you believe his stomach has become cold and his food does not digest and you see his face swollen, then cauterize him with a large cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned and one on his liver. And another on his spleen with a nail-shaped iron and leave the cautery open for some time, then treat him until he recovers, God willing.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On Cauterization for Warts.
After cutting them, heat an iron shaped like a nail, then insert it hot into the same cut wart and press hard until the iron reaches the mouth of the vein from which blood flows. Do this once or twice.
If there are many wens, cauterize each one as we have described, then treat them with the appropriate ointment until they heal. If you cauterize a large wen at once with cotton, it will be more beneficial.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
On the cautery of fistulas that occur in the perineum and its surroundings.
If the patient does not respond to incision and the procedure we have described in its place, and refuses it, then perhaps he will be cured by cautery. If a fistula occurs, and pus and foul moisture flow from it, the first thing you should do is measure it with a fine probe.
Then determine the depth of the fistula with the probe, and prepare a cautery iron that resembles a chisel. Insert it heated into the fistula itself along the straight course of the fistula and to the depth that the probe reached. Repeat the cautery until all those foul substances are burned away once, twice, or three times, as needed.
Be careful not to burn a nerve if there is one, or a large blood vessel. And be cautious if the fistula leads to the bladder or intestine.
Be careful of all these places, and only do this if the fistula is in a fleshy place and you determine that it is impassable. Then treat the area until it heals. If the area closes and the discharge ceases and remains so for some time, know that it has been completely cured.
If the discharge does not cease, know that it is passable or that there is a large foul substance in its depth or something similar to what will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
On the cautery of the kidneys.
If pain occurs in the kidney due to cold or a strong wind, and as a result the patient's semen is reduced, you should cauterize him on both sides, on each kidney, with the nail-shaped iron previously mentioned. Perhaps you will cauterize it three times on the same table, resulting in three cauterizations in a row. This will be the most beneficial.
Chapter Thirty-Eight
On the Bladder.
If there is weakness and relaxation in the bladder due to cold and dampness, so that the patient cannot hold urine, make incisions in the lower part of the perineum, on the bladder, where the pubic hair begins; one incision on the right side of the perineum and another on the left.
The incision on each side should be the length of a thumb joint. Make an additional incision in the lower back, or two if necessary. The cautery should be pointed as previously described.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
On Cauterizing the Womb.
If a substance of cold and dampness occurs in the womb, so that menstruation is obstructed and its flow corrupted, or if pain occurs upon its arrival, three cauteries should be made around the perineum as we described for cauterizing the bladder. One cautery should be made on the pubic hair below the back, or two if necessary. The cautery should be pointed.
Chapter Forty.
On Cauterizing to Dislocate the Hip.
Moist humors may sometimes collect in the hip joint, causing it to dislocate. The sign of this is that one leg will be longer than the other when they are measured against each other, and you will find a void at the site of dislocation. A semicircular cautery should then be made on the hip joint itself.
After you have marked the area around the joint with ink, as if drawing a circle to enclose it, make sure that the center of the circle corresponds with the dislocated joint. The cautery iron used should be the one previously described for cauterizing the stomach. If this iron is not available, make three incisions with a large olive-wood cautery.
The depth of the cautery should be equal to the thickness of all the skin, then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Forty-One
On the cauterization of the sciatic nerve.
If pain occurs in the hip and its cause is cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as mentioned in the division, but the treatment does not succeed and time passes, then it is necessary to ease the patient from thick humors with purslane or marshmallow, or the like.
Then cauterize the area, and there are two types of cautery: cautery with burning medications or cautery with fire. Cautery with fire is done in several ways, one of them being to apply three triangular cauteries directly on the hip itself in this manner.
They should be of an appropriate depth, and the distance between each cautery should be the width of a finger. The cautery iron should be oiled. Sometimes one cautery is applied to the center on top of the hip itself, resulting in four cauteries. If you wish, you may cauterize it with the circle mentioned previously for hip dislocation with one cautery.
This circle will encircle the entire hip and burn all the skin thickness. This is the description of cautery for sciatica if the pain is localized to the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
But if the pain extends to the thigh and leg, apply two cauteries on the thigh in the spot indicated by the patient as painful, and one cautery above the ankle bone with four fingers toward the outer side. Use a thin iron, and the depth of the cautery should be equal to the thickness of the skin only.
If the patient indicates that the pain extends toward the toes, apply three or four cauteries with a pointed iron where indicated, or more if needed. If the pain is indicated as being below the knee toward the leg, apply one thin cautery there.
Be cautious in all your cauteries not to burn a nerve or large blood vessel, as this will cause the patient serious harm or disability.
I have seen one or two people who cauterized above the ankle and then squeezed in the cautery, until the leg swelled to the point of reaching the foot and it all became suppurated and ruined the whole leg, then diarrhea and death followed. If the pain is on both sides, cauterize them in the same manner.
Some wise scholars have mentioned that when cauterizing the hip, it should be done in this way: make a kind of crucible out of iron, with an opening half a handbreadth wide, and at its mouth a thickness equal to or slightly less than the kernel of a date. Inside this crucible is another, and inside that one there is a third.
The space between each crucible should be the width of a thumb joint. Each crucible should be open on both sides and about a handbreadth or two in height, with an iron handle firmly fixed to them. This is its illustration.
Then it is heated in the fire until red-hot and the sparks are removed, then placed on the buttock bone and the ilium while leaning on the correct side. It cauterizes three circular cauteries at the same time. Then it is left for three days and bandaged with butter, leaving the wound open for several days.
Afterwards, it is treated with ointment until it heals. The author of this book said that this type of cautery is rarely used due to its ugliness and frightening appearance and because few people can endure it, but it is a good cautery for those who are patient enough to endure it and are affected in the right place.
As for cauterization with burning medications, it is done by making two crucibles resembling a mortar, into which the reflux of the retort descends, made of copper or iron.
The crucibles have a height of about two handbreadths, and the space between them is about the width of a finger. They are open at the bottom and top, and some are fastened together in this manner.
Then you lower it onto the right hip bone, with the patient lying on his right side and hold your hand firmly; then pour between the two circles the sharp water, which has been heated by a small fire pot, and keep it there for the space of an hour-glass. The patient must endure its stinging and burning, for he will find a pleasure like that of fire.
Until the stinging subsides, then you raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off all the sharp water from the hip with fresh water; then leave it for three days and apply butter to it until the blackness of the burn is gone. Leave it for several days so that pus flows from it, for this is most beneficial.
Then treat it with ointments until it is healed. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make for him a mold that will hold the water according to what you made for the hip. This is the description of sharp water and he has proven it in his treatise on the Correction of Drugs.
Take one part each of saltpeter and quicklime, crush them together and put them in a new pot which has been pierced with a single small hole at the bottom, just large enough to admit a reed. Place another glazed pot underneath.
Pour fresh water over the saltpeter and quicklime, enough to cover them by a fingers breadth after you have well pressed them together with your hand, and leave the pot until the sharp water descends into the glazed pot below. Then collect all of that water and pour it over new lime and saltpeter which have also been renewed.
It will then be extremely sharp and effective for many medical purposes and in cauterizing all the organs, for it acts like fire itself. There are other drugs with which the hip can also be cauterized, such as thafasiya, honey of bladder senna, and lime mixed with soap.
Galen related a story about an ancient man who had a remedy for hip pain and sciatica, exaggerating its importance greatly and claiming that no other treatment was needed and that it would cure with a single application.
Even he may enter the bath carried and come out of it completely healed. It is to take from the fresh green chickpea, if green is not found, then one takes a dry chickpea. Grind it with some fat and put it on the hip where there is pain, or in the leg or thigh.
Tighten it and leave it for three hours, or as long as the patient feels the burning subside, then put him in the bath. If his body sweats, put him in the basin, for the pain will go away and he will be healed by God's will. If he is not healed, repeat the poultice after ten days again.
He will be healed if God wills, and know that no one should use cauterization with these medicines except after the body has been purged, and Dioscorides mentioned that goat's hair if used to cauterize sciatica is beneficial.
Cauterization is done as follows: take wool, soak it in old oil and place it on the deep location between the thumb of the hand and the index finger, closer to the index finger. Then take a dry goat's hair.
Ignite it with fire until it becomes a coal, then place it on the wool and leave it until it goes out, then take another and continue doing this until the sensation reaches the middle of the arm to the hip and the pain subsides by God's will. This type of cauterization is called hair cauterization.
Chapter Forty-Two.
On Cauterization for Back Pain.
Back pain can arise from many causes, such as a fall, blow, excessive purging, and so on. It is often due to the accumulation of a cold, wet substance. Cauterization is applied only in this type.
When back pain is caused by the accumulation of a cold substance, after the patient has been purged with a laxative like natron and so on, they should be cauterized on their back where the pain is, in three rows across the width of the table itself. Mark the location with ink. In each row, apply five or more cauterizations according to the patient's tolerance and strength.
It should be cauterized with a pointed iron, and if you wish, cauterize it three or four times with a medium-sized nail iron in this manner.
Chapter Thirty-Third.
In the cautery of the beginning of the swelling.
This ailment often occurs in young children, and its initial sign in a child is shortness of breath upon standing and moving, and you will find at the end of his back vertebrae a lump that has protruded over all other lumps.
If you see this and want to stop it, cauterize it with an iron that is circular in this manner. Let the cautery be applied to each side of the vertebra evenly, and if you wish, cauterize it around the vertebra with a pointed iron in two or three rows, making sure the dots are close together; then treat the area until it heals as we have described.
And be careful to use cautery on the swelling that is caused by nerve constriction.
Chapter Forty-Fourth.
On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pains.
If joint pains are from cold dampness settling into any part of the body, and if these pains occur in the legs, it is customary for physicians to call this gout specifically.
If cold gout is treated with the types of treatment mentioned in the division and the pain does not go away, then cautery will remove it.  This involves cauterizing around the ankle joint after vomiting, applying many cauteries. Use a medium-sized olive iron in this manner.
And if you need to cauterize the face, do so with a pointed iron; if the pain rises to the knees or to all other joints, which often happens, cauterize each knee three or four times on each side using this same olive iron.
If you need more than this, take it and do not delve your hand into the cautery, but let it be about the thickness of the skin only. If the pain ascends to the hips or back, use what we have mentioned about cautery in its chapter.
If the pain is only in the hands, punctuate around the wrists as two rows turn. If the pain remains in the fingers, punctuate each knuckle with a point and on the back of the hand. If the pain ascends after a few days to the elbows or shoulders.
Cauterize them from all sides and let the patient not be without good management and taking medicine, for if he eats well and expels phlegm, he will recover with this cautery, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Fifth.
On Cauterizing The Skull.
If a hernia occurs in the groin and some intestine and omentum descends to the testicle, and this is recent and near the beginning, it is necessary to order the patient to abstain from food for a day and to use laxatives that will expel stool from his bowels.
Then let him lie on his back between your hands and order him to hold himself until the omentum or intestine protrudes, then push it back in with your finger, and then mark with ink under the hernia on the pubic bone a mark resembling a semicircle with its ends pointing upwards towards the body.
Then heat an iron in this shape.
Until it becomes white and throws sparks, then push the intestine or omentum back into its place and have a servant hold his hand over the spot so that the intestines do not protrude again; with the patient's legs parted and a pillow placed beneath him, and another servant holding his legs.
And another on his chest, holding his hands, then lower the iron onto the mark itself and hold it upright with your hand until it reaches the bone, or repeat it again if it did not reach the bone the first time.
Preserve your efforts from the protrusion of the intestines while cauterizing so as not to burn them, for that would cause the patient either death or a great affliction. Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work will not succeed. The cautery iron should be gentle according to their ages, both for children and adults.
Then treat the cauterized spot with butter after three days so that the burn's dryness goes away, and then treat it with all other ointments until it heals. Let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound closes.
You should make his food during his treatment something that softens his stomach so that the intestines do not protrude when straining and defecating. Then, if he wishes to get up after forty days, use a tight bandage and keep it for another forty days. Reduce exertion, fullness from food and drink, and loud shouting.
If he follows this regimen, he will be completely healed, God willing. I will mention the treatment of hernia by incision in its chapter, God willing. As for the hernia that occurs in the rest of the abdomen and is in its early stages, if you want it not to increase, cauterize it with a round cautery iron according to its size. Let what you burn of the skin be one-third of it, then treat it as we mentioned; it will not increase, God willing. Some of the ancients have mentioned cauterizing the hernia with a triangular iron in this shape.
After you have learned to mark the hernia with a plumb line, make a horizontal line at the top of the hernia and the other line below it. Then put your hand in the middle and cauterize it with one nail-shaped cautery. The first cautery is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Six.
On Cauterizing the Hernia.
If pain occurs in some of the members due to a fall or blow, and that pain lasts for a long time and is not relieved by medication, it should be cauterized with a point iron, cauterizing each member according to its size, weakness, and strength.
If the pain and inflammation are relieved by the first cautery, then it is healed. Otherwise, repeat the cautery because it is customary for these pains to transfer from one member to another nearby, so it should be followed up with cauterization until the patient recovers.
Chapter Forty-Seventh.
On Cautery for Leprosy.
As for lepers, they may benefit greatly from cautery, especially the type of leprosy that results from putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
If you wish to cauterize them, and the leprosy is in its early stages and you have treated it as mentioned in the division, but it has not subsided or stopped, and you fear that corruption will take over all of his humors, then apply five cauteries on the head. One in the middle of the head, the usual spot; the second below it toward the forehead at the end of the hair; two on the temples; and one behind on the nape of the neck. Press your hand firmly during the cautery for a short time until it slightly affects the bone.
Scales will peel off, making it easier for the thick vapors to escape. Cauterize another cautery on the same spleen as mentioned above. As for leprosy that has persisted in the patient and appeared clearly, you should apply these cauteries we mentioned on the head. One cautery on the tip of the nose, two on the cheeks, two on the sides of the neck, six on the sides of the back, a large one on the coccyx at the base of the spine and another above it in the same area, and two on the thighs, one on each. Two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the elbows, two on the elbows, two on the armpits, and a bandage on each joint of the fingers of his hands and feet, as well as on each heel and on the wrists of his hands.
And preserve the nerve that is on the back of the heels so as not to burn them, for it may be cauterized on the pubic bone and another on the mouth of the stomach and another on the liver, and know that the more you increase the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it will be.
And know that the patient does not feel pain from cauterization as a healthy person does, because his body has become numb, and the cautery irons should be of varying sizes according to the limbs and joints as previously described regarding the characteristics of the irons.
Then treat the cautery with frankincense resin mixed with honey and all other treatments until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
In Cauterization of Numbness, When a limb has become numb and has been treated with medications, ointments, and bandages but has not recovered, cauterize the same numb limb with cautery irons according to what suits the size of the limb, whether large or small, and let your cautery be slightly deeper in thick skin.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals, and sometimes cauterization can be performed for some numbness that occurs in the hand or foot in cases of back pain at the exit point of the nerve that moves that limb, thus eliminating the numbness.
And this should only be done by someone who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the body and the exits of the nerves that move it.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
On Cauterization for Leprosy.
If leprosy has become advanced and no medical remedy has been effective, cauterize it slightly deep according to the thickness of the skin so that the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with lentil flour mixed with rose oil, plantain leaf and pigeon blood or the blood of small birds, a part from each. Mix all together and apply it to a cloth and bind it over the area until it is healed.
Chapter Fifty.
On the Treatment of Cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with a circular iron, going around it as if turning. Some sages have mentioned cauterizing a significant amount in the middle of it, but I do not approve of this because I expect it to ulcerate. I have witnessed this many times.
The correct method is to cauterize around it in a circle as we have said, or with many cauterizations.
Chapter Fifty-One.
On the Cautery of an Aneurysm.
If someone has an aneurysm which has slowed in maturation, either due to the efficacy of the cause or because the patient is old and has little blood, or simply due to time, and you wish to hasten its maturation, cauterize around it with many small, punctuating cauteries.
Then leave it; for it will hasten maturation. If you wish to cauterize it, use an iron with this shape.
Lower it into the middle of the aneurysm until it penetrates the skin. Let the cautery be as described below so that pus can easily flow, then treat it accordingly until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
On the Cautery of a Fistula.
A fistula is a corruption that progresses within a member, consuming it like fire consumes dry wood. If you see a fistula in a location suitable for cautery with fire, use many small and large cauterizing irons, shaped like nails, according to what suits the location of the fistula.
Then cupping is done from all sides until all the corruption is eradicated and nothing remains of it at all, then it is left for three days and sulfur powder mixed with oil is applied to the scorched areas so that all the scabs and corruption are removed.
Then it is treated with flesh-producing ointments. If you see after three days that the flesh grows healthily without corruption, otherwise, cauterize what remains of the corrupted areas, and the eating sore may be treated with a caustic drug.
For it acts in place of fire more quickly and beneficially, and I have mentioned its treatment with a caustic drug in the division, so take it from there when you need it.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On Cauterizing Reversed and Unreversed Nails.
This ailment often occurs on the soles of the feet, it is something rough that afflicts a man, and cauterization for it takes two forms: either cauterization with fire or cauterization with caustic water.
As for cauterization with fire, it is to heat a hollowed iron resembling an eagle's feather, made of iron to the extent that it encircles the nail from all sides, and its edge should be thin, then lower it while hot onto the nail, and turn your hand with the iron around the nail until the iron reaches the depth of the nail.
Leave it for three days so that it fills with pus, then dress it with wild barley flour pounded with salt and leave the dressing on it overnight; for it will come off from its roots, then treat the wound site with a flesh-producing ointment until it heals. If the nails are not reversed.
It often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, so you should take a tube made of copper or iron or an eagle's feather and place it on the nail or wart, then pour a small amount of caustic water into the tube.
Hold your hand and turn it slightly with a squeeze of your hand so that the rim of the tube touches the base of the nail, allowing the sharp water to find its way to the base of the nail. Let the patient endure the stinging of the sharp water for a moment.
Then you leave it, the nail will come off at its base. You do this one by one until all of them are removed from the body, then treat their places after they are removed with ointments that promote flesh growth.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On Cupping.
If someone experiences cupping due to cold in a nerve or from fever quarters or something else, four or five cups should be applied on the back between each vertebra and one cup on their chest. And a cup on their stomach with an olive oil lamp, for cupping soothes and accelerates the ripening of cold illnesses.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
On Cupping for Swelling in the Body.
Ugly blisters may erupt in the body, resulting from thick, cold, and corrupt humors. Upon their initial appearance, a gentle cup should be applied to the head of each blister using a slender aspen twig with one end ignited by fire or the root of long asphodel or a lentil-shaped iron.
Similarly, boils should be cupped in this manner upon their initial eruption so that they do not worsen, and the active principle dissipates, leading to recovery for the patient. However, it is important that this be done after the patient has undergone bloodletting.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
On Cupping for Bleeding After Artery Severance.
Bleeding from a severed artery often occurs during external wounds, incisions into tumors, or cupping of an organ, making its cauterization difficult.
If this should happen to anyone, quickly put your hand to the mouth of the artery and place your middle finger upon it and press it firmly so that the blood is held under your finger and nothing comes out. Then take small and large olive-wood splinters and heat them in the fire until they become very hot.
Then take one of them, either small or large according to the wound and the place where the artery has burst open, and apply the hot splinter to the vein after quickly removing your finger and hold it there until the blood stops flowing.
If the blood flows again when you lift your finger from the mouth of the artery and the splinter goes out, quickly take another splinter from those prepared in the fire and continue to do so one after the other until the bleeding stops.
Be careful not to burn any nerves that may be there, for this would cause the patient further pain. Know that if blood flows from an artery, it cannot be cut, especially if it is a large one, except in one of four ways: either by cauterization as we have said, or by amputation if it has not already been amputated. For if it is amputated, its ends will contract and the bleeding will stop. It can then either be tied tightly with thread or have medications applied to it that staunch the blood flow and be bound firmly with bandages.
But attempting to cut it with a ligature, or by tightening cloth around it, or by applying burning objects, and the like, will not stop the bleeding except in rare cases. If someone suffers this and cannot find a doctor or medicine, let them quickly place their middle finger over the mouth of the wound itself as we have described.
Press it down very firmly so that the blood is confined and flows from above the wound onto the artery and finger. Do not remove your finger with cold water, always keep applying it until the blood freezes, thickens, and stops flowing. During this time, see what cauterization or medicine is needed.
Chapter Two
On incision, cauterization, bloodletting and surgery and the like.
He who came before us has already mentioned in the first chapter every disease that can be treated with burning, cautery and its causes, reasons and instruments, and the figures of the cautery irons; and he arranged this in chapters from beginning to end.
And I will follow the same path in this chapter so that it is easy for the student to attain his goal.
Before I begin with that, you should know, my sons, that this chapter contains more intricacies than the first chapter on cautery.
Therefore, caution should be even greater here, for work in this chapter often involves the evacuation of blood, which sustains life, when an artery is opened or an incision is made on a tumor or abscess is lanced, or surgery is performed to remove an arrow or to incise a stone, and so forth. All of these carry risk and danger, and most of them can result in death.
And I advise you against venturing into what is doubtful, for in this craft you may encounter people with various diseases. Some of them may be weary of their illness and find death preferable.
Some may offer you their wealth, hoping for a cure, while their disease is combative. You should not assist those who come to you with this disposition at all.
Let your caution be greater than your desire and zeal, and do not proceed with anything unless you have certain knowledge that will lead to a favorable outcome. In all treatment of your patients, use advance knowledge and warning as guides to safety.
For in this way, you will gain praise, glory, remembrance and gratitude. May Allah inspire you, my sons, with right guidance and never deprive you of correctness and success, for these are in His hand. There is no god but He.
This chapter has been arranged in sections, from the top of the head to the feet, as was discussed in the previous chapter on cauterization, so that you may more easily find what you seek, God willing.
The First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that collects in the heads of boys.
This ailment often occurs in boys at birth if the midwife presses on the boy's head without gentleness, and it may also arise from a hidden cause that is unknown.
I have not seen this condition in anyone other than boys, and everyone I have seen with it quickly died; therefore, I decided to abandon treating it. I once saw a boy whose head was full of water, and his head grew larger every day. Until the boy could no longer sit up because of the size of his head and the moisture increased until he died.
This moisture either collects between the skin and the bone or gathers under the bone on the peritoneum. The procedure is as follows: if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the swelling is small, one should make a single incision across the middle of the head, about two finger-widths long, so that the moisture can drain. This is an illustration of the surgical instrument.
But if the moisture is greater and the swelling larger, make two incisions that intersect, like this:
And if the moisture is under the bone, a sign of which is that you see the sutures of the skull open on all sides and the water descends when you press it with your hand into the interiorthis will not be hidden from youthen you should make three incisions in the middle of the head, like this:
After making the incisions, all the moisture will come out; then tighten the incisions with rags and bandages, and then cover them from above with a drink and oil until the fifth day. Then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with poultices and ointments. Do not neglect to bind the head moderately, and feed the patient with all dry foods that are low in moisture.
Until the member becomes strong and heals, another method of incision is to look where the bone appears at the gathering of water, for it may be more in the back of the head or in the front of it, or on the right or on the left.
So you intend by the incision where the swelling appeared to you and filled with water, so make an incision as much as you can while preserving that you do not cut an artery causing hemorrhage from which the patient may die along with vomiting of moisture.
Chapter Two.
Cutting the arteries behind the ears, known as the temporals.
When one is stricken with a sudden cold to the eyes or chest, and it persists and medications do not succeed in treating it, then the treatment for that is cutting these two arteries.
If you wish to cut them, shave the patient's head with a razor then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the artery appears. Then tighten the patient's neck by means of their garment. Then look where the pulse is and the two places are the lower depressions behind the ears, they rarely hide except in some people.
Then mark them with ink and cut them with a scalpel to the bone, this should be done across the head. If you wish, you may insert the scalpel under the artery and pull it upwards while cutting, the length of the incision being about two fingers' widths.
For if the artery is severed, blood will flow out in a pulsating manner, springing forward and back repeatedly. If the artery does not appear to the touch, then you should measure three finger widths from the ear and mark with ink and cut to the bone. What is necessary...
Send six ounces of blood at once, and perhaps you may send more or less; all this depends on the strength of the patient and the fullness of his arteries. Then look at the wound, if any peritoneum remains upon the bone, cut it off.
So that a hot tumor does not appear, then tighten the wound with a wick of linen cloth, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter Three.
Sever the two arteries in the fingers.
If a person has chronic migraine or severe acute illnesses from humid heat and muscle fever in the fingers or chronic severe headache, and has been treated with various medical treatments without success, we have found that severing or cauterizing the arteries of the fingers, as described, is effective for these conditions.
The procedure for severing them is as follows: shave the hair on the fingers and aim for the visible artery in the thumb, which will be apparent to you from its pulse; it rarely hides except in rare individuals.
Or if the cold is severe and it is hidden from you, have the patient tighten their neck with their garment; then rub the spot with a rag or compress the spot with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the scalpel pictured here. Then gently peel back the skin with it until you reach the artery. Insert a ligature into it and pull it upwards until it emerges from the skin, freeing it from the fascia beneath on all sides. If the artery is thin, twist it with the end of the ligature. Then cut a portion of it, depending on how far apart the ends need to be so that they constrict and no bleeding occurs. For if it is not severed and does not break, the blood will not recede at all; then drain the blood from six to three ounces.
If the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong doubled thread; let the thread be either of silk or of lute strings so that gangrene does not set in before the wound heals and cause bleeding.
Then you cut the remainder between the two ligaments, doing this at that moment or later. If you wish to make it adhere to the bone with a cauterizing iron until its ends are severed, this will serve as well as, or even better than, the previous operation.
However, if the patient has a fever or a disturbed temperament, because cauterization helps to eliminate moisture, it will be even more beneficial. After ligating the arteries, the site should be stuffed with soft cotton and tight bandages should be applied. After removal of the ligatures, it should be treated with dry medications that promote flesh growth and bandaged until it heals, God willing.
If, during your work, bleeding occurs from an artery, immediately cut it, either by cauterization or by filling the area with pitch and pressing your hand until the bleeding stops. If none of this is available, place your finger there until the blood clots.
Wash the area with very cold water to soothe the burning and bandage it properly. Something easier and less severe than ligating the artery is to cauterize the vessel with this two-bladed iron after marking the locations with ink.
Lower it while very hot until it reaches the bone and the vessel is severed in two places so that there is distance between its ends, for it will not heal at all with this cauterization. This is a picture of the iron.
Its two blades are sharp, resembling small pincers but they are much less sharp than a knife because if they were as sharp as a knife, they would cool quickly and the flesh would not be severed readily. If there is some thickness to them, they will retain the heat of the fire.
And it cuts the flesh quickly. This operation is better than all others, lighter and easier, and the distance between the blades should be the width of a finger.
Chapter Four
In the treatment of continuous hot tear flow to the eyes.
If the tears are continuous and flow from the veins on the outside of the head, and no benefit is derived from medical treatment with drugs, and you see the face of the patient has reddened. And he feels a tingling in his forehead like the crawling of ants and his eyes are shaken and wet, their lids have become firmly glued from the intensity of the tears, so those who came before us in treating it resorted to this procedure which is called treatment by sword, which is to order the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then make three parallel incisions on the forehead, each incision being about two fingers long. The first incision is parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second a short distance from the movement of the muscle in the temple, and the third on the other side.
Take care not to cut the arteries on either side and keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws. The space between each incision should be about three clenched fingers. Have prepared pieces of sponge or many absorbent cloths ready to staunch the bleeding.
Then insert the sharp, double-pointed bistoury, which is pictured here. From the incision next to the temple to the middle incision, and scrape away all the skin and fascia on the bone between them. Then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision. Then remove the bistoury. Then insert into the first incision another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and smooth on the other. This is its picture:
Place the sharp side upwards towards the flesh adhering to the skin and the smooth side downwards toward the bone. Push it until it reaches the middle incision, cutting all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without the cut reaching the surface of the skin.
Then you do that in the middle incision to the other incision, and after a moderate amount of blood flows, press the places of the solid blood clots, then put a wick of cotton in each incision and place a bandage soaked with syrup and oil or vinegar and oil on it.
So that a hot swelling does not occur, and on the third day the ligature is dissolved and much irrigation is used with lukewarm water, then it is treated with balm of balsam with rose oil and all that you treat wounds with until it heals, if God wills.
Chapter Five.
In the treatment of tears and discharges to the eyes from the interior of the head.
When one has frequent, sharp, persistent discharges and sees the eyes as two small agitated objects and their sight has weakened and the eyelids are ulcerated and eyelashes fall out from them. And there is a sharp, painful ache deep in the head and continuous sneezing, know from these symptoms that those substances and discharges come from many deep vessels and the best treatment for it is this treatment, which is to order the patient to shave their forehead, then make one incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there is a sharp, painful ache deep in the head and continuous sneezing, know from these symptoms that those substances and discharges come from many deep vessels and the best treatment for it is this treatment, which is to order the patient to shave their forehead, then make one incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise it a little sideways and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, the incision being to the bone and keeping your hand away from the temporal muscles that move when chewing, until the bone is exposed and all the blood is dried with a sponge.
Then separate the edges of the incision with lint cotton or a twist of linen, then tighten it from above with bandages and soak the bandages with syrup and oil so that a hot swelling does not occur. When you dissolve them and see that the hot swelling has subsided, you should rub the bone until the growth of flesh begins there.
Then treat it with a drying treatment that promotes the growth of flesh, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of litharge and preparing an ointment from them to be used in the growth of flesh in such surgeries.
Chapter Six.
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.
Everything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone or something like stone, such as iron and glass; or a vegetable seed, such as chickpeas and kernels and the like; or something liquid, such as water and vinegar and the like.
And if an animal falls into the ear, whenever a pebble or something like a pebble falls into the ear and it does not exceed in the ear, expose the ear to the sun. If you see the pebble, put something of violet oil or cerate on it, then try to remove it by moving your head or sneezing with a nosebleed. And block the nostrils when sneezing after placing a collar of cloth or wool around the ear and extending the ear upwards, for it often comes out with this treatment. If it does not come out, then try to remove it with the delicate tool pictured here.
If it comes out with the tool, or else try to remove it with a fine, flexible blind hook. If it doesn't come out that way, then make a tube of copper and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole carefully.
Seal what is around the tube with softened pitch so that the wind has no path but the tube, then draw it strongly with your breath and it often comes out this way. If it does not come out as we have described, then take a little mastic from the gum arabic or the prepared gum used to catch birds and place it on the tip of the probe.
After wrapping it tightly with cotton, then insert it into the ear hole gently after drying the ear from moisture. If it does not come out with all that we have described, then proceed to incision before a hot swelling or spasm occurs.
The incision prescription is to lance the patient in the temple first and let out blood according to their strength, then sit the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards. Cut a small incision at the base of the ear near its cartilage in the lower part of it.
The incision should be crescent-shaped until you reach the stone, then remove it as best you can with instruments, and sew up the incision quickly afterwards and treat it until it heals.
If the object that has fallen in the ear is one of the grains that swells and becomes enlarged, try to remove it as we have mentioned; if it does not come out, take a fine, delicate probe shaped like this.
And try to cut that kind of grain that has fallen in the ear; but only do this if you are sure that the grain has become moistened by the vapor of the ear until it becomes many small pieces, then remove it with a blind syringe or a fine forceps or a sucker.
As we have mentioned, it is easy to remove it; but water that has entered the ear should be treated by having the patient sneeze with a reed first, and having filled his ear with some loose cotton while he lies on that side where the water is, if it comes out that way.
Otherwise, take many small pebbles, smooth and flat along the fingers, warm them slightly in the fire, and have the patient insert one of them into the hole of his ear, while he stands on one leg from that side and strikes with another stone the stone that is in his ear.
He should continue to do this pebble by pebble until all the water comes out; and the water may come out if one takes a reed or a feather and inserts one end into the ear, while he applies the other end to the fire until most of it burns away then repeats with another feather.
Do this several times until all the water comes out, or draw it out with a tube as previously mentioned with the pebble; but if you wish to remove an animal that has entered, first look and see: if its body is small like a flea or the like, treat it as I have described in the section on...
If its body is large enough to be felt, try to remove it with forceps and probes; this is easier than removing anything else that grows in the ear. As for extracting worms bred in the ear, if you have treated them as mentioned in the section on catarrhs and your treatment has not been successful...
...you should look into the ear towards the sun; if you see any part of the worm, remove it with forceps or fine probes. If you do not see any part of it, take a tube shaped like this.
It should be narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and insert the thin end into the ear as far as the patient can tolerate, then suck strongly with it. Do this several times until all the worms come out. If they do not come out for you, seal around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you in the case of a stone.
If they do not come out as mentioned, use the catorrhs that I have mentioned; the ancients used them to kill worms and you will find this in the section on catorrhs. Pouring ointments and medicines into the ear with this instrument, which is shaped like this:
As you see, make it from silver or brass, narrow at the bottom with a small hole and wide at the top. If you wish, the cannon in the inside of the tube can be made of solid brass; if you wish, take a spindle and wrap cotton tightly around its end.
Then pour the ointment or juice, or whatever medicine you want, into the tube while it is in the ear. Then insert the spindle with cotton from above and squeeze it moderately with your hand until the ointment is driven into the auditory canal and he feels it.
Let the patient feel it going in, and let whatever you pour into the ear be warmed slightly by the fire. Beware that what drips from it is not too cold or too hot, for the ear cannot tolerate it.
Chapter Seven.
In the treatment of aural obstruction.
Some children may be born from their mothers with their ears unpierced.
It may also happen that some people experience blockage in the ear canal from a wound or growing flesh. This blockage may be deep within the ear hole, imperceptible to sight.
Sometimes it protrudes slightly from the hole and is visible, while blockage deep within the ear and imperceptible to sight tends to be more difficult to heal. If the blockage is visible, one should expose the patient's ear to sunlight. Observe it carefully; if you see the blockage, open it with a delicate perforator, which should look like this:
Its tip should be slightly broad, with a limited width, and the rest of the perforator should be smooth on both sides so as not to injure the ear. If the blockage is due to flesh that has grown in the ear canal, grasp it with a delicate snare and cut it carefully until all the flesh is removed.
If the blockage is deep within the ear, take a delicate, smooth millet stalk, heat it slightly in fire, and insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the blockage and the patient experiences hearing difficulty, gently push it further.
Be careful not to injure the eardrum. Then place a wick in the ear, sized to the width of the opening and coated with Egyptian ointment. Continue this treatment for several days until you are sure the wound has healed. Alternatively, soak a wick in water and sprinkle powdered glass over it.
Use this method; if you see the ear has become swollen and inflamed, remove the wick and replace it with another wick coated with a rose ointment made of clarified butter to soothe the inflammation. Continue treatment until the ear is healed.
If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use all the treatment that stops the mentioned bleeding in the article on catarrhs.
Chapter Eight.
In the treatment of warts appearing on the eyelids.
These warts appearing on the eyelids may be moist or dry, so they should be grasped with forceps or a snare and cut at their base with a scalpel; then powdered lapis lazuli should be applied to the area.
If blood flows from it, cauterize it with a mild lentil-sized iron after cutting; and it is best to cauterize after cutting. It often recurs if any part of its root remains. And if cauterized with fire, those roots will be burned and will not return.
Chapter Nine.
In the treatment of ophthalmia appearing on the eyelids.
Often, something resembling a cold in severity and stiffness appears on the eyelids.
It is called ophthalmia because it involves a gathering of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids. If the inflammation is raised on the surface of the eyelid and moves to all sides, its treatment is easy: make a horizontal incision across it.
Then carefully peel it off from all sides until it is removed, then hang it with a snare and cut it off. If you cannot cut it except after penetrating the eyelid, this will not harm the patient. If the incision is large, bring it together with stitches and treat it until it heals.
If it is small, there is no need to worry because the ointment will bind and cauterize it. If the inflammation is inclined inward toward the inner surface of the eyelid, turn the eyelid over and hang the inflammation with a snare without needing an incision, and cut it off from all sides.
If you cut the eyelid, it will not harm anything; then wash the eye after cutting the bandage with salt water and treat the area with something that promotes healing until the patient recovers.
Chapter Ten.
In the treatment of a stye that appears on the eyelid.
A stye is a boil that forms in the layers of the upper eyelid and it most often affects boys. It weighs down their eyes and makes them prone to colds at night, and they are unable to look at sunlight. So that tears flow quickly to them.
That is why you see them leaning on their faces all the time and sleeping on them, with their eyelids wet under their eyebrows, swollen, and the stye clearly visible. When you press the area with your fingers, you feel the stye between them. The procedure is to have the patient rest his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a wick from it, making a circle out of that wick large enough to surround the stye on all sides. Place it over the stye and press with your fingers on all sides to gather the stye in the center of the circle.
Then cut in the center of that dampness with a sharp scalpel, making a horizontal incision no larger than the one made during bloodletting. As for depth, you should cut through all the skin until you reach the stye.
In most cases, the stye will protrude from the incision in the form of a white lump of fat. Grasp it with a cloth that you have wrapped between your fingers and pull it outwards while turning your hand right and left until it is removed. Be careful not to widen the incision further, lest the scalpel injure the eye.
If the stye does not appear in the first incision, you should gently widen the incision slightly until the stye emerges, then pull it out as we described. Then soak a cloth in vinegar and water and apply it to the area, securing it with a bandage. Some people crush salt instead.
He places it in the depth of the incision to dissolve any remaining moisture, then treats it until it heals; if a hot tumor occurs at the site, he treats it with cooling poultices until it is cured.
Chapter Eleven.
On Varieties of Ophthalmic Cautery.
If a superfluous eyelash grows on the eyelid, outside of the natural course beneath the normal eyelashes, and it becomes inflamed, it will harm the eye and cause various diseases such as constant tearing, relaxation of the eyelids, leukoma, and opacity, to the point that it leads to blindness.
Ophthalmic cautery is performed in four ways: either by burning with fire, or by a caustic drug as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery; or it may be cauterization by cutting and suturing, or by means of a reed, as I have already stated.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn back the eyelid with your left hand; if it turns back, otherwise insert a needle with thread from below the eyelid and pass the needle with the thread from above, this being near the eyelash itself. Draw the thread upward with the eyelid.
Turn it back with a speculum, then incise within the eyelid, away from the superfluous eyelash, with a dissecting knife, from the larger meatus to the smaller; then draw up the thread and place under the eyelid a small dressing of cotton or linen cloth; then apply cerate to the eyelid.
Like the shape of an ace leaf, except that the shape should be according to the amount you wish to raise the eyelid because it may vary among people; some may need a quantity cut from the eyelid, according to how much the eyelid has relaxed.
And some may need less cut, all according to the relaxation of the eyelid; then incise with a dissecting knife along the lines that you marked, beginning from the larger meatus to the smaller; let each incision be near the natural eyelash, about the width of a speculum.
Then the snare is inserted into one of the angles of the skin, then it is pulled out altogether, and the two lips are brought together with a needle and fine wool thread, and the blood is wiped away. The remaining threads are stuck onto the temples with something adhesive.
If you wish to do so, or not, it does not matter. Then the stitching and threads are left for about three or four days, then it is treated. If you wish, you can leave the wound unstitched and treat it with something that dries and constricts. For when the wound closes and comes together, the eyelid will rise. Stitching is better.
This method of treament, described by those who came before, has some inconvenience for the patient but it is good and without danger. There is another way to treat it which also involves applying a shape on the eyelid like the shape of an as leaf, as we have described. Then the eyelid is lifted with three forceps which are either separate or grouped in this manner:
Then what remains of the eyelid is cut with a small scissors in this manner, making an even cut:
If you cannot hold the forceps steady, take a needle with thread in it and insert it into the center of the shape. Insert another thread near the larger angle and a third thread near the smaller angle. Gather the threads evenly between your fingers and then raise them moderately with your hand.
Raise the entire marked skin as we have described, then bring the edges of the wound together with stitches and treat it until it heals. If there is a hot swelling after cutting or incision, soothe the swelling with cerate and similar soothing ointments.
The lower eyelid may also sometimes turn inwards, in which case the methods we have described for cutting, stitching, cauterization with fire and caustic medicines should be used. Cauterization with fire or a caustic medicine is more effective and less painful for the patient than cutting and stitching. Cutting and stitching are better in both cases.
Cauterization with sugarcane is done as follows: turn the eyelid and make an incision on the inside, as previously described, then make two reeds or thin pieces of wood the length of the eyelid and narrower than a lancet.
Cut the ends of both sides so that the threads can be attached, then gently bring them together on the remaining eyelid and tighten the reeds from both sides. Leave them for several days; the stretched skin will die, turn black, and rot.
It will fall off on its own, but if it is delayed, cut it with pincers and then treat it until it heals. When the wound closes, the eyelid will rise and the eyelashes of the eye will not sag. This is the shape of the reeds, they are made this size in length and width: .
Chapter Twelve.
On removing ingrown eyelashes with a needle.
If it is one hair or two, the procedure is as follows: take a fine needle and thread a very thin smooth silk thread through it. Then gather both ends and tie them in a delicate knot, making the length of the thread about a span long.
Then attach another thin thread to the needle, shorter than the first, and tie its ends if you wish. Have the patient place their head on your lap, preferably near sunlight so that you can clearly see the work, as it is delicate. Insert the needle with the threads into the base of the ingrown hair.
Quickly push it through the eyelid until it comes out above the natural hair, then pull the thread upward and insert into the needle that ingrown hair - if there is only one or two or at most three.
Then pull your hand so that the hair comes out with the needle in the eyelid along with the natural hair. If you pull the needle and the hair doesn't come out, pull the needle down with the thread you attached to it until the needle comes out of the upper hole.
Then return the hair to it and pull them, do this until it rises in the upper hole and you see it with your eye. Then loosen the tweezers and the thread and take them out, tighten the eyelid and leave it tightened for two or three days so that the hair settles in its place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, then either add a long hair from natural hair to it so that it rises with it, or leave it until it grows longer after a while, then lift it.
Chapter Thirteenth.
In the Treatment of a Stye That Occurs in the Upper Eyelid.
The stye that it is subject to is called an arnebia, and this stye can be either natural or accidental; the accidental one is from a bruise of a wound, a scratch, or something similar.
The way to treat it is to cut that bruise and separate its edges, and put a wick of linen between them and tie it so that it heals. And it should not be treated with things that dry and constrict.
For if you do that, the stye will return worse than it was. Rather, use things that soften it, such as fenugreek and a poultice with water in which henna has been boiled, flaxseeds, and diachylon ointment melted with some oil, and apply it to the wick and treat it with that.
The goal of its treatment is to try by all means to prevent it from healing in the shape it was originally in, and this work that we mentioned is only some improvement of the stye, not returning the place to its original state completely.
Chapter Fourteenth.
In the Treatment of a Stye That Occurs in the Lower Eyelid.
This stye, which is from below, is truly called a hordeolum and can be either natural or accidental; the accidental one comes from a wound, a scratch, a burn, or something similar.
The way to work with it is to take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left angle to the right angle until the thread is at both ends of the flesh, then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a wide spatula.
If the shape of the eyelid returns to what is proper, otherwise take a ligature and place it on the site of the incision, turn the eyelid with it and make two incisions on the inside of the eyelid, the ends of which are from the angles of the cuts that were made until they meet, so that an angle is formed from them. Until when they come together it becomes shaped like this:
And it is the Greek letter lambda, then remove that flesh to the extent that the sharp side of it is below what follows the eyelid, then gather the scattered parts with two stitches sew it with wool thread, then treat it with the softening and relaxing medicines we mentioned until it heals.
And if the scar appeared from a cut, stitch or burn, it should be cut in a simple incision without the hair of the eyebrows as mentioned before, then separate between the lips with a twist as we mentioned.
In conclusion, in the treatment of a scar whether it is from above or below, you should carry out the work according to what seems suitable to you from the shape of the scar, for it may be very different in appearance, and the skilled craftsman manages by any means possible.
Until the shape returns to its natural form or approaches it, and the same disease indicates to you what is suitable for it from work and tools in most cases.
Chapter Fifteenth.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
This adhesion may occur to many people, the upper eyelid adhering to the white of the eye preventing it from moving easily and hindering it from its natural functions, so you should insert the end of a ligature under the eyelid.
Raise it upward or extend it with a string, then cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel, which should not be as sharp as other scalpels but rather blunt so as not to alarm the patient during the operation. The cutting should be done gently as if peeling away that adhesion.
Wait until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the adhesion is completely healed. Then pour saline water into the eye to wash it, or drip a solution of Indian frankincense in water. Afterward, separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen wick.
Place a bandage soaked in egg white over the eye. After the third day, use powdered frankincense until it is healed.
Chapter Sixteen.
On Cutting the Veil and Removing Flesh from the Eyelids.
The veil comes in two types: either nervous, resembling a thin, firm membrane; or non-nervous, resembling a solid white moisture that breaks apart when touched by iron or grasped with a string.
Neither type can be grasped with a string. Both types begin at the larger eyelid and gradually extend until they cover the pupil, blocking light and eye movement. To remove it, have the patient rest their head in your lap.
Then have them open their eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand. Grasp the veil with a slightly curved string and pull it upward. Take a needle, thread a horsehair or cow hair through it along with a strong thread, and bend the tip of the needle slightly. Insert the needle into the middle of the veil.
Push the needle through and tie the thread to the veil, pulling it upward. Peel the side of the veil next to the pupil with the hair as if spreading it to the end, then cut off the rest at the base of the eyelid with a fine scalpel or small scissors. Leave the natural flesh of the eyelid.
So that there should not be a continuous flow of tears from the part cut, the ligature may be applied with thread alone, or with thread and needle as we have said, then the end is removed with a smooth scalpel.
Be careful that the scalpel does not touch the corneal membrane, lest a perforation occur and the pupil be injured; then after the incision, place in the eye some powdered salt or zanzibar gum, and leave it for a day, then treat it as is appropriate until it heals.
If the chalazion is not nervous and you are unable to insert a needle into it or secure a ligature, this type of chalazion is often treated with medication and heals as described in the section. If you wish to excise it, open the patient's eye.
Take a delicate, smooth scalpel with a fine edge, like this: Carefully pare the chalazion from above with this scalpel. If you see that it is loosening and breaking down, and the paring has only affected it superficially, apply a poultice to the eye of zanzibar gum or red gum, or powdered salt, and bandage the eye for a day.
Then repeat the procedure until it is all gone, unless you encounter a hot swelling in the eye, in which case leave it and treat the hot swelling until it heals, then resume paring until it is healed. As for the fleshy growth behind
If the growth is causing severe pain to the eye, suspend it with a ligature and cut off some of it. Do not overcut lest there be a continuous flow of tears. Then apply red gum or zanzibar gum to the socket until it heals.
Chapter Seventeenth.
On Excision of Pterygium and Removal of Excess Flesh in the Eye.
Sometimes, red flesh grows in the eyes of some people until it covers the pupil or comes close to it or spills over onto the eyelids. Sometimes the eyelids turn outward and resemble a pomegranate flower.
The procedure is to place the patient's head in your lap, then open their eyes and grasp all of that red flesh with suitable forceps.
Or you may hold it with a forceps or tweezers, then cut the flesh one by one until it is all gone, preserving the eye so as not to injure it while working, and your cuts should be either with the scalpel we described for cutting the membrane, or with small scissors. Like those used to pick up splinters, as its image will appear in the following chapter.
Once you have finished cutting and all the pterygium is gone, fill the eye with pounded salt or instill a drop of red ochre, or a similar caustic medicine into it, and apply cotton soaked in egg white externally to the eye to prevent hot swelling.
But if some pterygium remains, and blood overwhelms you, and you fear hot swelling, leave the eye and treat it with what calms the swelling, then return to work on it until it is healed. Do the same for excess flesh of this type which appears in the eye.
However, you should avoid treating any weak eye, either by nature or by appearance with iron instruments, and do not put your hand into anything of these operations until you see that the organ can tolerate it.
Chapter Eighteen.
On Removing Splinters from the Eye.
Splinters are red vessels that spread across the eye, preventing vision and weakening it over time. Therefore, you should first look and see if the eye containing the splinters is strong and has no other disease besides the splinters.
Then, the extraction is as follows: Have the patient place their head in your lap, then grasp those vessels with one or two forceps according to your skill. The forceps should be fine and bendable in this manner:
Or there may be two double sockets in one body like this:
Then take fine forceps and gently grasp those vessels, wiping away the blood from time to time until you see that the eye has gone dark from those vessels and the blood has clotted, and preserve the eye so that it is not harmed by the tips of the forceps, and let your work be done in broad daylight facing the sun.
Be very steady in your work so as not to cut anything other than those vessels, and when you are finished cauterize the eye with green or red vitriol, so that its sharpness consumes what remains of the vessels; if you cannot grasp it all at that time, then bandage the eye with something that relieves eye pain.
Leave it for days until its pain subsides and the hot swelling is gone, then repeat the work on it in the same way until this image of the forceps' pain is removed from it.
Leave it [with the head of the patient resting in the student's lap, the last one drying the tears and ensuring vision in the front and back of the eye and you] the main principle in the work is to open the eye with fixed or triangular openers held by a student.
Concentrate, with the head of the patient resting in the student's lap, the last one drying the tears and ensuring vision at the front and back of the eye; and you have the option to begin by grasping from above the eye or below it, the first being to dry two sockets on the upper side, one at the end of the iris and the other at its beginning.
Grasp them between the middle finger and index finger, then attach forceps from underneath opposite them, then grasp them between the ring finger and little finger and lightly lift your hand until you see that all the vessels have risen; cut them with the smallest scalpel if you wish, or with a fine probe.
Thread the needle and hurry to lift all the vessels until they rise above the conjunctiva, do not cut the conjunctiva because tears and blood will obscure your vision.
Then cut off with scissors what exceeds the crown above and below so that nothing remains projecting except in the cornea. If you can lift it from the cornea, remove it with a forceps, for this is best. It may become necessary in some people.
And if you cut it, it will be shaved for a few days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling disappears, then resume work on it.
Chapter Nineteenth.
On Returning the Feather to the Nose.
Physicians call the feather a "nasora" if they treat it by cautery or with a sharp, burning medicine as previously described, and it does not heal. There is no recourse but to incise the swelling when ripe and extract all the moisture or pus within it.
Until the bone is exposed. And if, when the bone is exposed, you see decay or blackness in it, scrape it with an instrument of this form:
It is called a "khashna ra's" (rough head) and is made of Indian iron. Its head should be round like a button, engraved with a fine pattern by a rasp or an eskelfajj. Place it on the decayed part of the bone and turn it between your fingers while pressing your hand slightly until you know that the decay has been removed.
Repeat this process several times, then bind the area with drying astringent medications. If the area closes and flesh grows there, the discharge ceases for forty days and does not recur or cause any incident.
Then know that it has healed. Otherwise, there is no recourse but to return the nasora to the nostril in this manner: expose the bone again with iron or a caustic medicine. Once the bone is exposed, take a speculum of this form:
The tip of the iron should be triangular, and its handle conical, tapering towards the end as you see. Place it on the bone itself, near the cartilage and keep your hand further away from the eye. Then turn your hand with the speculum until the bone is pierced and the patient feels it.
If he finds the wind coming out, when he presses his hand on his nose, then let him compress the spot with astringent drying medicines as I have taught you. And if flesh grows and the place hardens, then the substance which was protruding outwards will return to the nose, and this will be easier for the patient God willing.
Chapter Twenty.
Returning a Protruding Eye.
If the eye protrudes in its entirety and there is no injury or impairment to vision, then you should ease the patient, then dissect them in the cephalic region, then apply a ligature to the nape without fail and suck gently.
Then place on the eye a poultice made from acacia, frankincense, myrrh and asafetida, then tighten the eye over the dressing with many bandages. The recipe for the bandages is to take soft linen cloths, fold each cloth four times, making many of them.
Then place them one on top of the other according to what the eye needs, and tighten them with a strong, firm cloth.  Repeat the ligature with suction without fail, then remove the ligature and leave the eye tightened for a day and a night.
If the bandage relaxes during this time, it should be tightened again. Then remove the bandage after a day and a night as we have said. If you see that the eye has returned, well and good, otherwise repeat the poultice, bandages, tightening and ligature until it returns.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On Excision of a Chalazion.
If a protrusion occurs in the conjunctival layer, then swells and protrudes outside the eyelids like an unripe grape, disfiguring the appearance of the person, and you wish to excise it, proceed as I describe.
This is done by inserting a needle into the base of the chalazion from below upwards, then inserting another needle with a doubled thread from the side and passing it through, leaving the first needle in place.
Then cut the place where the double thread bends and tie some linen around the needle and tighten it well, then remove the needle and put wet wool on the eye with egg white and leave it until the threads fall off with the linen, then treat the eye with something that strengthens it.
Until the wound is healed, and you may tighten the linen from all sides with a circle of cloth so that the eye increases in size, well, then apply a thin bistoury which reaches the depth of the eye so that the white moisture flows and the eye descends and softens in its place, then tighten it until it is healed.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In the Treatment of Cataracts.
This condition, called cataract, is a turbidity that gathers in the eye resembling descending water, but it is not so. The procedure for this involves having the patient sit upright on a chair, then taking their head with your hands on both sides.
Move it until you see the turbidity move downward with your eye, then fix it so that it does not return, and light will be released and the patient will see things as they used to. If the turbidity does not descend, we know it is water. If the descent of the turbidity is not prepared as mentioned,
otherwise, seat the patient before you, then take a thin bistoury and make an incision above the corneal membrane slightly at the junction of the suspensory ligament with the corneal membrane in the limbus, until the material is expelled.
Then, if a cataract forms in the eye, pour hot water mixed with honey or water boiled with fenugreek and honey into it, then treat it with all usual treatments until it is healed.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
We have mentioned the types of water in the classification and which one is suitable for removal, explained in detail. Take it from there according to what is correct. When this is done, the patient should sit squarely before you facing the light near the sun.
You connect his sound eye and bind it tight, then lift the eyelid of the affected eye with your left hand if the watery eye is the left one, or with your right hand if the watery eye is the right one.
Then you place the tip of the trephine near the limbus with the thickness of a millet seed in the same white part of the eye from the side of the smaller pupil, then you push the trephine forcefully while turning it with your hand until it penetrates the white part of the eye and you feel the trephine has reached something empty.
The trephine should go to a depth equal to the distance from the pupil to the last part of the blackness, which is the limbus of the eye, for copper is seen by the observer in the same way as an eye due to the clarity of the corneal membrane; then you turn the trephine upward to the place where the water is.
Then you press it down repeatedly, and if the water descends from its passage, the patient will see what has been opened before him with the trephine still in his eye, then he rests for a while; if the water ascends, lower it again without removing the trephine.
If it becomes stable and does not ascend, carefully remove the trephine while twisting it slightly with your hand; then dissolve a little bit of pure rock salt in water and wash the eye from the inside; then place a compress or damp cotton wool over the entire outside of the eye.
Anoint it with rose oil and egg white, and bind the sound eye with it; as for us and people of our time, we put powdered cumin mixed with egg white on it. If the trephine does not enter the eye because of its hardness (since some people have very hard eyes), you should take the scalpel called a "briquet", which is pictured as follows: .
Pierce the same area with it, but do not dig deep, just lightly touch it so that the trephine can enter as we have described; and when you complete your work, prepare a firm bed for the patient to lie on his back in a dark room.
He must abstain from all movements and coughing, and his food should be what softens his nature. He should not move his head to the right or left at all. The bandage remains as it is until the third day, then it is loosened in that dark room, and his sight is tested.
Show him things, then return the bandage to the seventh day. This should not be done during treatment or after the hour has passed, but it should be avoided before water ascends quickly with intense looking.
If a hot swelling occurs, the eye should be loosened before the seventh day and this is remedied with what soothes the swelling until it subsides, at which point his sight is released and a veil is placed over his face to train his sight from beneath it for days while he is in that dark room.
He gradually leaves the house and acts according to his reasons. Know that a learner cannot do without observation in this procedure, so when he has done so many times he proceeds with the work. I have heard from some Iraqis that one of them said that he makes in Iraq a hollow aspirator which absorbs water.
I have not seen anyone in our country who has made this, nor have I read it in any book of the ancients. It may be something new. This is a picture of different types of aspirators so that he can recognize them.
It is made of copper, especially with a tip shaped like this, triangular at the end and sharp.
Chapter Twenty-Fourth.
On the Treatment of Growing Flesh in the Nose.
Various types of excess flesh may grow in the nose, some resembling many-legged scorpions and others being cancerous, hard flesh the color of rust, and still others soft flesh not the color of rust.
For any of these soft fleshes that are not malignant or cancerous, the patient should sit before you facing the sun. Open their nostril and insert a snare into the flesh, then draw it out. Cut off what was grasped with a delicate sharp scalpel from one side only.
Until you know that all the flesh has gone, if there remains something which you cannot cut, scrape it off gently with one of the fine instruments so that nothing remains. If blood overcomes you or a hot tumor appears.
Meet it with what is appropriate, or if it is one of the malignant tumors, hasten to scoop it out so that the blood stops and all the flesh goes, then after cutting, put in the nose vinegar and water or wine; if the nose opens and moisture flows from it to the throat.
Know that it has been cured, if the moisture does not flow as it should, know that inside there is fresh flesh on top of the loose bones to which the instrument did not reach in cutting, then you should take a thread of linen somewhat thick.
Tie many knots in it, making the distance between each knot the width of a finger or less. Let the patient insert one end of the thread into his nose with a needle or whatever is possible after fashioning it like a spur, and pull on its thread until it reaches the cartilage.
And it comes out on his throat; often boys in schools do such a thing, and it is easy for whoever wants to do it. Then gather the ends of the thread, the one that came out of the mouth and the one that remained in the nose.
Then use the knots in the thread to spread the flesh, do this until you know that the flesh has been cut by the knots of the thread, then remove the thread and after cleaning the blood put a wick which has been soaked in Egyptian ointment into the nose, do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment eats up all that remains of the flesh, and the last thing in the nose is a lead tube for some days until it heals. If it needs drying treatment, use that.
This is an image of a syringe with which ointments and medicines are dropped into the nose:
He places one made of silver or copper, resembling a small lamp, open-mouthed and with its passageway similarly shaped.
If you prefer, make the tube closed like a reed, and the syringe plunger flat.
It has a handle at its end as you see, which is held when fat or whatever juices or liquid substances are heated in it.
Chapter Twenty-Fifth.
On Plant Warts at the Tip of the Nose.
A wart often grows at the tip of the nose, it enlarges and increases with the days until its appearance is unsightly.
Therefore, it should be cut at its first appearance and its entirety extirpated, then cauterization or a burning medication that acts in place of cauterization should be applied to the area. If cutting it is delayed until it grows large, examine it; if it is hardened, stone-like in color and insensitive.
Do not apply a hot iron to it, for it is a cancerous tumor; I have often seen this tumor cut out and the patient suffer greatly as a result. If the tumor is soft to the touch and not stone-colored, and you see that it can be cut out entirely. Empty the wart and cut it without hesitation or fear, then treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Sixth.
On Sewing the Nose, Lip, and Ear. If the connection is severed due to a wound or something similar, know that when a separation of connection occurs in one of these cartilages, little can be done.
Therefore, when one of these occurrences presents itself, examine if the wound is fresh and bloody; then gather the lips of the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals. If the separation has completely divided the lips and each side has become whole, you should flay each side with the thickness of its outer skin until it bleeds.
Then the lips are brought together with sutures and tightened, and myrrh and frankincense, powdered, are sprinkled over them. A plaster of palm balm or another kind of emollient ointment is placed on top and it is left tight for two or three days, then it is loosened.
The dressing is changed and left until the stitches fall out on their own, then it is treated with ointment until it heals. The method of suturing is to bring together what was separated, either with needles as we described in abdominal suturing, or with thread as we explained there.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the Removal of Nodes Appearing on the Lips.
Many people have small, hard tumors inside their lips, some resembling caraway seeds, others smaller or larger. The lip should be turned over and each nodule incised and ligated with a snare.
It should be cut from all sides, then the area after cutting packed with powdered borax to stop the bleeding, and gargled with vinegar and salt. The areas are treated with astringents until the wounds heal.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On the Excision of Excess Flesh from the Gums.
It often happens that excess flesh grows on the gums, called by the ancients "epulis." It should be ligated with a snare or grasped with forceps and cut at its base. The wound is allowed to bleed for a time, then powdered borax is applied to the area.
Or one of the dried astringent herbs. If the flesh returns after treatment, which it often does, it should be cut again and cauterized, for it will rarely return after that.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On the Extraction of Teeth with Iron Instruments.
Rough, unsightly scales may collect on the surfaces of the teeth both internally and externally and between the gums. They may blacken, yellow, and even green until decay reaches the gum and the teeth become unsightly.
The patient should sit between your hands with his head in your lap. Expose the molar and tooth on which you see the scales and something resembling sand, removing it entirely. Do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and anything else until it is purified.
If all the scaling is removed in the first scraping, well and good; otherwise repeat the scraping on another day, a second and a third time until you reach your goal. Know that molars require various types of scrapers, different in shape and form according to what suits your work.
For the scraper used to remove scaling from inside a molar is different from the one used for the outside, and the one used between molars has yet another shape. These are several types of scrapers you should have prepared:
Chapter Thirty.
On the Extraction of Teeth.
You should treat the molar for its pain by every means and delay extracting it, for there is no replacement for it if removed because it is a noble entity, even if extraction becomes necessary.
If the patient insists on extraction, you should make sure that the molar's pain subsides before proceeding. Often, the patient is deceived by pain and believes it originates from a healthy molar, so he extracts it; but the pain does not subside until the diseased molar is also removed. We have seen barbers do this repeatedly.
When the molar's pain subsides completely, you should then make an incision around the tooth with a strong forceps until the gum is loosened on all sides; then move it with your fingers or delicate pliers, first a little, then a little more, until it becomes loose.
Then you will be able to grasp the two large canines firmly, and the patient's head should be between your knees so that he cannot move. Then pull the tooth straight up so as not to break it; if it does not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it under it from every side gently, rocking it back and forth as you did at first.
And if the tooth is decayed or loose, you should fill that cavity with a rag and pack it down well with the end of a thin probe so that it does not fall apart when you pull on it with the forceps; you should also thoroughly examine the gums all around.
Take care not to break it, lest some of it remain and cause the patient more trouble than his initial pain. And beware of doing what ignorant barbers do in their trade, rushing to extract it without using what we have described.
They often inflict great evils on people, the least of which is breaking a tooth and leaving all or part of its roots behind. Or they may even extract some of the jawbone, as we have seen many times. After extraction, rinse with a drink or vinegar and salt. If bleeding occurs from the site, which often happens, then crush some alum and apply it to the area.
If the alum doesn't help, cauterize it. The figure of the delicate forceps with which you move the tooth first has long arms and a short handle, thick so that it does not bend when you grasp the tooth with it. And this is the image of the large forceps:
As you see, it has thick handles so that when you grasp them they do not yield or bend; the arms are short. Let it be made of Indian iron or tempered steel with well-fitted tips, and let there be teeth at the end which interlock for a firm and tight grip.
And limbs may be made like a rasp, and they will also be strong in control.
Chapter the Thirty-First.
On the Extraction of Roots of Teeth and Removal of Broken Jawbones.
If, after the extraction of a tooth, a root has broken off, it is necessary to place cotton wool soaked in butter on the spot for a day or two until the area relaxes; then insert a probe or forceps into it. Which resembles a bird's beak and is called pliers, which are pictured:
It should be made like a rasp from the inside or like a scalpel. If it does not come out with these pliers, you should dig around the root and expose all the flesh with a spatula; then insert an instrument that resembles a small chisel, which is pictured:
Short and slightly thick at the end, and not sharpened lest it break. If the root comes out with this, well and good; otherwise, use these other instruments which are pictured: the first is triangular at the end and somewhat thick.
A picture of another delicate triangle:
We may also use this two-pronged instrument, which is pictured:
And other instruments and tools that have been mentioned previously in the removal of teeth. We may also use this instrument which resembles a large hook, as pictured:
Triangular at the end, curved and somewhat thick so as not to break, and not sharpened. Know that dental instruments are many, as are all other instruments; a skilled craftsman can invent for himself instruments according to what work dictates and the diseases themselves suggest.
For there are diseases for which the ancients did not describe instruments due to the variety of their types. If a bone of the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth has broken or decayed, search for it in its place with what is suitable from these instruments and pliers that have been mentioned for extracting roots.
And we seek aid in its likeness:
Let there be some slight thickness to fix the bone so that it does not slip until the bone comes out, and we immobilize the place with appropriate medicines. If there is a slight putrefaction in the bone, remove its pus and discoloration until it is purified, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
On Spreading Supernumerary Teeth.
If supernumerary teeth erupt in an unnatural direction, they disfigure the appearance, especially if this occurs in women and delicate individuals. Therefore it should be examined: if the tooth has erupted behind another molar.
And if it cannot be spread or pushed back, extract it. If it is attached to another molar, cut it with this instrument, which has this shape:
It resembles a small beak and should be made of very sharp Indian steel.  The cutting should be done over many days due to the hardness of the tooth, so as not to disturb other teeth. But if it is a protruding tooth capable of being pushed back, push it back with a dental brace which has this shape:
It should be entirely made of Indian steel, and its working part should be very finely engraved like the file used to make needles. Push the tooth back a little at a time over many days gently so as not to loosen it and cause it to fall out. Then smooth it out last and remove some of it with scrapers.
If a molar has broken off and is hurting the tongue when speaking, it should also be filed down so that the roughness of the break goes away and it becomes level and smooth, so as not to injure the tongue or spoil speech.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On Fixing Loose Teeth with Silver or Gold Wires.
If the old molars become loose and move after a blow or fall, and the patient is unable to chew anything for fear they will fall out, and treatment with astringent medicines has not been successful.
The trick is to tighten it with a thread of gold or silver, and gold is better because silver tarnishes and rots after a few days, while gold remains as it is forever and is not affected by that. The thread should be medium in fineness and thickness, according to what fits between the molars.
The image of the weaving is to take the thread and insert its bend between the two sound molars, then weave with the ends of the thread between the moving molars, one or more, until the weaving reaches the sound molar on the other side.
Then you redo the weaving to the side where you started and tighten your hand gently and wisely so that it does not move at all, and your tightening of the thread is at the roots of the molars so that it does not come loose, then cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors, gather them and twist them with a ligature and hide them between the sound molar and the moving molar.
So that it does not injure the tongue, then you leave it tightened as long as it remains. If it comes undone or breaks, tighten it with another thread so that he enjoys it this way forever, and this is a picture of the molars and the weaving in two sound molars and two moving molars, as you see: .
And it may happen that one or two molars return to their place after they have fallen out and interlock as we described and remain so. This is only done by a skilled craftsman, who may carve bone from the bones of oxen and make it in the shape of a molar and put it in the place from which the molar has gone. And he tightens it as we said, so it stays and he enjoys it.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
On Cutting the Frenulum Under the Tongue Which Prevents Speech.
This frenulum under the tongue may be either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental, from a wound that has healed.
The operation consists of opening the patient's mouth and placing his head in your lap, then raising his tongue and cutting the nerve band across so that the tongue is released from its hold. If there is some stiffness and complexity due to a wound contraction, insert a trocar into it and cut it across until the band is severed and the knot dissolves.
Be careful that the incision is not deep in the flesh, lest you cut an artery there and cause bleeding. Then rinse after the cut with rose water or vinegar and cold water. Then place a linen wick under the tongue for the patient to hold in his mouth every night.
So that it does not adhere again. If bleeding occurs, apply powdered alum to the area. If the bleeding is severe, cauterize the area with a lentil-shaped iron suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with all other remedies until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On Removing a Frog Born Under the Tongue.
It may happen that a tumor resembling a small frog forms under the tongue, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function and possibly growing until it fills the mouth. The operation consists of opening the patient's mouth facing the sun and examining the tumor.
If you see that it is dark red or black, hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not interfere with it because it is cancerous. If it tends toward whiteness and has moisture, insert a trocar into it and cut it with a fine scalpel, freeing it from all sides.
If bleeding becomes excessive while you are working, apply powdered alum to it until the bleeding stops, then return to your work until you remove it completely. Then rinse with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with all appropriate remedies until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
In the Treatment of Tonsil Abscesses
And whatever may grow in the throat of other tumors, glands may appear inside the throat that resemble those appearing externally, called tonsils; if you treat them with what I have mentioned in the division and they do not heal.
Therefore, observe if the tumor is hard, dark in color and insensitive; do not expose it to the iron. And if it is red in color and its origin is thick, do not expose it to the iron either for fear of bleeding; rather leave it until it matures. Then either you may poultice it or it may burst on its own.
If it is white, round, and its origin is delicate; this is what should be cut. The procedure is that you look before working to see if its hot inflammation has completely subsided or decreased somewhat.
Then seat the patient facing the sun, his head in your lap; open his mouth and take a servant in your hands to press his tongue down with an instrument like this:
Make it of silver or brass, thin like a knife. When you press the tongue with it and the tumor becomes visible to you, take a snare and insert it into the tonsil, drawing it outward as much as possible without pulling any of the membranes along with it.
Then cut it with an instrument like this, resembling scissors except that its two ends are curved, and the point of each is sharp; made of Indian iron or Damascus steel:
If you do not have this instrument, then cut it with a scalpel like this:
Sharp on one side and blunt on the other. After cutting one tonsil, cut the other in the same manner. Then, after cutting, let the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs, gargle with water in which pomegranate peels or bay leaves or the like astringents have been steeped until the bleeding stops. Then treat him until he is healed. Other tumors besides the tonsils may grow in the throat; cut them as described for cutting the tonsils, similarly.
I treated a woman for a tumor that had grown inside her throat, extending towards the clavicle. It was slightly sensitive and almost blocked the throat. The woman breathed through a narrow passage and it prevented her from eating or drinking water.
She was close to death if she had remained for a day or two, and the tumor had two branches that extended out of her nostrils. I quickly inserted a probe into one of them and pulled it, extracting a suitable piece.
I cut it where I grasped it from the nostril, then I did the same with what protruded from the other nostril. Then I opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue, inserted the probe into the same tumor and cut away some of it; only a small amount of blood flowed.
The woman's throat opened up and she immediately began drinking water, then she ate. We continued to cut from that tumor repeatedly for a long time, and the tumor would leave behind replacements for what was cut, which lasted a long time for both of us.
I finally managed to cauterize the tumor inside her throat, so it stopped growing. Then I traveled away and didn't know what God had done with her afterwards.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
On the Excision of a Goiter.
If a cold descends into the thyroid gland and it swells, and it is white and oblong, it is called a column. If it is thick at the bottom and round, it is called a goiter. If treated with what we mentioned in the division (on treating swellings) but treatment is ineffective.
And I saw that the hot swelling had subsided and it was thin, so it should be cut out. But if it were a solid round mass and did not have length, and was bloody or lead-colored, black, or without sensation, then cutting should be avoided.
For it is a marvel for the patient, so if you see it on the form that I mentioned from its whiteness and length, let the patient sit opposite the sun and press her tongue with the instrument previously described, then insert the fishing line into the mole.
Pull it down and cut it with one of the two instruments mentioned for cutting the tonsils. You should not cut more than what exceeds the natural state, for if you cut more, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then, after the cut, use what we described for cutting the tonsils and treat it until it heals. If the patient is afraid of cutting it, you should use a trick to cauterize it without fear or caution. The way to cauterize it is with a sharp medicine, which is to put the patient's head in your lap.
Then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned, then take some of the sharp water that we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization and knead it into a non-extinguished ember, making it neither too thick nor too thin. Fill the hollow of this instrument with it. This is its form:
The end where you put the medicine should have a hollow like that of a quince spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the mole itself. The patient should lie on their side so that the saliva flows out from inside their throat, lest anything descends into their throat and harm them.
Then hold your hand with the medicine as you press it on the mole for half an hour until it turns black and the sting of the medicine subsides. If you wish, you can take some cotton, wrap it around the end of a quince spoon, and soak the cotton in the medicine.
Insert the quince spoon with the cotton into a tube from above until the cotton sticks to the mole. Repeat this several times until you reach the desired cauterization of the mole, then leave it. It will wither and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reapply the medicine, prepare it again.
After cauterization, wipe around the uvula with cotton dipped in butter and dry it. Then gargle with cold water and treat externally with astringents and internally with gargles until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and free from fear.
Inflammation can also be treated with something gentler than cautery and cutting: treat it with incense in this way. Take frankincense, spikenard, thyme, saffron, savory, chamomile, wormwood, and similar herbs. Gather them all or some of them in a pot and immerse them in vinegar.
Boil the mixture in a pot coated with philosopher's clay, and make a hole in the center of the lid. Place a hollow instrument on top as follows: it is made of silver or copper.
Insert the end with the rose into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the inflammation through the tube until the inflammation softens, then repeat this several times until it subsides.  Be careful not to perform this treatment at the very beginning of the swelling.
For it often increases the swelling, but you should only do this when the hot swelling has subsided. If you don't have this instrument, take a reed and attach an eggshell to one end so that the patient's mouth doesn't burn.
Because the eggshell prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, this is a good treatment and safe.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
On Removing Splinters and Other Objects Lodged in the Throat.
Often a bone, fishbone, or something similar becomes lodged in the throat. You should remove what is visible after pressing down on the tongue with an instrument in sunlight.
To make what is in the throat clear, and for what is not visible to you and has hidden itself in the throat: induce vomiting in the patient before their food has been digested in their stomach. Perhaps the lodged object will come out with the vomit, or the patient may swallow a piece of lettuce or radish root.
Or he swallows a mouthful of dry bread, or takes a piece of soft sea sponge, ties it in a thread and then swallows it; when it reaches the place of the thorn, the thread is pulled quickly, repeating this several times.
Often the thorn or bone will adhere to it and come out; if it does not come out as mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this form:
It is somewhat thicker than a plumb, and at its end there is a hook with which the patient inserts it into his throat gently while raising his head upward, and he refrains from touching his throat so as not to cause coughing, and pushes the bone or thorn with it, or the doctor inserts it with his hand.
The patient inserting it himself is better because he knows the location of the foreign object and pushes it down or pulls his hand up with the instrument as much as possible until it comes out.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
On extracting a foreign body lodged in the throat.
If you have treated the foreign body as mentioned in the division on treatment with medication and it has not been successful, then look into the patient's throat toward the sun after pressing his tongue down with the instrument that I have described for you.
If your sight falls upon the foreign body, pull it out with a small fishing line or a delicate pair of forceps; if you are unable to do so, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the patient's throat towards the foreign body, then insert an iron rod heated in fire into the interior of the tube.
Repeat this several times, and the patient abstains from water for the whole day; then he takes a syringe full of cold water, opens his mouth into it and gargles without swallowing a drop and moves the water occasionally with his hand.
For the foreign body will fall out on its own when it feels the water; if it does not come out as we have described, then vaporize the throat with urine and with hellebore by the instrument that I have described in fumigations of the laryngeal area, repeating this several times until it falls out.
The way to use the incense is to take a quantity of it and put hot embers in it, covering the quantity with a lid that has a hole in the middle. Then the end of the instrument is placed into the hole, and the incense is poured in. The patient puts their mouth on the end of the tube and closes it so that the incense doesn't escape until they know it has reached their throat.
If the leech falls on the specified place, then it is done; otherwise, the incense is repeated several times. The patient must endure thirst and eat salt and garlic but not drink water.  The leech will certainly come out with this treatment. This is a picture of an instrument used to attract the leech from the throat once it is seen.
It resembles forceps as you see, except it has this curved part that enters the throat. Its ends resemble a bird's beak and are rough like a file so that when it seizes something, it doesn't let go.
There is another instrument with which the tongue is pressed down. It's a wide iron ring, as large as the mouth, inserted above the tongue and into the mouth, standing on its side. The mouth remains open involuntarily and the patient cannot remove it at all until it is removed.
Description of the instrument with which the mouth is opened to this very extent.
Chapter forty.
It deals with speech concerning the cutting and opening of tumors.
Tumors are of many kinds, diverse in nature, as will be described individually in this book. They differ in their cutting and opening in two ways: one is the type of tumor itself and what it contains.
The second type is according to the places in the body where they occur, because a tumor that occurs in the head is not like a tumor that occurs in the buttocks, and a tumor occurring in a fleshy place is not like a tumor occurring in a joint. Each of them has its own rule for treatment.
Some tumors should not be incised until the pus in them has matured and become complete, while others should be incised even though the pus has not fully matured, such as tumors near joints.
For if a tumor occurs near a joint and its matter lingers until it suppurates, it may corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, thus becoming the cause of lameness in that limb, or the tumor may be near a principal member.
For if you delay incising it until it matures, you will thereby injure that principal member; or it may be near the seat, and you should incise it while immature, for it is necessary to incise a tumor near the seat while the pus is not fully mature so that it does not suppurate and penetrate into the inside of the seat, becoming a danger.
And it becomes to such a degree that it will not heal, and you should know the time for incising tumors that have fully matured, which is when the pain of the tumor subsides, the fever goes away, the redness diminishes, the throbbing ceases, and the head of the tumor softens, along with all other signs.
The incision should be made at the lowest point of the tumor if possible, so that the discharge flows downward more easily, or in the thinnest and most protruding part of the tumor; the incision should run lengthwise in the body if the tumors are on the hands or feet.
Avoid making incisions in the locations of muscles, tendons, nerves, arteries, and in general, in all flat places where there is no bending; as for those that bend, the incision should be made according to that location.  If a tumor is located on fleshy areas, it is best to leave it un incised.
Let it mature completely as we have said; for if you incise it before that, the pus will flow for a long time and will be foul and dirty, and perhaps its edges and cavity will harden. Some tumors may be incised transversely across the body when necessary or according to what the limb requires.
And one should use a single probe for small tumors, and a wide probe or many incisions according to the size of the tumor for large ones. Some tumors may require that the skin be scraped and cut if they have become like cloth.
And it has sometimes happened that a man died as is shown in many dens and lairs, some of which are cut with a three-cornered incision and some of which are cut out in the shape of a playing card like the Arabic ace.
Some use a round incision, some a crescent-shaped incision and so forth for these incisions. If it does not have a head like smooth, flat tumors, then only a simple probe should be used. And if the tumor is large and has collected for a long time, and you have probed it, do not hasten to draw out all the pus at that time.
But draw out some of it, then bind up the tumor until the next day and draw out some pus again. Do this repeatedly gradually until you have drawn out all of it.
Especially if the patient is weak or a pregnant woman or a young child or an old man, for the animal spirit often dissolves with the sudden exit of pus and the patient may die without you realizing it. Therefore, be extremely cautious in this matter.
After probing these tumors, you should wipe the wound and look at it. If the tumor's wound is small or the incision is a single simple one, use a bandage of linen or soft cotton. But if the tumor is large and there are many incisions from the probing
you should insert a wick into each incision so that they reach one another. If some of the skin of the tumor has been cut or scraped off, it should be packed with soft cotton or dry linen bandages and bound until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals. If bleeding occurs while you are working, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a linen cloth in them and applying it to the bleeding spot several times.
If the bleeding continues, it is necessary to use treatment and remedies which we have described in many places in this book and in the division. If you are in winter and the place of the swelling has many nerves, then you should moisten the bandages with a hot syrup and oil.
You should place them on the area. And if you are in the summer and the places are hot, then you should soak the bandages with water and oil or syrup and oil all of that cold until as we said on the third day you should dissolve the swelling and rub it.
And you should use in its treatment what seems fitting until it is healed. This is what you need of knowledge to treat tumors in general. As for the way of detail, I have mentioned how to treat every tumor summarized and classified.
Chapter Forty-One.
On the incision for tumors that appear on the scalp.
Small tumors appear on the scalp, and they are of a kind that contains sheaths like a chicken gizzard, and their types are many: some are fatty and some contain moisture that resembles slime.
Some contain moisture that resembles broth and soup, and so on. Some are petrified and solid. All of them are not dangerous to incise and remove unless you encounter an artery while incising.
The procedure in incising it is to first probe it with the instrument that will come after this, which is called a speculum, so that you know what it contains. If what it contains is moisture, then incise it lengthwise in a simple incision like this:
Begin the incision from line ~b~ to line ~j~. Once the moisture has drained, peel off the sac that contained that moisture and cut it all out, leaving nothing at all behind. This is because it often recurs if anything is left.
Then dip cotton in the small ointment if available, otherwise in salt water, and fill the wound with it, leaving it until the next day. It will eat away what remains of the sac. Then apply cotton with Egyptian resin again a second and third time if needed.
Until you are sure that nothing of the sac remains, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. If the tumor contains a fatty substance, incise it in this manner:
Make a firm incision and hold the edges of the wound with forceps, extracting it from all sides. Strive to remove the peritoneum that contains it. If you encounter an artery, do as I have previously described for you. Do the same for tumors if they are hardened from incision.
The treatment is the same as mentioned, and the incision on a hardened tumor is easier because it has little blood and moisture. Some of these tumors in the head of some people have no moisture at all. This was the case when I incised a tumor...
on the head of an old woman, and I found the tumor hard like a solid, rough, white stone that could not be broken even if someone threw it at something. And none of the other tumors occurring in the head were like this except for the tumors that appear on the heads of boys.
And at the base of the ears, incise them all with a simple incision and make its opening from below so that it is easy for the material to flow downward. Then treat it with the appropriate treatment.
Chapter Forty-Two.
Chapter Forty-Two: On Incisions for Warts
Every cyst has its own peritoneum, just as in boils and tumors of the head, as we have described. There are many types of cysts: some are calcified, some contain fluids, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
I have not seen a cyst in good condition upon palpation, with its appearance close to the color of skin, movable in all directions, not adherent to the neck nerves, jugular vein, or artery, nor was it sunken. It should be incised with a simple cut from above to below the body in this manner, from line ~j~ to line ~b~.
It should be dissected from all sides and the edges of the skin extended with a forceps, or two forceps, or many forceps if needed, as we said for head tumors. It should be extracted little by little, resting on the neck so as not to cut any vein or nerve. The scalpel should not be overly sharp.
So as not to increase the cutting with your hand or alarm the patient by cutting what is not needed; if you cut a vein or artery and are prevented from working, place powdered alum or some astringents in the wound to stop the bleeding.
Tighten the wound and leave it until the sharpness of the cyst subsides and the wound relaxes, taking care not to allow it to become infected. The bleeding will stop at that time, so return to your work until you have finished emptying it; then search with your index finger if there remain any other small cysts, cut them and remove them.
If there is a large vein at the base of the cyst, it should not be cut from its origin. Instead, it should be ligated with a strong double thread and left until it falls off on its own without harm. Then, pack the wound with soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment and treat it accordingly.
If the whole pig's foot is cut off, its lips should be brought together and sewn up immediately after you are sure that there is no remnant at all; but if you see that there is a remnant of bone from the pig's foot,
you should direct the cut to its origin and base and use the stitching as we mentioned. And if any pig's foot contains moisture, you should apply a simple poultice wherever you see it ripening and make the poultice of what is below, as we said.
Then you should use, after the poultice, a bandage with Egyptian ointment or similar to consume whatever remains of corruption, and when you see that the wound has been cleansed, treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Third
On the incision of the throat for a tumor occurring within the pharynx.
The ancients mentioned this incision in the throat, and I have not seen anyone in our country perform it; this is consistent with their speech. But those with angina should avoid incising the throat as they will not benefit from it.
This is because all the vessels and lungs will be diseased, but for those with a hot tumor in the mouth, throat or tonsils, if there is no cause in the trachea, incision of the throat should be used to escape the harm that results from suffocation.
If we desire this, the throat should be incised beneath three or four small incisions in width between two circles as much as the incision is in the peritoneum and not in the cartilage; this location corresponds to the incision.
Because it is devoid of flesh and its blood vessels are far, if the practitioner is timid, he should stretch the skin of the throat with a snare and then incise the skin until reaching the trachea, avoiding blood vessels if he sees any.
Then the peritoneum is incised as we have described, and evidence of incision of the trachea is found in the phlegm that comes out of it with the rattling sound and cessation of voice, and the wound is left open for a while. If the time during which strangulation was feared has passed, the lips of the wound are stitched together with skin.
And it is drawn alone without cartilage, then medicines that promote flesh growth are used until it heals. The author of this book says: the explanation of this statement which we have mentioned is only if they see the patient has blocked their throat with one of these tumors that we mentioned.
And the patient was close to death and intended to die, so they went to cut the throat so that the patient could breathe on the wound for a while and be saved from death, but they were ordered to leave the wound open until the course of the illness is over and its form is three days or so.
At that time, they were ordered to sew up the wound and treat it until it healed. And what I myself have seen is that a servant took a knife and sent it across her throat, cutting off part of the trachea. They called me to treat her, and I found her fading like a slaughtered animal, so I exposed the wound.
I found that the blood coming from the wound was flowing slowly, so I realized that she had not cut an artery or vein and the air was escaping from the wound. So I proceeded to draw the wound together and treat it until it healed, and nothing happened to the servant except a hoarseness in her voice, no more.
And after a few days she returned to her best condition, so we say from here that cutting the throat is not dangerous.
Chapter forty-four.
On incision for the tumor that appears in the pharynx from the outside and is called elephantiasis of the pharynx.
This tumor, called elephantiasis of the pharynx, is a large tumor the color of flesh and it is common in women. It is of two types.
It is either natural or accidental. As for the natural, there is no remedy for it. As for the accidental, it is of two types: one resembling fatty tumors and the other resembling a tumor from the complication of an artery, and danger in its incision. It should not be exposed to iron at all except if it is small, and if you probe and examine it with a sound and find that it resembles a fatty tumor and is not attached to any of the veins, then incise it as you would on tumors. Remove it with its sac if it is in one, otherwise, excise all of it and then treat the site as necessary.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On Incision for Different Types of Tumors.
Tumors are of many kinds and I have mentioned all their types in the classification. We should state here the difference between a tumor and an abscess, as it is confusing. I say that an abscess has heat, fever, and intense pain until the boiling of the pus subsides. The putrefaction then continues, and at that time the fever and pain subside. A tumor is not accompanied by heat, fever or pain and it is contained within a peritoneal sac which is its special envelope. It is the color of the body and begins like a millet seed, growing to the size of a melon and sometimes larger and sometimes smaller.
It is of two types: either fatty or containing moisture. The colors of the moisture are numerous, as mentioned in the classification. If you intend to treat a tumor, first probe and examine it with an instrument called a sound, whose image will be shown in the following chapter.
Determine the size of the tumor, then withdraw the sound and look at what comes out after it. If liquid moisture of any color emerges, incise it with a simple incision as mentioned for other tumors. If no moisture emerges after the sound, know that it is fatty.
Make a straight incision upon it in this manner as I have taught you, and hang it up with hooks.  Peel off the skin from all sides carefully, and if possible preserve the sac with it so that it may come out entire along with its contents.
But if the sac be torn during the operation and you cannot extract it whole, which often happens, take it out piece by piece so that nothing of it remains; for if any part of it be left behind, whether much or little, the contents will more readily return to its former state.
If, however, you are overpowered and a small portion remains, enlarge the wound with some sharp-cutting instruments, draw together the edges of the wound, and apply over it something to allay the hot swelling. Treat it with all suitable remedies until it heals. If the contents are large, cauterize its edges and treat them in a manner that promotes union.
If a throbbing vein, or any other vein, obstructs you and blood flows freely, immediately cauterize the spot with powdered litharge and let it remain constricted for two or three days until the wound becomes gangrenous and the flow of blood subsides; then return to excising what remains of the contents.
Chapter forty-six.
On the Forms of Instruments.
The instruments which are used for cutting and probing include specula, which come in three sizes: large, medium, and small.
Image of a Large Speculum.
Image of a Medium Speculum.
Image of a Small Speculum.
They are made of tempered steel, square at the ends, to facilitate entry into tumors. These are images of probes, called "burd" which also come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Image of a Large Probe:
Image of a Medium Probe.
Image of a Small Probe.
A probe is useful for exploring tumors, wounds, fistulas, and abscesses in order to determine the presence of bones or other structures within them. It is made as a smooth, polished circle like a file, from Chinese copper, Spanish silver, copper, iron, or silver; the best are made from Spanish silver.
Probes can also be made of black lead and are suitable for exploring fistulas that have bends in their depths, bending easily with those bends. They also come in three sizes: long, medium, and short.
The thickness of the probe should be made according to the width of the fistula, whether wide or narrow. Image of a large lead probe:
Image of a medium lead probe:
Image of a small lead probe:
Images of forceps, which come in many varieties: there are simple forceps with one hook, in three sizes - large, medium, and small; blind forceps, also in three sizes; forceps with two hooks, in three sizes; and curved forceps with two hooks. And forceps with three hooks, also in three sizes. All of these types are needed for their specific uses. Image of a large simple forceps: Image of a medium simple forceps: Image of a small simple forceps:
Image of a large blind forceps: Image of a medium blind forceps:
Image of a small blind forceps:
Image of a large two-hooked forceps: Image of a medium two-hooked forceps: Image of a small two-hooked forceps:
Image of a large three-hooked forceps:
Image of a medium three-hooked forceps: Image of a small speculum with three hooks.
And these are images of the scalpels with which one incises and flayers, they being three types, because some are large, some are medium-sized, and some are small. Image of a large scalpel:
Image of a medium-sized scalpel:
Image of a small scalpel:
Its cutting edges are limited, and the other ends are unlimited, but they were made so that one may use them to flay the tumor when afraid of cutting a vein or nerve, and so that the patient may be able to hold onto it and find some relief from the burning sensation he feels when the tumor is being flayed.
And these are images of probes, they being three types because some are large, some are medium-sized, and some are small. Image of a large probe:
It is made of copper like the kohl applicators and has, on one end, a wide spoon-like shape with two layers in which there is concealed a lancet blade resembling a bird's tongue that can be moved inwards and outwards as desired, as you see.
Images of lancets that are held between the fingers when incising tumors so that the patient does not feel them. They are three types because some are large, some are medium-sized, and some are small. Image of a large lancet:
Images of ligatures with which to cut off the flow of blood, they are three types because some are large, some are medium-sized, and some are small. Image of a large ligature:
It is made of copper or pewter, rounded into a slightly elongated shape as you see and fitted to the neck. These types of ligatures should be available to you in large and small sizes so that you can quickly cut blood vessels when necessary and when medicine is not at hand.
But do not use cautery in every part of the body, but only in fleshy places such as the muscles of the thigh and leg, and the muscles of the arm, chest, abdomen, groin, and similar moist muscular organs.
And other small instruments can be made from it, resembling pistachio shells, in this manner:
It cuts blood if it bleeds from a cupping site or when cutting an artery or vein, and a circular one can be made from it in this manner:
Chapter the Forty-Seventh.
In the Treatment of Men's Breasts.
Which resembles women's breasts, sometimes the breast of some people swells during puberty until it resembles a woman's breast, remaining warm and ugly. So whoever dislikes this should make a crescent-shaped incision on the breast in this manner.
From line ~b~ to line ~c~. Then scrape away all the fat, then fill the wound with salted medicine, then bring the edges of the wound together by stitching and treat it until it heals. If the breast tends downward and relaxes due to its size as happens to women.
It should be cut in its upper sides with two incisions resembling a crescent shape, each connecting to the other at their ends so that the larger line encircles the smaller one, as shown here: From line ~b~ to line ~c~, then scrape away the skin between the incisions, remove the fat, and use what we mentioned of stitching and necessities, and whatever it needs for treatment until it heals.
If you do not remove all that needs to be removed due to the patient's anxiety or because of bleeding, then stuff the wound with cotton soaked in an emollient ointment and leave it until it consumes what remains of the fat, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Eight
On the treatment of tumors that appear under the armpit.
These tumors that appear under the armpit are of the type called swine, solid and containing a sac; some contain moisture. If it contains moisture, then it should be cut in a crescent shape like this.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~, and when it has emptied all that is in the tumor, pack it with lint and leave it until the next day; then remove the lint.
And treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals. If the tumor is of the type called a swine knot, cut it open as we mentioned for cutting swine. Whether or not it spreads pus, use cautery as we previously described.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
On incising the tumor that appears before an artery or vein and is called aneurism.
If the artery is injured and the skin above it heals, a tumor often results. Similarly, a vein can also swell and form a tumor.
The signs that indicate whether the tumor and swelling are before an artery or a vein: if it is before the artery, it will be rectangular and deep in the body. If you press the tumor with your finger, it feels as though it has a pulse.
The tumor before the vein is round and on the surface of the body. Incision into these tumors is dangerous, especially those in the armpit, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body, and if they are large, it should be avoided to treat them with iron.
And if it is in the extremities or head, it should also be avoided. If it is an aneurysm of the artery, cut a lengthwise incision into the skin and then open the incision with forceps. Then dissect the artery and free it from adhesions.
Until it is exposed, then you insert a needle under it and pass it to the other side and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places as you were taught in the case of the two arteries that are in the fingers, then you pierce the place between the ligaments with a scalpel until all the blood in it comes out.
And the swelling dissolves, then you use a treatment that produces pus so that the ligaments fall off, and then treat it with suitable ointments until it heals.
But if the swelling is from a vein incision, you should hold as much of the swelling as possible with your hand along with the skin, then insert a needle under the place you are holding with your hand and pass it through with a double thread so that it comes out on the other side. Then tie the swelling well as you were told in tying the grape from both sides at the ends of the thread, and if you fear that the threads may loosen, insert another needle with another thread under the entire swelling at the intersection of the first needle.
Tighten your threads in four places, then cut the swelling in the middle so that what is inside comes out, and cut off the excess skin, leaving what was tied to it, then place a dressing soaked in syrup and oil on top of it. Then use treatment with tourniquets and ointments until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
On the Swelling Resulting from Nerve Constriction.
Just as swelling occurs in arteries and veins, swelling can also occur in nerves if they are struck or experience excessive exertion or similar stress, and this is most common in the wrists and heels.
And in every place where the joints move, it is a hard swelling, its color resembling that of the rest of the body.  It is usually painless and if pressed hard, the patient feels numbness. The swelling is not deep within the body.
It will be under the skin and it moves to every direction, but it does not go forward or backward. So what is in the joints should not be treated with iron, for it may cause suppuration. And what is in the head or forehead...
Cut the skin with a scalpel, if the tumor is small grasp it with forceps and cut it from the root. If it is large, hang it with a thread and draw it out, then remove it and bring the wound together with stitches and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-One.
On Excising Warts Appearing on the Abdomen.
Warts often appear on the abdomens and throughout the bodies of some people; they are called fungal warts because of their resemblance to fungi. They have a thin base and a thick head, and some have lips that have transformed. Some are small, while others grow very large.
I once saw a man who had two warts on his abdomen that resembled fungi; they had a thin, white base and their lips had transformed and cracked, with moisture always flowing from them. I excised them both, and one weighed about eight ounces, while the other weighed about six.
The procedure for excising them is as follows: If the affected area is moist and the warts are white, damp, and have a thin base, cut them with a wide scalpel. Keep your forceps heated in a fire, because there is often profuse bleeding when they are cut.
If bleeding becomes excessive, cauterize it immediately. If you see that the affected area is cowardly and afraid of being cut with metal, take a tight lead thread and tie the wart that has this characteristic. Leave it for two days, then tighten the lead further. Continue tightening the lead.
Continue this process until the wart detaches and falls off on its own, without any pain. If the wart has a thick base, there is some danger in excising it, especially if it is located on the abdomen. However, you may be able to cut off half or part of it.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return, then treat it until the wound is healed, and beware of exposing yourself to a cut which is bluish-black in color, insensitive, and foul-looking, for it is a cancerous tumor; I shall mention cancer later on.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
On the Treatment of a Superfluous Growth.
A superfluous growth may result from various causes, either from a rupture of the peritoneum on the abdomen whence the omentum or intestines protrude as occurs in other hernias, or from blood issuing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or from wind accumulating therein.
If it results from a rupture of the peritoneum and protrusion of the omentum, the tumor will be of a color similar to that of the body, soft, and painless, and its appearance will vary. If it results from protrusion of the intestines, its position will be even more different than what we have described. If you press it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return, and it may be accompanied by rumbling; it increases considerably when entering a bathhouse and during strenuous exertion. If it is due to moisture, it will be soft.
If it is not due to moisture, it will not disappear when pressed and neither increase nor decrease in size. If it is due to blood, along with these signs, the tumor will appear dark. If it is due to growing flesh, the tumor will be hard, fixed, and of a constant size.
If it is due to wind, touching it will feel soft. The procedure in this case is that you should examine it; if the superfluous growth results from arterial or venous blood, or wind, treatment should be avoided because there is danger and risk involved as I have informed you in the chapter mentioning tumors arising from arteries and veins.
But if the superfluous growth is from the intestines or omentum, you should instruct the patient to hold himself and stand upright and extended, then mark the entire growth with ink. Then order him to lie on his back before you and cut around the tumor with a broad scalpel at the place marked with ink, then extend a large ligature from the middle of the tumor upwards and tie the incision site tightly with a strong thread or silk suture.
The ligature should be tied firmly, then the middle of the drawn tumor is opened above the ligature and your second finger is inserted into it, searching for the intestine; if you find it has been taken by the ligature loosen the tie and push the intestine back inside the abdomen, but if you find a clot extend it with a ligature.
Cut the rest of it, and if a vein or artery obstructs you, tie it firmly, then return to your work. Take two needles and insert strong threads into them, passing the needles into the incision made around the tumor, crossing them; then draw up the tumor in four places on the needles.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the drawn flesh rots and falls off by itself or cut it off if it becomes soft and rotten, then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals; but if the tumor grows from newly formed flesh.
Or from moisture, you should bore the tumor as we have said and draw out the blood or moisture that you find there, then treat it with what will heal the area.
Chapter Thirty-Five
On the Treatment of Cancer
We have mentioned in the division the types of cancer and how to treat them with medication, warning against treating it with iron lest it ulcerates, and we mentioned cancer that arises in the uterus and warned against treating it.
We previously mentioned that whenever the cancer is in a place where it can be completely removed, such as cancer of the breast or thigh, and similar limbs capable of being entirely extracted, especially if it is small and early; but if it is advanced and large, it should not be approached.
And I have not been able to cure anyone from it, nor have I seen anyone before me reach that point, and the work in it, if one is proficient as we said, is to advance and ease the patient from the black matter several times, then separate it if there is a clear fullness in the veins.
Then the patient is placed in a position that allows for work, then the appropriate forceps are introduced into the cancerous growth and it is grasped from all sides along with the skin thoroughly so that nothing of its roots remains, and the blood is allowed to flow freely without being stopped abruptly.
But press the areas and express all the thick blood with your hand or whatever instruments you can, and if during the work a great hemorrhage occurs from cutting an artery or vein, tie off the vessel until the bleeding stops, then treat it with all appropriate measures until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On the Treatment of Whitlows.
We have previously explained in the section the types of dropsy and how water accumulates, as well as the signs of each type and its treatment with drugs; only the serous type is treated with iron, and the phlegmatic type and the fleshy type are not treated with iron at all.
For that is fatal, if you have treated this type of whitlow, which is serous, with medications and your treatment was unsuccessful, then see if the patient has become excessively weak or has another disease besides the whitlow, such as
a cough or diarrhea, and so forth. Then do not treat him with iron, for it is dangerous. If you see the patient is strong and has no other disease besides the whitlow alone, and he is neither a boy nor an old man, then proceed as follows: Have the patient stand before you. Let a servant stand behind him and press his abdomen with his hands, pushing the water downwards towards the groin; then take a pointed bistoury like this:
Limited on both sides, long and pointed at the end like a scalpel, but with a slight bend so that when working it does not pass into the intestines and injure them. Then look carefully; if pus has formed from the side of the intestines.
The incision should be made three fingerbreadths below the vulva, towards the feet, above the pubis. If the pus has formed due to a liver disease, make the incision three fingerbreadths to the left of the vulva. If it is due to a spleen disease, make the incision three fingerbreadths to the right.
The incision should not be made on the side where the patient wishes to lie down so that pus does not flow into that weak spot. Then pierce all the skin with an instrument, and insert the instrument into the incision, raising your hand.
With a scalpel, separate the skin from the peritoneum as if you were peeling it off. The amount you peel off should be about the size of a fingernail. Then pierce the peritoneum until the scalpel reaches an empty space, which is where the water collects. Remove the scalpel and insert the instrument pictured here into the hole.
It is a tube-like instrument made of thin cane, silver, copper or polished espadrilles. It has a small hole at the bottom and three holes along its sides - two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
Its tip may be shaped like a pen nib as shown here: .
There is a ring at the top of the instrument. When the instrument reaches the water, it will flow down the side of the instrument and drain out. This allows you to drain a moderate amount of water because if you drain too much, the patient may die from dissolution of their animal spirit.
Or, the patient may suffer a swoon close to death. However, drain only as much as their strength allows, which you can determine by their pulse and complexion. Then remove the instrument and retain the drained water because it collects in its side chamber.
Because of the skin which grips the hole in the peritoneum, you were told to dress it in that manner, then return the instrument another day if you see the patient is able to tolerate it.
And it also comes out of the water a small amount, do that for several days while you are on your neck and protect from error so that there is not much water left, if you fear for the patient and leave a lot of water then treat him by burying in hot sand.
And a lot of sweating in the bath and sun, and enduring thirst, and treating him with drying medicines until he recovers, and cauterizing the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the water as described previously.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
In the treatment of children who are born with their urine passages not pierced, or the opening is narrow, or in the wrong place.
Some boys may come out of their mother's belly with their urethra not pierced, so it should be pierced immediately upon birth.
With a very fine trocar as follows:
Then put a fine lead pin in the hole and tie it, holding it for three or four days, so when he wants to urinate, it flows past it and then is returned. If you do not place the lead, it may be that the urine passing through the spot does not allow it to close.
As for the one who has a narrow opening, treat it with lead as we said for many days until it widens. Those who have the opening in the wrong place  some are born with the opening at the end of the urethra and cannot urinate forward.
Until he lifts the penis with his hand upwards, and that he was not previously born with semen unable to reach the uterus straight - a very ugly cause - and the method of treatment is for the patient to lie on their back.
Then stretch his foreskin strongly with your left hand and cut the head of the penis with a knife or a sharp probe, as thick as a writing pen, or as if you were carving something so that its middle projects outward like a purse, and so the hole falls in the center as it should.
And be careful during your work to prevent bleeding, for this often occurs. Meet it with what stops the blood and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
In thickening that appears in the foreskin, and the glans penis, and blackness and corruption, and adhesion of the foreskin to the glans penis.
This thickening often appears in the penis, and it is a malignant fleshy growth. Some are benign and some are malignant. The benign kind should be suspended with a fine ligature.
Cut it until you remove all of it, then apply cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment to it, and treat it afterwards with palm ointment until it heals. As for the malignant thickening which is dark in color, cautery should be used after cutting and scraping it.
If the thickening is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and some of the thickening is inside the foreskin and some outside, you should first remove the thickening that is inside so that it heals. Then treat it from the outside.
Because if you treat them together, you cannot be sure that the foreskin will not tear. It may also appear in women and in the labia, blackness and corruption. You should excise all that has blackened, or threatens to corrupt, or has already corrupted.
Then apply honey with pounded and strained pomegranate rind, and caraway seeds to it. Then treat it with all the usual treatments until it heals. If bleeding occurs, use cautery with a crescent-shaped iron in this manner:
Cauterization is beneficial for both conditions, namely the bleeding of blood and a wound that has become putrid. If the cautery mark becomes firm and disappears entirely at once, it should be introduced into the urethra, a tube made of lead, through which the patient will urinate. As for the adhesion of the scab to the cautery mark...
This adhesion occurs in those whose scab was sound and who were not circumcised, and it may be presented by a previous wound or tumor. It should then be loosened with a sharp instrument until the bond is dissolved and the cautery mark is freed from all sides.
If difficulty is encountered in distinguishing them upon examination, a portion of the cautery mark and the scab should be loosened. Since the scab is thin, it may easily be punctured due to its thinness. Then separate the scab from the cautery mark with a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it will not adhere again.
Then treat it with an astringent solution so that it may heal.
Chapter the Fifty-Seventh.
On the Purification of Boys and the Treatment of the Errors They May Suffer.
Circumcision is nothing other than a separation of attachments, like all surgical procedures, except that since it is an act done by our will and its use is particularly common in boys, we must determine the best method for performing it.
The safest and easiest path is this: I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their writings because it was not practiced in their customs, but rather something we have acquired.
Through experience, I have found that the majority of craftsmen and barbers use purification with a knife and scissors and employ forceps, ligatures with thread, and cutting with a fingernail. I have tried all these methods.
But I have found no better method than purification with scissors and ligation with thread, because purification with a knife often causes the skin to retract, since the foreskin's skin has two layers; it may cut the upper layer and leave the lower one intact.
He will be forced to cut the last and recurring pain, and cleansing with a fleam does not guarantee cutting the tip of the urethra because it may have entered its hole. As for cleansing with a fingernail, it may cause the skin to loosen and spoil your work, or the child's skin may be naturally short.
Very often they are born this way and do not need cleansing, and I have seen that. As for cleansing with scissors and ligating with thread, experience has revealed its benefit because the scissors are proportionally cut so that the blade above is like the blade below.
So when you squeeze your hand proportionally with the two blades, it cuts to a single size and in a single time so that the ligature thread becomes like a wall for the skin of the urethra from all sides, and no mistake occurs with it whatsoever. The first step in the work is to deceive the boy.
Especially if he is one who understands a little, that you are only tying the thread in his urethra and leaving it until the next day, then rejoice him and make him happy in every way that he can accept, then stop him between your hands standing straight.
And he should not be sitting, hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that the boy's eye does not fall on them at all, nor on anything of the instruments. Then insert your hand into his urethra and blow into the skin and lift it up until the head of the urethra comes out.
Then cleanse it of whatever dirt gathers in it, then tie the designated place with a doubled thread, then tie a second ligature a little below it. Then grasp the spot below with your thumb and index finger firmly and cut between the ligatures. Then quickly lift the skin upward and pull out the head of the urethra, then let the blood flow a little, for it is better and causes less swelling of the urethra. Then dry it with a damp cloth, then sprinkle it with powdered dried and burned pumpkin seeds, which is the best I have tried, or with flour from chickpeas, which is also excellent.
Then quickly lift the skin upward and pull out the head of the urethra, then let the blood flow a little, for it is better and causes less swelling of the urethra. Then dry it with a damp cloth, then sprinkle it with powdered dried and burned pumpkin seeds, which is the best I have tried, or with flour from chickpeas, which is also excellent. Then place a poultice on top of the boil, consisting of boiled egg yolk in rose water and fresh rose oil ointment. Leave it on for a day then treat it with all other remedies until it heals.
This is an image of the scissors suitable for purification:
It should be a sharp, straight-bladed scissors, with the screw well lubricated; the length of the blades should be equal to the length of the handles. As for the error that may occur during purification, it is sometimes that all or part of the underlying skin is flipped over when cutting, so it should be stretched immediately from the moment of the cut with your fingernail before the area swells.
Cut it evenly; if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, pull it with a thread and cut it. If three days pass and what is under the head of the boil remains swollen and warm, leave it until the hot swelling subsides and then remove it gently.
Cut it according to what is suitable for you, and be careful of the head of the boil; if a piece from the head of the boil is cut off, it will not harm, so treat it with one of the astringents that we have described in the article on astringents.
And if a piece of skin is cut off excessively and retracts upwards, it will not be very harmful either; treat it as we have mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Eight.
On the Treatment of Urine Retention in the Bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder occurs when it is blocked by a stone, congealed blood, pus, growing flesh, or something similar. If you treat that with the types of treatment prescribed in the division.
If the urine does not flow and you see that its retention is due to a stone in the neck of the bladder, the patient should be placed on their knees, bent over; then a man should sit on his back and extend his abdomen toward his back. The patient should hold himself as much as possible.
Then the neck of the bladder will be forced to push the stone back, and urine will be discharged. If it does not discharge as mentioned, and the patient's condition becomes severe, it is necessary to use an instrument called a catheter, which has this shape:
It is made of silver, thin, smooth, and hollow like a bird's feather quill, long in the vicinity of one and a half finger lengths. It has a delicate funnel at its head, and the way to draw urine with it is to take a folded thread and tie a wick or cotton securely at its end.
The end of the thread is inserted into the bottom of the catheter, and it is cut with scissors if any excess wick remains so that it can enter the tube and plug it like a cork. Then the catheter is greased with oil or butter or egg white, and the patient sits on a chair.
His bladder and urethra are moistened with a wet ointment or oil and lukewarm water, then the catheter is gently inserted into the urethra until it reaches the base of the urethra. Then the urethra is bent upwards towards the scrotum and the catheter is pushed inside it.
Until the urethra is bent, then the catheter is pushed inside until it reaches near the bladder neck. The penis is tilted downwards with the catheter inside, and it is pushed until it reaches the bladder. The patient will feel that it has reached something empty.
This order is followed because the passage through which urine flows has curves. Then the wick thread is pulled with a slight tension, and the urine follows the wick. It is then removed, and urine flows out freely, and the catheter is reinserted.
This is repeated until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter Ninety-Five.
How to Inject the Bladder with Zarqaq
The instruments suitable for this are made of silver or hollow ivory, having a long tube on a slender neck so that water and medicines may be dripped into it. This instrument is called zarqaq and its form is as follows:
It is made of silver or hollow ivory, having a long tube on a slender neck, which is hollow except for the tip, where there are three holes, two on one side and one on the other as you see.
The hollow place in which the piston is should be of a size that it can close tightly, so that if you draw with it some moisture, it will be drawn in and if you push it, it will be propelled forward as the syringe is made for throwing oil in sea battles.
If you wish to inject moisture into the bladder, insert the tip of the zarqaq into the moisture and draw it upwards with the piston; the moisture will be drawn into the zarqaq. Then insert its tip into the urethra as we have described in the catheters and push the moisture with the piston.
This moisture will then reach the bladder in its proper place until the patient feels it. This is also an image of a delicate injector with which to inject the bladder:
It is made of silver or espadrilles. Its upper head resembles a small funnel and beneath it is a notch into which the ligature falls. Then, take a camel's bladder and put in it the moisture with which you wish to inject the bladder. Tie it securely between the two notches with a doubled thread.
Warm that moisture slightly over a fire, then insert the tip of the injector into the urethra and pull your hand tightly on the bladder with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder, take a thin piece and make a circle out of it; pierce it all the way around and thread a tight string through those holes as they revolve. Then gather the circle as you gather a purse after putting what you want of moisture, unguents, and water into it.
Then tie it in the instrument and make with it as you made with the bladder from the palm of your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter Sixty.
On the Removal of Stone.
We have previously mentioned in the division the types of stone and their treatment with medication and stated the difference between stone generated in the kidney and stone generated in the bladder and the signs of all that, and we mentioned the stone which requires manual work and incision.
It is the stone generated in the bladder especially, and that which develops in the urethra, and I will describe that with a clear explanation and brevity.
I say that the stone generated in the bladder is more common in boys, and among its signs is that urine exits from the bladder similar to water in its thinness.
Sand appears in it, and its mention is scratched and tampered with, and it often dangles then spreads, and the buttocks protrude with many of them, and it is easy for boys to recover from it until they reach fourteen years old, and it is difficult in the elderly, as for young men it is intermediate between that.
And the one whose stone is larger, its treatment is easier, and the smaller one is the opposite. So if we turn to treatment, it should first be injected into the urethra with an injection that removes all the filth in its passage because it may prevent the presence of the stone upon examination.
Then the urethra is taken with both legs, shaken and agitated downward so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or jumps from a high place several times, then he sits between your hands upright, his hands under his thighs so that the entire bladder becomes inclined downward, then it is examined.
And you touch it from the outside, if you feel the stone in the space, hurry up and cut it open right away, if it doesn't fall under your grasp at all, then you should smear the index finger with grease from the left hand if the patient is a boy or the middle finger.
If he is a perfect boy, you insert your hand into his urethra and search for the stone until it falls under your finger. Then you move it little by little towards the neck of the bladder and press on it with your finger, pushing it outwards towards the place where you wish to make an incision.
You order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand and another servant to extend his right hand above the testicles, while with his other hand he stretches the skin beneath the testicles towards the place where the incision will be made. Then you take the sharp bistoury whose picture is shown:
You make the incision between the scrotum and the testicles, not in the middle but to the side of the left testicle. The incision should be directly over the stone with your finger in the urethra, pressing it outwards. You make the external incision wide and the internal one narrow so that the stone can come out easily.
Do not make the incision too large, for it may happen that when you press the finger in the urethra at the time of incision the stone will come out easily. Know that some stones have angles and projections which can make their removal difficult.
Some stones are smooth, like an acorn, and easily roll out. If a stone has angles or projections, you should enlarge the incision slightly.  If it still does not come out, you must use a trick: grasp it with a strong forceps whose tip is shaped like a file.
This will grip the stone firmly so that it does not slip. Or you can insert a delicate instrument with a blunt end under it. If this fails, widen the incision a little. If there is considerable bleeding, cauterize it with alum.
If there is more than one stone, push the largest one first into the bladder opening and then make an incision over it. Then push out the smaller stones. The same method applies if there are more than two stones. If a stone is very large, do not attempt to make a large incision because this could endanger the patient in one of two ways:
Either he will die or he will always have the continuous dripping of urine because the place will not join at all, but try to push it out so that it comes out whole or break it with forceps so that it comes out in pieces.
Then, when you have finished your work, cauterize the wound with frankincense and myrrh, tighten it, and place over it a rag soaked in oil and wine or rose oil and cold water to soothe the hot swelling; then let the patient lie on his back and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Then, when the bandage is removed, wash the place with plenty of water and oil; then treat it with palm balm and basilic ointment until it heals. If swelling, heat, pain, or the like occur in the wound, such as blood clotting in the bladder and urine being withheld, which is known by blood coming out with the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it will lead to corruption and rotting of the bladder; then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply any type of treatment according to its nature until it heals.
And during all the treatment times, it is necessary to tie and bind the thighs together to fix the medicines that are placed on the spot. If the stone is small and has reached the urethra and become embedded there, preventing urine from coming out, treat it with what I have described before it reaches incision.
Very often, I dispensed with the need for incision by this treatment. It has been tried and found to be effective. Take a steel instrument shaped like this:
Its point is triangular and sharp, inserted into a handle; then take a thread and tie it to the penis under the stone so that it will not return to the bladder; then gently insert the steel instrument into the urethra until the instrument reaches the stone itself.
You turn the stone with your hand in the same spot a little at a time, aiming to pierce it until it passes through from the other side. Then urine flows out of its opening. You then bind your hand on what remains of the stone outside the urethra, for it will crumble and come out with the urine, and the patient will recover.
If this treatment is not feasible for you because of an obstacle preventing it, tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then cut on the stone in the same urethra between the ligatures and remove it.
Then you loosen the ligature and cleanse the coagulated blood that has formed in the wound. It is necessary to tie a thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above it, so that when the thread is loosened after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
Therefore, you should lift the skin upward when tying the upper thread so that it returns to its place and covers the wound when you are finished, as we have said.
Chapter Sixty-One.
On Removing Stones for Women.
Stones rarely develop in women. If one of them does have a stone, its treatment is difficult and prohibited for many reasons, one of which is that the woman may be a virgin, and the second is that you will not find a woman who allows herself to be examined by a doctor.
If she is a virgin or one of those with whom intercourse is forbidden, and third, because you will not find a woman who is skilled in this craft, especially working with her hands, and fourth, because the location of the incision on the stone for women is far from the location of the stone itself, requiring a deep cut.
There is danger in that. If necessity requires it, a female physician who is skilled should be sought, which is rare. If she is unavailable, request a chaste and gentle male physician or bring in a midwife who is skilled in the affairs of women or a woman who has some knowledge of this craft.
You should open it and order her to do all that you order her to do in examining the stone, first of all, to see if the woman is a virgin, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into her vulva and search for the stone; if you find it, press it down under your finger.
Then you order her to be incised; but if she is not a virgin and is an older woman, order the midwife to insert her finger into the vulva of the patient and search for the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it very well.
If she finds it, it is necessary for her to push it down from the mouth of the bladder downwards as far as she can until it reaches the base of the thigh, then incise her opposite the middle of the vulva at the base of the thigh on whichever side allows her to feel the stone in that area.
Her finger should not be removed from the stone while pressing down on it, and the incision should be small at first; then insert the probe into that small incision. If she feels the stone, enlarge the incision as much as she knows the stone will come out of it. Know that there are many kinds of stones.
Some are small, some large, some smooth, some rough, some long, some round, and some have branches. Know its varieties so that you can deduce what you want. If blood flows freely, sprinkle powdered alum on the spot and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the stone comes out, prepare with yourself the instruments mentioned for removing stones from men so that you can use them in your work. If bleeding is excessive and you know the pulse indicates it is from a severed artery, apply a ligature to the spot.
Tighten it firmly with bandages and leave it; do not disturb it again, and leave the stone in place. You may kill the patient if you remove it. Then treat the wound. When the severity of the bleeding subsides after a few days and the area becomes infected, return to your work until the stone comes out.
Chapter the Sixty-Second.
On Incision for Watery Humor.
Watery humor is a collection of moisture in the white membrane which lies beneath the skin of the testicles surrounding the testicle, and it is called the tunica vaginalis. It may also be in a special membrane prepared by nature on one side of the testicle.
Sometimes it may be mistaken for another testicle, and it is found between the skin of the testicle and the white membrane which we mentioned. This rarely happens, and this humor arises from weakness affecting the testicles, and this material builds up in them. It may also occur after a blow to the testicles.
This moisture comes in many colors: it may be yellowish, reddish, dark purple, or watery and white - the latter being most common. The signs by which it is recognized are...
Where the water collects, if it is in the white membrane we mentioned, the swelling will be somewhat elongated like an egg shape and the testicle itself will not be visible because the moisture surrounds it on all sides.
If the moisture is in a special membrane of its own, the swelling will be round on one side of the testicle.
Because of this, a person might think it is another testicle. If the moisture is between the skin of the testicle and the white membrane, it will be felt under the hand. To determine the color of the moisture, probe the swelling with the square instrument whose image we have previously shown; judge the contents by what comes out after probing.
If we turn to treatment with cautery, the patient should be bled if possible and you see that he is full-bodied; then he should lie on his back on something slightly raised and place many cloths underneath. You should sit to his left.
You order a servant to sit to your right, extending his penis to one side of the scrotum skin and towards the direction of the abdominal cavity; then you take a wide speculum and cut lengthwise through the middle of the scrotum skin, close to the perineum.
The cut should be straight and parallel to the line that divides the scrotal skin in half, until it reaches the white peritoneal sac; then you remove it carefully, avoiding cutting it, and you make your removal from the side that is attached to the testicle more than the other side, and you continue the removal as much as you can.
Then you stretch the water-filled peritoneum with a wide clamp and remove all the water; then separate the edges of the incision with specula, pulling the peritoneum upwards without touching the scrotal skin containing it; and cut the peritoneum as much as possible, either completely or in pieces.
Especially its thinner side, because if you do not remove it completely, you cannot prevent the water from returning; and if the testicle protrudes outside its skin while you are working, then once you have finished cutting the peritoneum, return it to its place and then close the edges of the scrotal skin with sutures.
Then treat it as any other surgical wound until it heals. If you find that the testicle is damaged from another disease, you should tie off the vessels in the spermatic cord to prevent bleeding; then cut the testicle from the spermatic cord and remove the testicle, treating it as we have previously described.
If the collected fluid is on both sides, know that it is hydrocele; so incise the other side as you did the first, and if it seems best to perform one operation, do so; then wipe away the blood.
Introduce into the incisions cotton wool steeped in oil or rose ointment; and place over them another layer of cotton wool steeped in syrup and oil, extending it over the testicles and abdominal cavity; then lay a folded cloth, which is called a "refyad", on top. And it is attached from above by the ligament which has six ends in this manner:
Then two cloths are taken, sewn together and stuffed with blown wool in this manner, and the ends are made from cotton or wet wool, gathered tightly into a trouser belt. One of the ends is taken to the buttocks towards the back.
The second is taken towards the groin, and the two sides on the thighs from below, and the remaining two sides on the armpits, all gathered tightly into a trouser belt. This splint can also be made by cauterization instead of cutting with an iron.
And it is to take a fine, skinny iron and cut the skin of the testicle while it is held as we described until the white peritoneum containing water is exposed. Then take another iron in this manner:
Which resembles a Greek eye, then apply it to the peritoneum while it is held until all the moisture comes out, then stretch the peritoneum with tweezers and peel off the containing layer with the iron and cut it as much as possible so that you eradicate all of it, preserving the testicle from being touched by fire.
Know that this procedure is safer and further from bloodletting and better than the procedure of cutting, for if during the cut or cauterization a hot tumor, bleeding or anything else occurs, you should treat it with whatever remedy suits it as previously mentioned.
But if the patient is cowardly and cannot endure this procedure due to its ugliness, let him use a poultice as I will describe, which, if it is correct according to what we have presented of evidence.
Since the splints are watery, the patient should sit on a high chair and then place the tumor under it with a wide spatula. Make the poultice extend along the length of the body, ensuring a wide opening so that all the water flows out. Then place cotton on the area and tie it.
Let him continue to drain the remaining water and then treat it until the wound heals. If there is difficulty in draining the water when you press it, know that it is because the white membrane obstructs the mouth of the wound and prevents the water from escaping.
Then you should insert a goose feather or the instrument with which water is extracted for lovers, the image of which has been presented, or enlarge the opening of the wound slightly.
Know that water may return and collect after six months or so. If it does collect, press it in the same manner and the patient should rest for a few days.
Chapter Sixty-Third.
On Incision of the Muscular Part and Its Treatment.
Know that incision on these muscles is one of the most dangerous things leading to death in most cases. Therefore, we advise leaving them alone and staying safe from them. I will mention the work done on them and the types of tumors.
I say that many tumors can occur in bodies, composed of the anthrax, and this is due to several causes, either from excess humor flowing into the anthrax, or from a blow. The tumor will be the color of the body and there will be no water in it.
The tumor will be hard and sometimes stony, the color of soot, without any sensation. It may also be due to the complication of arteries and their swelling, as mentioned earlier, or from the swelling of the veins. Any swelling of the arteries can be recognized by the dispersion of the tumor.
If you press it with your fingers, nothing should be done to it. As for that which is from the swelling of the veins, nothing disperses from it when pressed with the fingers. This type may be incised along with all other flesh.
This is done by incising the skin of the scrotum, then extending the testicle upwards and removing it from the white peritoneum.  You should free the spermatic cord from its vessels, tie off those vessels, and cut the spermatic cord after freeing it from all sides of the testicle. If the testicle has adhered to the newly grown flesh...
It is necessary for the egg to be removed and cut open. If the adhesion is between some of the peritoneal membranes or between vessels, it is necessary to free all of that adhesion and cut it in a circular manner.
If the growth of flesh is in the place of adhesion which is behind, it is necessary to cut all of it and remove the egg as we said. When your work is done, dress the wound abundantly with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with all other treatments until it heals.
Chapter sixty-fourth.
On the treatment of hernias with a femoral ring.
The femoral hernia is a twisted tumor, somewhat resembling a cluster with relaxation of the ligaments and difficulty for the patient in movement, exercise and walking. In the treatment of this ailment, it is almost the same as what has been previously mentioned.
But it is necessary to mention the work done on it, as was done by those who came before. I say that the patient should sit on a high chair and then push the femoral ligaments downward, then grasp the skin of the scrotum with your fingers along with the vessels that are near the penis.
Have a servant hold it and extend it firmly, then make a wide incision with a sharp scalpel in a direction parallel to the vessels until the vessels are exposed. Then dissect from every side as I have described to you regarding the arteries in the groin, then insert a needle with a doubled thread into them.
Tie it at the first place where the hernia appeared and also tie it at the last part of it, then make a vertical incision in the middle along the length of the body and remove the foul corrupt humors that have collected there.
Then treat the wound with all the treatments of other surgeries that you want to occur so that the vessels feeding one of the ligaments can fall away. There is no harm in this. If the hernia occurs in relation to all the vessels, it is necessary to remove one of the ligaments along with its vessels so that the testicle is not deprived of nourishment. When vessels are severed they become necrotic and are no longer useful.
Chapter Sixty-Fifth.
On the Treatment of Intestinal Fistulas.
These fistulas occur from a tear that appears in the stretched peritoneum of the abdomen, toward the groins from the navel, where the intestines protrude into one of the two groin areas.
This hernia is either from a tear in the peritoneum or its extension, and these two types occur for many reasons, such as a blow, a jump, a shout, lifting something heavy, and so on. Its sign, if it is from the extension of the peritoneum, is that it occurs gradually over a long period.
It does not happen suddenly and the swelling is level towards the depth because the peritoneum presses on the intestines.  Its sign, if it is from a tear in the peritoneum, is that there is great pain from the beginning, and the swelling appears differently under the skin nearby.
This is due to the intestine protruding and its course outside the peritoneum.  Sometimes, it may protrude with fat, which is called an intestinal-fat fistula. It may also be accompanied by wind, or there may be pus running in the intestine, and it becomes blocked, leading to the patient's death.
Because it causes severe pain and rumbling, especially when pressed. The treatment of these types of conditions with iron is dangerous and should be avoided. The course of action is to instruct the patient to return the intestine into his abdomen with his hand if it attempts to return.
Then he lies on his back between your hands, and raises his legs, then you stretch the skin next to the groin upwards and cut open all of the scrotal skin lengthwise. Then insert specula into the edges of the incision as much as is needed to widen it.
The incision should be as large as the egg can pass through. Then you peel away the peritoneal layers under the scrotal skin until the white, firm peritoneum is exposed on all sides. At that point, insert your index finger into what is next to the egg.
Between the white peritoneum under the tunica albuginea and the second peritoneum, adhesion is released behind the testicle. Then, with the right hand, it is folded inwards into the scrotum skin. At the same time, the left hand stretches the white peritoneum upwards and raises the testicle with the peritoneum towards the incision.
You order the assistant to raise the testicle upwards, and you completely release the adhesion behind it. Then, with your finger, you search carefully to make sure there is no twisted bowel within the firm white peritoneum. If you find any, push it down into the abdomen below.
Then, you take a needle threaded with a thick cord twisted from ten threads and insert it at the end of the peritoneum under the scrotum skin next to the incision. Then, you cut the ends of the folded thread so that there are four threads. Then, you overlap them firmly and tie the peritoneum under the scrotum skin with a tight ligature on both sides. Then, you also wind the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that nothing from the vessels that nourish it can reach it. This is done to prevent a hot tumor from forming, and a second ligature is made externally, away from the first one by less than two fingers. After these two ligatures, you leave a portion of the peritoneum under the scrotum skin the size of a thumb bone.
This is done to prevent a hot tumor from forming, and a second ligature is made externally, away from the first one by less than two fingers. After these two ligatures, you leave a portion of the peritoneum under the scrotum skin the size of a thumb bone. You cut off the rest entirely in a circular fashion and remove the testicle with it. Then, you make an incision below the scrotum skin that bleeds freely as described previously. Afterwards, cotton wool soaked in oil is applied to the wound, and the ligature we described is used.
The white peritoneum that we mentioned after it is cut may be cauterized carefully to prevent bleeding, as this often occurs. The ligature is left until it falls off on its own. If it delays in falling off, it can be loosened with hot water and something that makes it sweat so that it will fall off.
Then treat the wound with all surgical treatments until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Sixth.
In these windy hernias, I have not seen anyone dare to treat them with iron, and the ancients mentioned that it should be made as described in the hernias with a date pit, which is to tie the vessels gently below after the incision on them.
Then it is incised in the middle and the tumor is treated with what opens it so that the vessels fall out, and the wound is treated as we mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Sixth.
In the hernia that occurs in the groin.
The hernia in the groin may appear, as we said, where the place is revealed and nothing of the intestine descends into the testicles, and if it descends, it is a little and returns at all times.
But if it lasts for a long time, the rupture in the peritoneum increases so that the intestine and omentum descend into the scrotum, and this appears from the extension of the peritoneum which is in the groin as we said. This is because the peritoneum extends, then relaxes, and the place bulges and protrudes, and its treatment is by cauterization as we have previously described.
And it can be treated with iron in this manner: the patient lies on his back between your hands, then the warm hernia site is incised transversely to the width of three fingers, then the peritoneal layers under the skin are sutured.
Until the white peritoneum that follows it is exposed, then you take a ligature and place it on the site resulting from the peritoneum and press it to the depth of the abdomen, then you stitch the two resulting sites at the ends of the ligature from the peritoneum and glue them together with stitches.
Then you pull the end of the ligature and do not cut the peritoneum at all, nor touch the testicle or anything else as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal hernias, then treat it with surgical treatments.
If the sutures break and are replaced, and the wound is sutured until it heals, the peritoneum will contract and the hernia will not increase.
And cautery is best in this place because it is closer to safety.
Chapter Sixty-Eight.
On relaxing the skin of the testicles.
Often the skin of the testicles relaxes in some people without the flesh inside relaxing, and its appearance is unsightly. Therefore, whoever wishes to treat it should put the patient on their back.
And cut away all the relaxed skin on the thick skin, then gather the lips. And if you wish to sew first, sew the excess relaxed skin with three or four stitches and secure the stitching, then cut between the stitches.
Then treat it like all other surgeries until it heals and the sutures fall out.
Chapter Ninety-Six.
On castration.
Castration is forbidden in our law.
Therefore, I should not have mentioned it in this book of mine, but I did so for two reasons: one, so that it would be within the knowledge of a physician if he were asked about it and to know how to treat someone who has undergone it; and the other, that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
Such as rams, stallions, cats and similar animals. I say that castration is of two types: either by pressure or by incision and cutting. The one done by pressure works as follows: we place the animal in hot water until its testicles relax, soften and hang down.
Then press them with your hand until they dissolve and are no longer perceptible to the touch. As for castration by incision and cutting, you should hold the animal and squeeze the skin of its testicles with your left hand, then tie the cords and make one incision on each testicle.
Even if the two testicles protrude, cut them off after you have flayed them, and do not leave upon them any of the tunics except for the thin tunic which is on the vessels; this kind of castration is better than that which is done by crushing.
For crushing may perhaps leave something of the testicles, and the animal may then desire copulation; afterwards treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
On the Treatment of Hermaphrodites.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two types, one of which is that it appears below the space or in the skin of the testicles, between the testicles, in a shape like a woman's vulva, with hair, and urine may flow from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
As for women, there is one type, and it is above the vulva on the pudendum, like a small penis in men, emerging outwards; one of them, as though it were a man's penis, and both are like testicles. The treatment for all three types.
Both types in men, and the one type in women, should have that superfluous flesh cut off so that its trace is removed, then it should be treated with the treatment of all other surgical wounds until it heals. As for the second type of man from whom urine flows from that which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no action necessary nor any benefit whatsoever.
Chapter Seventy-One.
On the Excision of the Clitoris and the Flesh That Issues From the Vulvae of Women.
The clitoris may sometimes be excessive in size beyond the natural norm, so that it becomes prominent and unsightly; and it may become enlarged in some women to such an extent that it spreads like that of men and becomes capable of copulation.
Therefore, you should hold the excess clitoris with your hand or forceps and cut it off; do not be too thorough in the cutting, especially deep at the root, lest bleeding occur.
Then treat it with surgical treatment until it is healed, and as for the growing flesh, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
And perhaps it protrudes outward, like a tail. Therefore, some of the ancients call it the tailed disease, so it should be cut off as the foreskin is cut off, and treated until it is healed.
Chapter Seventy-Two
On the Treatment of Retroversion.
Retroversion is when a woman's vulva is not pierced or the hole is small, and it is either natural, born with it, or acquired, resulting from a previous cause, which can be due to excessive growing flesh.
Or a thin or thick peritoneum, which can be in the depth of the uterus, or on its sides, or at its top or bottom, and prevents intercourse, pregnancy, and childbirth, and may prevent menstruation. Knowledge of this is obtained by looking from the midwife.
If the obstruction is apparent and nearby, if not, examine it with her fingers or a probe. If the obstruction is from thin peritoneum and is close to the labia, then proceed to puncture it, which is done by placing on the labia something like stirrups, then place your thumbs from both hands together.
And the woman on her back with her legs spread, then stretch the labia forcefully until the thin peritoneum is punctured and the obstruction opens. Then take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the spot. Intercourse with the woman every day so that the spot does not join again.
If the peritoneum is thick and dense, it should be cut with a wide spatula-like scalpel. If the obstruction is from growing flesh, hang it with forceps and cut it off. Have pain-relieving medications that are not caustic on hand, such as tragacanth, mastic, and frankincense mixed with egg white.
Then a wide lead pipe is used so that the wound does not heal quickly, it is held for several days and a wick of dry linen is used, then treated with all the usual treatments for healing until it is cured, and if another fleshy growth appears in the womb, it should be cut in this way.
Unless it is a cancerous tumor, the cancerous tumor that occurs in the womb is not treated with iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Three.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts, and red pimples that appear in the vulva of women.
Hemorrhoids are a swelling of the openings of the veins until a great deal of blood constantly flows from them, and if hemorrhoids develop, they become warts, and I have mentioned their types and signs in the classification, and we will mention them here.
What is treatable and what is not treatable, I say that hemorrhoids and warts if they are deep in the womb and do not appear to sensation there is no treatment with iron, and what is in the mouth of the womb that falls upon sensation is what is treated.
She should enter a cold room, then spread the warts with a scraper or a rough rag and cut them from their roots, then put one of the hemostatic agents on it without smearing.
Such as catechu, mastic, frankincense and the like, then raise her legs to the wall for an hour, then lower them into cold water, if the bleeding continues, sit her in a decoction of senna, pomegranate peel, rue and the like, then take barley flour knead it with honey and vinegar.
And apply it to her back, if the bleeding stops, otherwise, stick to hard squeezing of the breasts and nipples without restriction, then take a wick and dip it in the juice of mallows or the juice of lamb's tongue or the juice of almond branches with rue syrup and apply it to the place.
If the swelling subsides, treat the area with ointment until it heals. As for the red wen, it resembles the heads of millet, rough in appearance. You should cut off what appears from it as I have mentioned regarding warts, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Four.
On the Incision of an Abscess That Occurs in the Womb.
Many kinds of tumors may appear in the womb, such as cancer, a petrified tumor, ulcers, fistulas, gangrene, warts, hemorrhoids, fissures, and hot tumors. I have mentioned all these diseases, their types, and their signs in the division.
Therefore, we should mention in this article the hot tumor that appears in the womb if it is one of the tumors that gathers for a while, how to incise it with iron. You should look and see if the pain in the beginning of the tumor is sharp with throbbing, inflammation, and fever.
And if you see it red and feel pain when touched, do not rush to incise it and treat it with something that promotes ripening until these symptoms subside. Then, the woman should sit on a chair with two seats and lean against her back.
She should bring her legs together toward the lower abdomen, and her thighs should be open. Her arms should be placed under her knees and tied with a suitable bandage.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and use the instrument that opens the mouth of the womb, a picture of which will come later. If you want to use this instrument, estimate with a rod the depth of the woman's womb so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the womb.
It will harm the patient if the instrument is longer than the depth, so pads should be placed on the lip of the cervix to prevent the whole instrument from entering the depth of the womb. The spiral that runs in the instrument should be from the upper side.
And you hold the instrument while the attendant rotates the screw until the cervix opens. If the abscess then appears and is touched by the hand and found to be soft and thin, it should be incised at its head with a broad bistoury, and if the whole period has been evacuated...
A soft wick soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringency should then be placed in the wound, and the wick should protrude from the incision in the cervix. Clean wool soaked in water that has boiled with yeast should be applied externally over the womb and the vulva.
It is then treated after two days with an ointment suitable for this purpose until it heals.
The womb and the wound may be washed by injecting it with water and honey, then with water that has been boiled with marshmallow root or wild rhubarb, and then return to the ointment. If the abscess is hidden internally in the uterus.
The use of iron should be avoided in its treatment but treated as mentioned in this section.
Chapter Seventy-Fifth.
On Teaching Midwives How to Treat Live Fetuses When They Are Delivered in an Unnatural Manner.
The midwife should first know the signs of a normal birth. These include the woman leaning downward and desiring to breathe deeply, and feeling relief from her labor pains.
The delivery of the fetus is hastened; know that this birth is normal and occurs with the head presenting first, the placenta either accompanying it or hanging from its cord. If you see these signs, you should press on her abdomen so that the fetus is delivered quickly.
If the head descends, the placenta will follow and be thoroughly cleansed of such residue. Any birth other than this is abnormal and reprehensible because the fetus may emerge with its legs first or with its hands preceding its head and legs.
Whether one hand or one foot emerges, or his head and hand emerge together, or he comes out folded, or perhaps turns over onto his shoulders, or any other of these disgraceful forms, the midwife should be skillful and gentle with all of these things and beware of errors and missteps.
I will explain each of these forms and how to manage them so that you can recognize them and deal with them accordingly. If the fetus emerges head first, which is the natural way, and labor becomes difficult for the woman, and you see her strength weakening, seat her on a chair and order women to hold her steady.
Soak her womb with boiled fenugreek and wet ointments, then the midwife inserts a small speculum between her fingers and cuts the placenta with it or cuts it with her fingernail until the moisture inside flows out, and she presses the woman's belly until the fetus comes down.
But if it does not descend, she should inject the woman with fenugreek saliva mixed with shiraj ointment, then order her to gargle and sneeze by tickling her with a reed, while holding her mouth and nose shut; for the fetus will emerge in its hour. If the fetus's hand comes out first, it should be gently pushed back a little at a time.
If entry is not possible, place the woman on a raised platform and raise her legs above it, then shake the platform on the ground while the woman holds on so as not to fall when shaken. If the hands still do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a cloth and pull them moderately, for it will come out. Emergence of the fetus on its legs. If the fetus emerges on its legs, push them upwards then turn the fetus a little at a time until it is straightened, then take one of its legs and extend it a little at a time.
If it comes out to the thighs, order her to crawl and pull it with forceps; it will come out. If it does not come out as described, then push back the fetus a little at a time until it becomes in its natural shape, for then it will come out smoothly. But if all of this fails.
Take saliva from the hyssop and licorice, and clarified butter and dissolved mastic, and beat all of them in a mortar very well; then apply it to the woman's vulva and lower abdomen. Then seat her in lukewarm water until it reaches the hips.
But if you see that her lower part has become soft, make for her a poultice of rue and apply it; if she holds the poultice for an hour, then seat her on a chair, and pull it out while covering her mouth and nose and squeeze her lower abdomen lightly; for the fetus will come out at once. The fetus comes out upon its knees and hands.
If it comes out in this manner, help insert its hands a little at a time; then let the woman lie on her back and lower her legs downward while lying on a bed with her hands clasped together, and squeeze above her abdomen gently. Then remove what is under her legs from the pillows until her lower part is raised; if the fetus does not come out, take hold of both of her legs and move them vigorously, then squeeze above the hips gently so that the fetus ascends upward; then let the midwife insert her hand and straighten the fetus a little at a time.
Order the woman to crawl until the fetus comes out; if the fetus comes out obstructed, with one of its hands extended, help push back its hand; if she is unable to push it back, have the woman stand and make her walk; if she cannot walk, let her lie on her back.
Her bed and shake her legs vigorously; then use the pessaries that have been described made from saliva; if labor starts, seat her on a chair and then work at pushing back the hand and straightening the fetus into its natural shape; pull the woman and order her to crawl until it comes out.
The expulsion of the fetus on its head, extending its hands and facing its face towards the mother's back, should be grasped by the midwife at the fetus' hand then gently turning it little by little and straightening it. If it becomes straight, apply to the front what we described of fat and lubricants.
Then let her move a little, and if she does, seat her on a chair and order her to lean to the right side then let her slide and sneeze her with a speculum, for it will come out, the expulsion of the fetus upright on its side.
If it descends to the mouth of the uterus in this manner with the placenta, tear the placenta with your nail until it is freed from moisture. If it clings to the face and neck of the fetus, cut it from the navel lest it be strangled and die, then push the fetus back inside until it becomes as it should be.
And order the woman to slide several times, for it will come out easily. The expulsion of twins or many fetuses, know that twins often are born and sometimes three or four are born and live, but this is rare. As for five, it is something beyond nature and they do not live at all.
They are surrounded by one placenta, even if they are many, and they are separated by a partition membrane tied at the navel of each one. They may be expelled as a single fetus is expelled naturally easily, or they may be expelled with difficulty as we have described.
If some of them are difficult during childbirth and become what we have mentioned of the unnatural shapes, treat it as we described. Let the midwife be gentle and do what she does gently and with patience and try to overcome every shape with whatever trick leads to safety.
Know what is conceived in the womb of fetuses may be miscarried, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven or more than ten may be conceived. It has been confirmed to me that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them conceived.
By the esteemed and knowing One, all of this should be in the knowledge of the midwife; for perhaps such a thing may befall her one day, so that she may meet it as is fitting.
Chapter Seventy-Sixth.
On the Extraction of a Dead Fetus.
If you have treated the dead fetus as mentioned in the division of treatment and it has not come out, and you are forced to work with your hands, then you should see if the woman is strong and healthy and does not have anything that she fears damage from. She should lie on a bed on her back.
Her head should be inclined downwards and her legs raised, and an attendant should hold her from both sides or she should be tied to the bed so that her body is not pulled when the fetus is extended.
Then the midwife should moisten the mouth of her womb with soft ointments mixed with saliva from a suckling infant, fenugreek and flaxseed. Then the midwife should anoint her hands with these ointments and salivas and gently insert them into the womb. Then she should search for a place where to implant the needles from the fetus and suitable places for that.
See, if the fetus is likely to descend headfirst, implant the needles into its eyes or temples or mouth or throat or under its chin or collarbone or in places near the ribs or under the shoulder blades.
But if its descent is feet first, then in the groin and the middle ribs; she should hold the needle in her right hand and twist it between the fingers of her left hand, insert her hand gently and implant a needle in some of those places that we have mentioned.
Until it reaches something empty, then implant another or a third needle opposite it if needed so that the pull is equal and does not lean to one side; then extend in a level manner, and the extension should not be only straight but moved to every direction.
To make it easy for him to come out as is done with a molar when it is extracted, and it should be relaxed in the meantime. If one side of it becomes retained, it should be smeared with oil by the midwife and some fingers inserted from that side to turn what is retained. And if part of the fetus comes out, the forceps should be moved to other places.
It is raised a little to do this until the whole fetus comes out, and if a hand comes out before anything else and cannot be returned due to its compression, it should be wrapped with a cloth and then pulled until it comes out entirely, then it is cut.
Either at the wrist joint or at the elbow, and this should be done with the other hand and the legs. If the fetal head is large and it undergoes pressure during delivery, or if there is accumulated water in its head, a sharp spoon-shaped instrument should be inserted between the fingers.
And it should split the head so that the water comes out, or it can be inserted with the instrument called a craniotome, the picture of which will come with the pictures of all other instruments in the chapter after this.
This is also done if the fetus has a large head naturally, its skull should be split or crushed with a craniotome as we said, then the bones are removed with forceps. If the head comes out and gets compressed at the neck, it should be split so that the moisture in the chest drains.
For then the chest will rejoin, if the chest does not rejoin and it is not possible to exit, cut as much as you can. If the lower abdomen is hot or has pus, it should be bandaged so that the moisture drains from it.
If the fetus is on its feet, pulling it is easy and straightening it to the cervix is simple. If it gets compressed at the abdomen or chest, it should be pulled with a cloth wrapped around your hand and the abdomen or chest should be split so that what is inside them flows out.
If you remove all the limbs and the head returns and is held fast, let the midwife insert her left hand; if the mouth of the womb is open, let her insert her hand into the neck of the womb and seek the head with it and draw it down to the mouth of the womb with her fingers, then introduce a pessary or two pessaries and draw it out.
If the mouth of the womb has become closed by a hot swelling, do not force it, but use applications of fatty moist substances, and apply poultices, and sit in waters which soften and moisten.
But if the fetus is on its side, and it can be straightened, use what we have mentioned for a living fetus; but if that cannot be done, cut it into pieces and remove it. Nothing of the placenta should be left inside at all. When you have finished your treatment, use what we have mentioned for treating hot swellings which occur in the wombs.
If bleeding occurs, let her bathe in astringent water and use all other remedies. I have seen a woman who had been pregnant, the fetus died inside her, then she became pregnant again.
The other fetus also died, and after a long time she developed a swelling in her abdomen which became distended until it opened and began to discharge pus. I was called to treat her, and treated her for a long time but the wound would not close, so I applied some strong drawing ointments to it.
A bone came out of the place, then after a few days another bone came out. I was astonished because there are no bones in the abdomen. I realized that they must be bones from the dead fetus. So I searched the wound and removed many bones from the skull of the fetus.
I continued to do this until I removed many bones, and the woman was in the best of health. She lived for a long time, with only a little pus discharging from the place. I have related this rare case here.
For in it is knowledge and assistance for what the artisan physician attempts by his hand in treatment.
Chapter seventy-seventh.
It contains images of the instruments needed for the extraction of the fetus.
Image of a screw with which to open the mouth of the uterus:
This is the clamp with which books are bound, it has two screws at the ends of the wooden pieces except that this screw should be finer than the bookbinding clamp and should be either ebony or boxwood, and the width of each piece of wood should be the thickness of two fingers.
And their shape is towards a finger, and their length is one and a half cubits, and in the middle of the two pieces of wood are two rails of the same wood itself which are attached to them, their length being half a cubit or a little more, and their width being towards two fingers or a little more, these two rails.
They are the ones that enter into the mouth of the uterus to open it when you turn the screws, an image of another instrument similar to it but finer and lighter:
It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of caltrops, except that it has two rails at its end as you see, the length of each rail being about a cubit and their width being two fingers. If you want to open the uterus with it.
Make the woman sit on a bed with her legs spread apart, then insert these two rails gently into the mouth of the uterus while holding the end of the instrument below between her thighs, then open your hand with the instrument as you do with caltrops, to whatever extent you want to open the uterus. So that the midwife can make what she wants, an image of another screw mentioned by those who came before:
Image of the cannon with which to push the fetus:
Image of the hook with which to hook the head of the fetus:
The scissors resemble a tool with teeth at the end, as you see. It can be made rectangular like pliers in this form, as you see it has teeth like a saw to cut and suture.
Image of a cannon also.
Image of a probe.
This probe is slightly thick so it does not break when pulling the fetus, image of a two-pointed probe.
Image of two wide forceps for cutting the fetus.
All these instruments, the more their types are and the better prepared they are by the craftsman, the faster his work will be and the higher his standing will be among people for his ability. So do not disdain any instrument from being ready for you, for there is sure to be a need for it.
Chapter seventy-eight.
On the removal of the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, you should order the patient to hold herself tightly and then sneeze it out with a speculum while grasping her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out this way, that's good; otherwise take a quantity (of something).
Make a hole in the lid and insert herbs that are open for the mouth of the womb, such as fennel, licorice, parsley, chamomile, rue, sage, and coriander; all these drugs or some of them. Soak them in water and place it over the fire. Then place a silver tube on the hole in the lid and the other end in the mouth of the womb.
Hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the womb; then make her sneeze as we said, for the placenta will come out quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to dip her left hand in sheep fat or camel saliva.
Then insert it into the vagina and search for the placenta. If she finds it, grasp it and pull it out slowly until it comes out. If it is stuck deep in the uterus, insert the hand as we described until you find the placenta. Then pull it out gently, little by little, with compassion.
So that the womb does not fall during strong traction, but it should be moved gently to the sides, right and left, then the amount of traction should be increased; for it will then respond and become free from adhesion. If the cervix is closed, we have described treatment by sneezing and treatment by quantity and herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, then beware of violence against her in re-traction; but it should be tied from what came out to the cervix to the woman's thigh, then inject her with the fourfold ointment, for it will soften it after a few days.
It will dissolve and come out; but if it becomes putrid, then a foul odor arises from it to the stomach and head, and that harms the patient. Therefore, appropriate incense should be used.
Therefore, some of the ancients tried incense of aloeswood and dried figs. An image of the instrument with which a woman is fumigated when there is retention of menstruation and placenta, etc.:
It is made of lead, resembling a funnel, or made of copper; the slender end is placed in the vulva and the wide end on the fire. The incense is placed on the embers, held until that incense has gone, and then replaced with other incense.
Chapter Ninety-Seventh.
In the Treatment of an Imperforate Anus.
Many boys may be born with imperforate anus, often closed by a thin peritoneum. The midwife should pierce this peritoneum with her finger; otherwise, let her incise it with a sharp bistoury, being careful not to touch the muscle.
Then she should place upon it a wick soaked in wine and oil, and treat it with ointments until it is healed. If there is fear that it will close again, insert a lead tube into the opening for many days and remove it when the child wishes to defecate.
Sometimes the blockage of the anus may also be due to a wound or a tumor, so it should be incised and then treated as we have mentioned in terms of treatment and suturing.
Chapter Eighty.
In the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
Fistulas that occur below are a complication and thickening that occurs near the anus from the outside or in the space from one of the sides, and the fistula may be one or more.
If this complication opens and moisture, watery or thin pus flows from it, and some of these fistulas may be penetrating to the urethra and into the intestines, and others may not be penetrating. The penetrating fistulas are known by what comes out of them of feces and gas when the patient defecates.
Perhaps worms may come out of it, and some fistulas may be penetrating into the bladder and into the urethra if they are in the space. Some may also be penetrating into the hip joint and into the coccyx, and what is known as a fistula penetrating into the anus is also sometimes not penetrating.
Insert your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe into the fistula, made of copper or iron, if there is no bend in the fistula; but if there is a bend, insert a thin lead probe or a horsehair into it.
Until you feel the probe or hair with your finger, and if you do not feel it at all, and nothing of feces, gas, or worms emerges from the hole as we said, then know that it is not penetrating, so proceed to treatment.
And if the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra, then its sign is urine coming out of it and its refusal to heal with medications. As for if it is penetrating into the hip joint or into the coccyx, then its sign is the probe reaching there.
If there is no extension to the bone and there is pain in a certain direction, and pus constantly discharges from it, and treatment is ineffective and ointments do not heal it, and all of these perforating fistulas, then there is no cure at all.
Its treatment is a futile effort for those ignorant physicians who attempt it, but the one that is not perforating and not chronic may be cured with iron as I will describe and have experienced. It is to lay the patient down on his back between your hands.
Raise his legs upward and incline his thighs toward his stomach, then insert a copper or lead probe if there is an extension in the fistula until you know where the probe ends. If the patient feels it towards the rectum, then you should insert your middle finger into the rectum.
If you feel that the probe has penetrated on its own, exposed and without feeling any fascia or flesh between your finger and it, then know for sure that it is perforating, so do not exert effort in this because there is no cure as we have said.
And they have said that it is cured in some people rarely, and of the treatments from which benefit is hoped, is to heat a thin iron according to the width of the fistula as previously mentioned and insert it while hot into the fistula until it reaches towards the rectum, then repeat this two or three times.
Until you know that all of the excess, loosened flesh which resembles a bird's quill tube has been burned, then treat it with a bandage soaked in butter until those burned tissues come out, and then treat it with prepared ointments; if it is cured.
Otherwise, it will never be cured by any other treatment. But if you insert the probe and it does not penetrate to your finger in the rectum and there is a thick barrier of flesh or fascia between it and the probe, and you see that the fistula is below the surface of the skin, then cut open the skin from the beginning of the fistula. And you pass with the probe while it is in the nostril until you reach the cut where the end of the probe is, and the probe is released and falls out; then you clean those adhered tissues that resemble a bird's feather tube, leaving nothing behind.
Then treat it with prepared ointments until it is healed. If blood overwhelms you and prevents you from working, the best thing to do and the fastest benefit is to cauterize those tissues with fire or a caustic drug, because cautery by fire accomplishes two good things: burning the excess tissues.
And cauterizing the blood and drying the moisture, then treat it with a bandage moistened in butter or sulfur powder mixed with oil until the area suppurates and those burnt tissues come out in the pus; then treat the wound at that time with prepared ointments that promote hard flesh.
These are drugs that contain astringents and drying agents; if it becomes constricted, it has healed and you need not fear its return. If the nostril has reached the depth of the cavity and is far from the surface of the body, insert your finger into the cavity and explore with it.
If you feel the probe and there is a veil of peritoneum or flesh between you and it, and it is near penetration, then there is no work to be done except on the path of hope and ambition. This means using one of three methods: cauterize it as we have said.
Or incise it until you reach its bottom so that you can insert the bandage and treat it from close range, and do not overdo the incision lest you cut the muscle surrounding the cavity, which will cause the patient to have involuntary bowel movements; then treat it as we mentioned, for perhaps it will heal as we said.
Or pierce that veil and perforate it after you have incised it near the cavity as we said, either with a probe or another sharp instrument; then clean all those adhered tissues in the incision as much as possible by careful examination.
Then, bind the whole wound with the incision and the upper opening until it is sealed, leaving the anus open inside the seat so that it is lighter for the patient, and the anus may remain in this condition.
If you insert the probe into the anus and it is in a side of the seat toward the surface of the body with the skin and the ring of the seat, then take a probe pierced at the end like a cobbler's awl in this manner:
And insert into it a twisted thread of five threads or so, then insert the probe with the thread into the anus until it reaches its bottom. If it is perforated in the edge of the seat from inside near...
Then pull the thread out of that hole by inserting your finger into the seat and pulling out the end of the thread, gathering both ends together and tightening them, leaving it for a day or two. Every time the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it well so that the flesh between the two ends of the thread breaks off and falls, then treat the wound until it heals and is cured.
If the anus opening is not perforated, then perforate it as best you can, unless it is very deep, in which case you should not do so because of the muscle, lest you cut it. Then proceed with it as we mentioned until it heals.
The image of the spiked scalpel with which you incise the anuses has a very sharp point, and the other side is not sharp so as not to cut what is not needed, as you see:
Chapter Eighty-One.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids that bleed, their excision, and the treatment of fissures.
Hemorrhoids come in two types: either they are inside the seat, resembling red cushions or like grapes, and some of them are small and some are large, and blood constantly flows from them.
And it may be single or multiple and may be outside the seat and at its edges, but those that are outside the seat are in most cases few in moisture from which yellow water or a little blood oozes constantly, and they are of the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which is from inside the seat is to order the patient to defecate and strain until the seat comes out and the warts appear to you, then hurry up and attach them with forceps or hold them with your fingernail, and then cut them off at their bases; if the forceps do not hold in them due to their moisture and laxity.
Then grasp it with a coarse rag or a piece of toasted bread, or draw it with your fingers and then cut it, then scatter some sharp grains on it after cutting so that they act as a cautery for it, or burn them as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
Then treat it with all the treatment until it is healed, and if the seat does not come out for you, inject the patient with an injection containing a little bitterness to wash what is in the seat and make it come out quickly when the patient strains; as for the warts that are outside the seat, their treatment is easy.
It is to take it with your fingernail or attach it with forceps and cut it off, then treat it as we have mentioned until it heals, and whoever dislikes cutting with iron should use its cautery on this method: Take a twisted thread and put it into a needle.
Then draw the wart upwards and pass it through the needle at its base from the other side, wind the ends of the thread below the needle while it is obstructing and tighten the wart tightly, then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this to all the warts and leave one without cauterizing it.
So that pus drains from it, then place a rag soaked in rose oil or quince on the seat and put it on the seat, and order the patient to rest, then leave him until they fall off; when the warts fall off, treat them with ointments and all other treatment until they are healed.
As for the treatment of fissures, they often arise from dryness and stagnation of the humor. If it persists and medicine proves ineffective, one should pare it with a scalpel or your fingernail until it becomes moist and the upper scab that prevents its union is removed.
Then treat it until it heals properly. If it does not heal, pare it again more deeply than the first time until it bleeds and sheds, then treat it; for it will be cured.
Chapter Eighty-Two.
On the Treatment of Inverted and Non-Inverted Warts, Dry Corns, and Calluses.
A wart is a round nodule the color of the flesh, resembling the head of a nail. It occurs throughout the body, particularly on the soles of the feet and toes, and causes pain when walking.
It should be incised around the wart and grasped with forceps or a snare and removed from its root, then treated. If you wish, cauterize it as previously mentioned in its chapter. As for dry corns, each one is a small, rough, adherent, round prominence above the surface of the body.
They often occur on the hands of boys. Treatment consists of stretching the corn and cutting it or scraping it with silk thread or a hair until it falls off. If you wish, cauterize it as previously mentioned with fire or caustic agents.
Inverted and non-inverted warts can also be removed with the instrument I have described in the treatment of calluses. As for calluses, they are also small, adherent, and thick prominences on the surface of the body that extend deeply inward. When exposed to cold, they produce a sensation similar to an ant bite.
They occur throughout the body, most commonly on the hands. Treatment involves taking a quill from a goose or a strong eagle feather and placing it around the callus to form a circle. Then rotate your hand with the quill until you incise the skin surrounding the callus.
And make it deep in the flesh and the ant will detach from its root, and if you wish to do that with a copper or iron tube in this manner:
The top of the tube should be tightly closed and twisted to make it easy for the fingers to hold and turn it, and if you wish, cauterize the ant as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
On instruments used for injection in cases of sciatica, diarrhea and colic.
The syringe can be made of silver, pewter, or brass that is cast or hammered, and small or large ones can be made from this instrument depending on those who use it. Those used to treat young children will be small, and those with narrow or painful bowels will have very fine syringes. Image of a large syringe:
Its upper funnel, where the cannula is attached, is wide and has a barrier where the cannula is attached as you see, and its lower end which enters the rectum is tightly closed and very smooth, with two holes on one side of the neck and one hole on the other side.
The size of the hole should be equal to or slightly larger than the thickness of the cannula, and the cannula in which the drugs are placed is made from a bladder animal or sheepskin, shaped like a small spoon, with a diameter of one span.
It is pierced with many holes as it rotates, and the distance between each hole is the thickness of a finger, then a tight thread of double-stranded yarn or similar is inserted into these holes, and the cannula is gathered together like a spoon. If medicine is placed inside, the top of the syringe is tightened between two stones tightly, and then injected. This is an image of the cannula circle and hole:
How to fill it: Fill the bladder or the sac with warmed medicine as much as the patient can tolerate, be careful that it is not too hot or too cold, then the patient lies on their back and raises their legs up.
A piece of cloth or a towel is placed underneath, then the tip of the syringe is smeared with grease, egg white, fenugreek saliva, or something similar. It is then gently inserted into the anus. Then an assistant squeezes the syringe firmly with both hands until all its contents are emptied into the intestine.
The syringe is then removed, and the patient leans against a wall with his legs raised. If the medicine urges him to evacuate, he should hold it as long as possible. If he sleeps all night, it will be most effective in purging. If he was injected for diarrhea and wants to hasten its exit, the injection should be repeated until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful tumors in the anus, the syringe should be very fine and smooth, like those used for injecting children. This is an image of a fine syringe with its skin drawn tight:
Chapter Eighty-Fourth.
On Surgical Treatment.
As I mentioned in the section on treating what resembles cysts, and as I will further detail here, treatment with both hands and medicine is complete. I say that surgeries differ according to the thing being operated upon and according to the location of the wound.
The things that involve surgeries are numerous, such as a stone bruise, a sword or knife cut, a spear or stick thrust, an arrow wound, and similar things.
As for surgeries according to the location on the body, there are wounds on the head or neck, chest or abdomen, liver, and similar organs.
I will describe the treatment of some surgeries to make them a measure and rule for all other surgeries, and I begin with simple head wounds, since complex ones will be mentioned at the beginning of Chapter Three of this book.
I say that when a simple head wound occurs without a bone fracture, and it is from a stone bruise or something similar, and the skin has merely been split open, and the wound is large and there is fear of a hot abscess developing, immediately apply a poultice to the area. Do not delay it, and let blood out of him to the extent of his strength, unless something prevents him from phlebotomy, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is little; and let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded area.
Warn the patient against repletion, drinking, and thick foods; if something prevents him from phlebotomy, let him reduce his food and keep away from meats and drinks. Apply to the wound if a hot swelling occurs, cotton wool soaked in rose oil alone or with a drink that has astringent properties.
And if you are confident that there will be no hot swelling, apply to the wound if it is soft with its blood and has not been changed by the dry air which I will describe to you shortly; but if it has been changed by the air, apply some ointments to it.
Until it produces pus, then treat it until it heals; if the wound is large and is from a sword cut or similar and its lips have not come together with ligatures, bring them together by suturing as I will describe in suturing abdominal wounds.
If the skin exposes the bone and hangs, and its adherence is only slight, cut it off; then treat the wound with medicines that will produce solid flesh instead of skin; and order the patient to eat foods that have tenacity, such as heads and tails and similar things.
If putrefaction occurs in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, cut off all the putrified part, cauterize it, then treat it; if there is an artery or vein bleeding from these wounds and the blood does not stop with medicines, search for the artery.
If you find it, do not amputate it but cut it with a scalpel and ligate it; if necessity requires and what we mentioned does not work, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. If these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is easy:  it suffices to treat them by leaving this dry air on them while they are bloody.
Before the air changes it, the recipe for stopping bleeding is to take one part frankincense, two parts mastic, and three parts slaked lime or unslaked lime; pound all together, strain it, and pack the wound with it, binding it tightly so that a good plaster adheres to it.
It will then coagulate with the blood, and you should bind it tightly from above with bandages and leave it undisturbed as long as there is no swelling; for the medicine will not separate from it until it is healed. If frankincense and mastic are not available, slaked lime alone may be used.
This same procedure can also be performed on wounds with a probe in many large operations, if it is skillfully applied and tightly bound, provided the wounds are fresh and bloody, as long as the air has not changed them; but if the air has already altered them somewhat, especially in summer.
Then there is no point in applying this styptic, as we have said that you should apply some stimulating ointments to it or apply a poultice of barley flour made with water and honey so that it will ripen the pus and then treat it with all other remedies until it is healed.
But if a fracture occurs in the wound and it is slight, draw it together with a ligature; as I have mentioned the treatment of head fractures later on, under surgery of the neck, if the wound occurs in the neck there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
But if a nerve or artery has been severed in the neck, and it is a nerve, there is no remedy except to avoid treating it with anything that constricts severely, such as lead plaster or litharge, for they will injure the nerve and cause it to contract.
Nothing cold should be put on the wound at all, because the nerve itself is cold, and its connection to the brain, which is the noblest of organs, makes it necessary that any medicine used for treatment be soft, such as rose water washed with fresh water many times and moistened with oil or pomegranate seed ointment.
If it is also washed with fresh water and all metallic stones in this manner, and with wet ointments, but if the wound is large, use stitching or bring its lips together with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has a cavity and an abscess has formed at its bottom, puncture it in the lowest part of it. If an artery has been severed in the wound and you see its blood flowing, amputate it, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary.
If the wound has severed some or all of the cartilages of the larynx, but the vocal cords are preserved, bring the lips of the skin together with sutures over the trachea; do not touch the larynx itself, but straighten it and return it to its natural shape, then tighten it firmly and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with ointments that have astringent and drying properties until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, examine it. If there are bone fragments in it, extract all of them or as many as possible. If you cannot extract them all, leave them until the wound is granulated and healed, making removal easier.
If the wound is soft, apply the cerate that we have described. If bone becomes putrefied in the wound and turns necrotic, treat it as follows, as mentioned in its chapter, in thoracic surgery and between the shoulders.
If it is a stab wound from a spear or knife and you see a cavity, observe if air escapes from it when the patient breathes. If so, know that it is a combat wound. If there is no cavity and it is soft with blood, do not apply cerate to it at first, nor tighten it lest the blood be retained in its cavity.
For if it reaches the heart, it will kill the patient. Instead, apply a drawing ointment to it and dissolve it twice during the day. If you do not have an ointment, put an old cotton swab in the wound to absorb any moisture that comes out of it and let the patient sleep on the wound.
If pus gathers in it, and even if the wound is three days old or more, and the patient has no tremors, bad palpitations, or shortness of breath, and I see all his other conditions are good, then know that the wound is healthy and treat it with bandages and all other treatment until it heals.
If its pus cannot be seen and the discharge continues, then know that it has become suppurative and treat it from the opening, allowing the patient to drain what gathers in it. If the wound is on the chest or back, treat it as previously described with sutures.
If it is large, or on the arm if it is small, and it has affected the bone and pieces have broken off from it, then search the wound and immediately remove those pieces if they are clean; but if they are not clean, leave them until.
The wound will fester and it will be easy to remove them. As for all other wounds that occur in all other organs, their treatment is ruled as we have mentioned.
Chapter Eighty-Five.
On Abdominal Wounds and Evisceration, and Their Suturing.
The rupture that occurs in the abdomen may be large, or small, or medium-sized. The large one may protrude intestines, or several intestines, making their insertion and suturing more difficult.
Even the small rupture may be difficult in another way, requiring a more laborious return, and if the intestines are not immediately returned to their place they will swell and thicken, making insertion difficult. Therefore, medium-sized ruptures have become preferable because the return of the intestines is not as difficult as with these two types.
Know that suturing the abdomen is done in four ways: two general sutures, which are suitable for suturing the abdomen and all other wounds of the body; and two specific sutures, which apply to all wounds but are especially suited for suturing the abdomen.
And I will describe them to you one by one with explanation and clarification, saying that if the wound is small and some of the intestines have come out and it is difficult to put them back in, this is due to one of two things: either because the tear is small as we said, or because the intestine has been exposed to bloating from cold air beforehand.
If this is the case, it should be heated by soaking a sponge or a damp cloth in lukewarm water alone, or in which rue, saffron and fennel have been cooked, and wrapping the intestines with it until the bloating subsides.
A drink that contains astringents is also effective and better than water alone in dissolving bloating. If you see that the bloating has subsided, moisten the intestines with water in which marshmallow or anise have been cooked, as this will make it easier to insert them.
If it is still impossible for them to return after this treatment, enlarge the tear slightly with an instrument used for perforating nasal passages. The first treatment, if successful, is preferable to incision. However, one must resort to incision only when necessary and after all other options have failed. This is a depiction of the instrument:
One side of it is curved and limited, while the other side is unlimited. The thin end is not as sharp as a scalpel but is slightly blunt. It is an instrument resembling a small probe, as you see. If the wound widens and the intestines enter, they should be returned to their natural shape.
Its specific location, if you can achieve it, is best. If the tear is wide and located in the lower abdomen, the patient should lie on their back with their legs raised higher than their head. If it is in the upper abdomen, their head and chest should be raised higher than their lower body.
Similarly, if the tear is on one side of the abdomen, always aim to have the surgical side raised higher than the other. This should be done in major and intermediate surgeries as well.
As for minor surgeries, you place it according to what is possible for you, then you prepare a reliable assistant in front of you who holds all the rags with his hands and brings together his lips, then he reveals from it to the one who sews something after something.
This is the description of a common suture, which is to take a needle or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leave from the edge of the cloth a length equal to the thickness of the fingernail and insert one needle without threading it into the edges of the skin. With the edges of the peritoneum under the skin from inside until it passes through that side, having gathered the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum, resulting in four layers, then tighten with a doubled thread around the needle several times on both sides so that the lips of the wound come together firmly.
Then leave a length equal to the thickness of the finger also and insert another needle, then interlock it with the thread as you did with the first needle, continuing to do so with as many needles as needed until the entire wound is filled. Let the needles be medium in thickness.
Because needles that are too thin will quickly cut through the flesh and those that are too thick are difficult to insert into the skin, so it should be medium in thinness and thickness. And the needle should not be inserted into the edge of the skin nearby.
Lest the flesh be cut quickly and the wound opened before it heals, and do not space the stitches too far apart lest the wound fail to heal. Then cut off the ends of the needles so as not to hurt the patient when he sleeps and make him bandages of linen cloth from each side to hold the ends of the needles.
Leave it until you know that the wound has healed, this type of suture with needles is thus suitable for minor surgeries because it may be sufficient to sew it with one or two needles or so.
As for the manner of suturing for a second intention, it is to gather by suture the four margins, namely the skin margin and the peritoneal margin at once with a needle containing a twisted thread that is moderate in fineness and thickness; then when these four margins have been passed through by the needle, return the needle from the side where you began.
Let the thread lie locked from above the wound so that the suture is according to the stitching of a purse which is tightened by drawing it, and make the distance between each stitch equal to the thickness of the little finger; this suture is known to all people.
With this suture, I operated on a man who had a wound in his belly inflicted by a knife; the rupture of the surgery was more than a span long and about two spans of the middle intestine had protruded from it; the rupture was in the middle of the abdomen.
I replaced it after his intestines had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in about fifteen days; I treated him until he was well and he lived for many years afterward, behaving normally in all respects, whereas the physicians had pronounced him incurable.
And it is marvelous that I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where there were no medicines at all; I used to put clean cotton on the wound twice a day and I used to undertake to wash it with honey water until it was healed.
As for one of the special kinds of sutures, I mention it according to the statement of Galen, which is to begin the suture from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside; when the needle has passed through the skin and into the muscle going straight along the entire length of the abdomen.
Leave the edge of the peritoneum on the side where you inserted the needle, and pass the needle through its other edge from inside to outside in the other edge of the abdominal wall; when you have passed it through, pass it again in this same edge from the abdominal wall from outside to inside.
Remove the edge of the peritoneum on this side and insert the needle in its other edge from inside to outside, then pass it through the peritoneum to the edge of the diaphragm on its side until it passes completely through.
Then begin again from the same side, drawing a line with the edge of the peritoneum on the other side and bringing the needle out through the skin near it. Then return the needle to that skin and draw a line along the edge of the peritoneum on the other side with this edge of the diaphragm.
Bring it out through the skin on its side, and do this again and again until you sew the entire incision in that manner. The description of this stitching is that it sews the stitching of furriers.
By sewing the peritoneum once from one side with an edge of skin, and leaving it once on the other side until it empties. As for the second type of specific stitching that Galen also mentioned, this is his word verbatim.
It is to sew it according to the example of how some healers sew, by bringing together each part with its counterpart, naturally joining the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge and the edge of the diaphragm to its other edge, as I will describe to you.
You should insert the needle into the edge of the diaphragm closest to you from the outside and pass it inside alone, leaving the edges of the peritoneum, then return the needle and pass it from outside to inside in both edges of the peritoneum, then return it again.
And pass it from inside to outside in the other edge of the diaphragm on the opposite side. This type of stitching is better than the common, easy stitching, which is the stitching previously mentioned. This is Galen's word verbatim. Some have said that abdominal stitching can be done with two needles. This is done by inserting one thread into them and beginning by inserting the needle from your side, passing it through to the other side, then inserting the other needle from the opposite side, passing it through to you, according to the stitching of shoes.
Know that a rupture if it is in the middle of the belly, its stitching is more difficult than all other places of the belly. As for the treatment of the wound, its ruling in its treatment is like all other wounds, so that if you find the wound fresh with its blood before the air changes it, and you return the intestines and stitch and tighten them, then apply a poultice to it made of saltpeter.
But if the wound has been changed by the air, apply to it some of the ointments that you prepare until it suppurates and the threads fall off and the peritoneum and omentum unite, then treat it like your treatment of all other wounds until it heals.
If you do not have medicines, apply clean cotton to it from the beginning of suppuration and change it twice a day as I have taught you until it heals; for you will not need any other treatment in most cases if the wounds are simple. If you fear that the wound may involve major organs in pain.
Then you should dip soft wool in lukewarm oil or rose ointment and place it around the areas between the groin and armpit; if he feels pain or foulness in his intestines, which often occurs, inject him with a warm black astringent potion.
Especially if the foulness has reached the intestines and become a penetrating wound into it, and know that what was thick from the intestines is easier to heal and what was thin from them is harder to heal.
As for the intestine known as the jejunum, it does not accept healing from any surgery that occurs in it at all, due to its abundance of large veins and thinness of texture and proximity to the nature of nerves. As for if what protruded from the wound was pus and you found it fresh, return it according to how you return the intestines.
If a time has passed and it has become green or black, it should be tightened with a thread above the place from which it has blackened so that bleeding does not occur, for there are veins and arteries in the hemorrhoid, and then what is below that ligature should be cut.
The two ends of the thread should be attached from below the operation outside of it to make it easy for you to pull and remove them when the hemorrhoid falls off and the wound suppurates, mentioning the wound that occurs in the intestine. As for if a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small.
It may be possible to heal it in some people, for I saw a man who had been wounded in his abdomen by a spear thrust and the wound was on the right side of the stomach. I sutured the wound and it became straight, from which feces and gas came out. I treated him as though I did not expect his recovery. I continued to treat him until he was healed and the area joined together. When I saw that the area had joined together, I feared for the patient that an accident might happen inside him. Nothing bad happened to him at all, and he remained in the best of health. It is true that he eats, drinks, has intercourse, enters the bath, and performs his service, and some experienced people have mentioned that whenever a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, it should be sutured in this manner.
This is done by taking large-headed ants, then bringing the lips of the wound together, and placing one of the ants with its mouth open on the lips of the wound. When it grips it and tightens its jaws, cut off its head; it will stick and not come undone. Then place another ant near the first one.
Continue to do this with several ants according to the size of the wound, then return it and suture the wound; those heads will remain stuck in the intestine until the intestine heals and recovers, and no harm will befall the patient at all. It is also possible that the intestine can be sutured with fine thread as well.
The one who wants to draw a thread from the animal's flesh after it has entered into the needle, should take the end of this thread from the flesh and draw it out nicely; then he should tie on its end a thin, well-twisted linen thread; then he should insert that thread into the needle. And in it is a thread of the flesh, with which the intestines are sewn together, and then it is returned to the cavity; this kind of stitching with silk and the flesh is only on the path of hope and desire.
But if the tear is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy or cure at all.
Chapter Sixty-Eighty.
On the Treatment of Catarrh and Coryza.
Know that every wound or swelling, if it becomes chronic and does not heal but forms an ulcer from which pus continuously flows without ceasing, is called in general, and whatever organ it may be in, a "naasoor," and we call it catarrh.
It is in fact a complication, an adherent, hard white mass without pain, with a cavity like the cavity of a bird's feather.
And because of this, some people called it "a feather." Sometimes it is moist and continuously discharges pus, and at times the moisture may cease. This moisture can be abundant or scant, thick or thin.
And as I previously mentioned in the division on surgery, every ulcer that does not heal and in which flesh does not grow is due to one of nine causes: one of them being either a deficiency of blood in the body or its corruption, or because there is hard flesh inside it and on its edges, preventing the growth of good flesh. Or because it is full of dirt and impurities; or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the material it discharges is of poor quality; or because the medication is not appropriate for its treatment; or because there has been a pestilence in the town; or because of something particular to the town.
Or because it is full of dirt and impurities; or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the material it discharges is of poor quality; or because the medication is not appropriate for its treatment; or because there has been a pestilence in the town; or because of something particular to the town. As was shown in the city of Saragossa, where the ripening of diseases is difficult and the healing of tumors is slow, naturally, or because it contains one or several bones; all these causes, their signs, and treatments with drugs have been explained in the division.
And I should inform you here of the treatment for fistulas and colds which are treated by handwork, know that fistulas may occur in all parts of the body, some fistulas ending in large veins or arteries or nerves.
Or to the peritoneum or to the intestine or to the bladder or to a rib or to a vertebra of the spine or to a joint of the complex joints composed in many ways such as the hand and foot, and some lead to a major organ or something like that.
So, whatever these fistulas are on this description, they are of the difficult diseases that do not accept treatment and working on them is a hardship and ignorance; If any of the fistulas have not reached the places mentioned, I hoped and desired to treat them.
And I wanted you to reach that knowledge, so take a probe of copper or iron if the fistula passes straight, search it with that. If there is a bend in the fistula, search it with a thin lead probe because lead softens its body.
It will slide upon entering and turn towards the bend, if the fistula has many openings you cannot determine them with a probe, then inject one mouth from its mouths; for the moisture you inject into it will travel towards the other mouths and flow.
Then continue the investigation in any way possible for you to know if there is a bone or nerve, or whether the fistula is deep or shallow, or whether it is one fistula with many openings; stand on all of this to the extent of your ability by skillfully inquiring and its presence with pain when you pinch your hand at that spot.
And such are the signs and causes that occur with a tumor. If you have truly grasped all of this, then proceed to treatment confidently, which is to look and see if it...
If the tumor is clearly near or in a healthy location far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or any of the locations I have mentioned to you, then incise the tumor as previously described and remove all purulent material, putrefied flesh, and excess flesh.
Remove any flesh, pustules, or the like that grow in its opening and treat it until it heals. But if the tumor is deep-seated and straight, then you should incise it as deeply as possible and then cleanse it of all putrefied flesh.
Then use a twisted ligature impregnated with caustic medications and insert it into the bottom of the tumor, which you can reach with an iron instrument. Repeat this process several times so that the caustic medicine consumes all remaining corruption in the bottom of the tumor.
Then dress it with ointments that promote the growth of healthy flesh until it heals. If it does not heal in this way, excise it as previously described. If the cause of the tumor is bone and you have confirmed this, then probe and incise it as I have instructed you, unless something prevents you from doing so.
If bone is exposed and there is some corruption or discoloration, scrape it away until the corruption is gone and then treat it with what promotes healing until it heals. If it does not heal and pus continues to form as before
Know that you have not removed all of the corruption. Examine everything again and meticulously scrape and cleanse it with your utmost effort, then dress it. If it heals, well and good; otherwise, know that this corruption lies deep within. Examine everything again.
Meticulously scrape and cleanse it with your utmost effort. If the corrupted bone is small and can be extracted, then extract it with fine forceps suitable for this purpose.
If there are many bones, draw them all out and do not leave anything behind. If any ligaments stand in your way, and cutting them is not dangerous, cut those ligaments and the flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
If you cannot pull out the bones at once, apply a dressing that will cause it to putrefy and leave it for several days until the flesh and ligaments around those bones become rotten. Keep the wound from closing together along the incision you made during your work.
Rather, if you fear that, place cotton wool soaked in powdered sulfur with oil or cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments upon it. For if those ligaments putrefy and the bones become loose, it will be easy to pull them out and draw them forth.
But if there is one large bone, such as the shinbone or thighbone and the like, and only the surface has decayed, scrape it thoroughly until that blackness and decay are gone, then bind the wound. But if a large part has decayed and the decay has reached the marrow of the bone, then it must be removed.
Cut it all away to where the decay ends, then treat it so that it heals and closes together. And I shall tell you of a case that befell a man in his leg as an example and aid to your treatment. This man was a youth.
He was about thirty years old and suffered pain in his leg, originating from a cause within his body until the humors reached his leg, causing great swelling and inflammation, with no external cause. Time passed, and with mistakes by physicians, the swelling burst open.
A great deal of matter flowed from it, and his treatment was mishandled until his leg became ulcerated and had many openings, all discharging pus and bodily fluids. A group of physicians treated him for about two years, but none of them were skilled in surgery.
When he came to me I saw his leg and the humors flowing from those openings in a great torrent, and the man had weakened his body and his color had turned yellow. So I inserted a probe into one of those openings and it led to the bone, then I explored all the openings.
I found them leading from one to another on all sides of the leg. So I proceeded and made an incision along one of those openings until I exposed some bone, and I found it corrupted, eaten away, blackened, putrid, and perforated until the hole reached the brain, and I spread out what was revealed to me.
And I was able to remove the corrupted bone, and I believe that there was nothing else in the bone except for that corruption which I cut out and spread, and that I had eradicated it. Then I bound the wound with astringent medicines for a longer time, but it did not heal together. So I returned and exposed the bone again above the first exposure.
I found the corruption connected to the bone, so I spread out what appeared of that corruption as well, then I tried to bind it, but it did not bind or heal together. Then I exposed it again, and I continued to cut away the bone piece by piece, trying to bind it so that it would heal, but it did not heal until I had cut away about a handbreadth of bone.
And I removed it with its marrow, then I bound it with medicines and it healed quickly and completely. This repetition in my work and incision was necessary due to the weakness of the patient and his low tolerance, and out of fear for him dying because he used to experience at all times from excessive vomiting a poor fainting spell.  He recovered completely.
And flesh grew solid in place of the bone and his condition improved in his body, his strength returned, and he was able to move around without any ailment affecting him at all. If a bone has been broken in any part of the body.
It should then be spread out in this manner: take a ligature and tighten it on the end of the protruding bone, and order someone to pull it upwards. Make another ligature of thicker wool than the first one.
Then tie it to the flesh beneath the bone and extend its end so that the flesh is drawn downwards while you expose the flesh from the place you wish to spread, so that the saw does not injure the flesh. Place a plank or board securely under the bone from below.
For if you do this, the saw will not be prevented from cutting the decayed bone, and the sawing should be done slightly above the place of decay so that there is no decay in the cavity of the bone, and it does not appear externally to the senses, thus compelling you to spread it again.
But if the bone is decayed and not protruding, but its parts are connected and the decay is in the middle or part of it, expose the flesh from all sides, then place the board underneath and saw it from the first side where the decay is.
When you have finished sawing it, saw it from the other side; let the sawing be a short distance from the decay, as we said. If the decay is in a joint, cut the decayed joint itself and spread the bone where it connects on the other side.
If the decay is in the connection of two joints, there is no remedy except excision. If the decay is in a metacarpus or metatarsus, the matter is extremely difficult to treat, but you should pare away the decay as it appears to you, and clean and purify it however you can.
By any means possible, provided you do not encounter a vein or nerve; know that saws and cutting instruments for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones, their setting, thickness, thinness, size, and whether they are firm or brittle. Therefore it is necessary to prepare for each type of operation a tool suited to that operation.
Know that the operations themselves may guide you to the type of instrument you need if you have long practice and knowledge of the techniques of this craft, for he who is skilled in the craft and has witnessed various types of diseases. May deduce for himself what instruments are suitable for each disease, and I have depicted for you at the end of this chapter several instruments.
You should make them examples to follow and a measure by which to measure others, God willing, An image of a saw.
An image of another saw:
An image of a small saw:
An image of a large saw:
The head of this saw is shaped like a nail head and is engraved in the shape of an escutcheon, but it is suitable for scraping bone heads if they are damaged or a large wide bone. An image of a small bone saw:
An image of a wide bone saw:
Its upper arch and blade are made of iron and its handle is made of wood with a tightly tapered cone, An image of a bone saw with a cavity:
An image of another delicate bone saw:
An image of another bone saw with a stoppered end:
An image of a small bone saw resembling a probe:
An image of another small bone saw blade:
And its tip is like an awl, it acts in many places for scraping bones. An image of a bone saw suitable for scraping what has been pierced from the bones:
Its tip is triangular with sharp edges, it is made of Indian iron. Likewise, all the saws and blades we mentioned should be made, An image of a bone saw:
Chapter Seventy-Eighth.
On the Amputation of Limbs and the Setting of Bones.
Limbs may become gangrenous either from an external or an internal cause. If you treat this corruption with medication and the treatment is ineffective, and you see that the corruption is progressing in the limb and nothing halts it.
Then you should amputate that limb where the corruption has reached, so that the patient may be saved from death or a great affliction greater than the loss of the limb. A sign that this has occurred is when the limb turns black until you think fire has burned it.
Or it may become gangrenous after turning black, so that the gangrene spreads to the limb and takes hold of the whole body; hasten to amputate it. The same applies if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of certain creatures such as the sea scorpion, snake, centipede, or similar creatures.
If the corruption or sting is at the tip of a finger, amputate the finger and do not delay until the corruption spreads to the hand. Likewise, if it has taken hold of the hand, amputate it from the base of the wrist and do not delay until the corruption spreads to the forearm.
Similarly, if it has taken hold of the arm, amputate the arm at the elbow joint itself. If the corruption spreads and you see that it is moving towards the shoulder, do not amputate the shoulder at all, for this would lead to the death of the patient. Use other methods of treatment according to your ability.
Do the same with the leg: if the corruption takes hold of a toe, amputate the toe at one of its joints; and if it has taken hold of the foot, amputate the whole foot. If it ascends to the knee, amputate the leg at the knee joint.
If the corruption has reached above the knee, there is no recourse but to leave it and resign the patient to death. The method for amputating a limb or setting a bone is to tie a ligature below the place where you intend to cut and another ligature above the place.
The attendant of the lower ligature extends it downwards, and another attendant extends the upper ligature upwards. You then expose the flesh between the ligatures with a broad elevator until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or divide it. It should be covered on all sides with pieces of linen.
So that the saw does not touch the correct spot, causing the patient additional pain and a hot swelling. If bleeding occurs during your work, staunch the area quickly or apply some styptic substances, then return to your treatment until you are finished.
Then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it is healed. I will give you an example of a man who had this same condition in his leg, which I will describe to you. It happened that he had blackness in his leg accompanied by a burning sensation like fire.
This gangrene first occurred in his toe, and then spread to his entire foot. The man amputated it himself when he saw the gangrene spreading through the limb with the intense pain and burning sensation he was experiencing.
After a long time, he experienced the same gangrene in the index finger of his hand. He came to me and I applied remedies to his hand after cleansing it, but the gangrene did not subside and continued to spread through the other finger.
The gangrene spread throughout his hand, and he asked me to amputate it. I refused, hoping to suppress the gangrene and fearing for his life if I amputated his hand because the man was weak and prone to falling. When he despaired of me, he returned to his town.
I was later informed that he had amputated his entire hand and recovered. I have related this story as an aid in cases of this type of disease and as a guide to be followed.
Chapter Eighty-Eight.
In the treatment of abscesses and the method of injecting them with medicines.
If a tumor occurs in some fleshy organ and its duration is prolonged until it collects a mass, then it bursts or breaks open and all that was inside comes out, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel.
And the skin upon it is like a rag, having become thin and not having gone so far in its corruption as to affect bone, nerve or ligament; therefore it deserves to be called an abscess and not a fistula except its duration lengthens until corruption affects something of these organs.
Then it is called a fistula or a running sore, and its treatment is to cut away all that skin as it goes around, especially if it has become thin and like a rag, and you are certain that it will not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and it has not reached that degree of corruption, and there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it by injection, which is to look at the abscess; if it is large and the pus that issues from it has a foul smell, inject it with Egyptian medicine.
This is vinegar and oil and honey and asafoetida in equal parts, collected in a vessel and cooked over fire until the medicine thickens and comes to the consistency of honey. Then take what you need from it and thin it with water and honey, and inject it into the abscess, constrict its opening and leave the medicine inside for two hours.
Then squeeze it out; do this for several days until the abscess is cleansed and the foul odor is gone. It may also be injected with ash water if this medicine is not available to you, which is to take the ash of vine wood or oak wood and pour water over it.
Then strain it and inject with it until you are certain that the abscess has been washed. If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine nor ash water, inject him with water and honey into which a little powdered asafoetida has been mixed.
Or you inject it with honey and drink mixed together, for honey is purifying and washing, and the drink sticks to the hidden place, especially if the drink has an excess of astringency and dryness. If you do this several times and are sure that the hidden place has gone its corruption, then inject it with something that causes flesh to grow in it.
Such as taking some of the palm ointment and dissolving it with rose oil and a constricting drink, or injecting it with some of the other medicines and ointments whose properties we have established in the article on ointments. If the mouth of the hidden place is narrow and does not fit the injector tube.
Then widen it a little with iron, or put in it a wick soaked in Egyptian ointment or a rush ointment until it widens. And if the mouth is also wide, then gather its lips by stitching and leave from it as much as the injector can enter without more.
And if its mouth, from which pus flows, is raised upward, then split it at the lowest point so that the pus flows downward, for pus, if injected into the depths of the hidden place, prevents flesh from growing in it.
If you cannot split the hidden place downwards as you want, then arrange the limb so that the pus flows easily according to what is available to you and ensure that nothing of the pus is retained at all.
As for the medicinal poultices that are placed on the hidden place from the outside and how to put them on, it is to take one of the suitable medicinal poultices and spread it on a linen cloth, let the cloth be as large as it covers the whole hidden place. Then cut with scissors opposite the mouth of the hidden place a hole slightly wider than the mouth of the hidden place, and spread some soft ointments on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and put it on top in a way that is spaced from the mouth of the hidden place so that pus can easily come out. Do not remove the large cloth except after.
For several days, and the one on the mouth of the abscess is the one that you remove at all times so that what has accumulated in it may come out, and to know whether what flows from it is much or little, ripe or unripe.
Also, examine the location of the abscess itself whether its owner feels pain in it or not, and whether there is swelling in it or not. Then if your treatment continues like this and you see that the material coming out on the mouth of the abscess is slight.
Know that the abscess may have adhered or is nearing adhesion, so then solve it on the morrow or in the third day. And when you have solved the wound, replace the cloth with another and renew the ointment. If thin pus comes out from the abscess after a long time, do not despair of its adhesion.
Its healing is near because some people are slow in the growth of flesh in their wounds and others are contrary to that. If, after many days, pus that is unripe comes out from the abscess, know that the abscess has not adhered.
And if its matter is prolonged, increase the drying medications and let them be medications that are moist in their consistency and dry in their strength, such as the palm ointment if excess orpiment has been added to it. And the most effective treatment for this is to take the palm ointment.
And solve it with rose oil and sprinkle on it a well-tempered, aged syrup then knead it with it and use it. You may do something like this if the palm ointment is not available to you; honey if you boil it until it becomes thick and use it. Or take bitter aloes, patience, and sandalwood, crush them all together and let it rest on honey while it is on the fire. Then spread it on a cloth and tighten it on the abscess, or coat it with honey that has been boiled until it thickens, sprinkle medications on it and put a cloth on it and tighten it.
Long zedoary, the root of asphodel, and caraway powder may be used singly or in combination. These are crushed, sifted, and sprinkled on honey as previously described. If the abscess persists and does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption within it.
If it has affected the bones or any other solid nerves or ligaments, treat it as described for nasal ulcers.
Chapter Ninety-Eight.
On the treatment of ingrown nails, diseased nails, amputation of supernumerary fingers, and splitting of fused fingers.
An ingrown nail is a large amount of flesh that grows under the toenail or fingernail, and it may grow on any of the fingers. If it is neglected and allowed to continue, it will cause swelling and a hot abscess.
Or it may become corrupted and rotten until it eats away at the base of the nail, and may corrupt it all. The corruption may even reach the bone, causing a foul smell and making the tip of the finger swollen and bluish in color. If you treat it with what we have mentioned in the division, and your treatment is unsuccessful.
You should cut off all the excess flesh growing from under the nail with a knife and then cauterize the wound afterward, for cautery is very beneficial in this case. But if the bone is sound and the nail itself is also sound.
And if the angle containing the nail has pushed the flesh inwards, causing it to be pinched and inflamed, you should place a fine wedge under the angle of the nail that is pinching the flesh and lift it up, carefully cutting away that flesh.
Then apply caustic medicines to the remaining flesh until it is all gone, and treat it with ointments until it heals. But if the corruption has affected the bone, you should cut out that bone and remove it, for it will not heal as long as there is corrupted bone present at all.
If you see suppuration and putrefaction advancing in the finger, cut it off at one of the interphalangeal joints as previously mentioned, then treat it until it heals. If the nail receives a blow or contusion and severe pain arises therein, the affected part should be lanced first.
Then split the nail with a sharp, slanting knife from above downward, being careful not to reach the flesh beneath the nail with the incision, for by doing so you will cause the patient severe pain and lead to the growth of excessive flesh in that place; then treat the area with something that relieves pain.
As for the supernumerary finger that sometimes occurs in some people's hands, it may be entirely fleshy, or it may have bones in some parts, and it may even have a nail, with its growth originating at the base of the joint of some fingers.
Or its growth may be in some interphalangeal joints, and those that grow in some interphalangeal joints do not move, while those that grow at a finger joint may move. Any part of it that is fleshy should be easily cut off; this is done by cutting it at its base with a wide knife.
As for that which grows at the base of a joint, its treatment is difficult, so abandon cutting it. As for that which grows in the finger at one of the interphalangeal joints, its flesh should first be cut circularly down to the bone, then the bone should be spread apart with one of those saws suitable for that purpose.
Then treat it until it heals. As for the adhesion that sometimes occurs between the fingers, this happens quite often and may be congenital or result from a wound or burn, etc. It should be incised.
So that the fingers return to their natural form, then place between them a wick or a thin shard soaked in rose oil so that it does not adhere quickly and separate them, or put a thin sheet of lead between them until the area heals properly.
And if some of the fingers are joined to the palm, then cut that union according to what seems suitable and corrects the shape of the limb.
Chapter Ninety.
On Cutting Arteries.
Arteries are twisted, thick veins filled with dark-colored blood that occur in most parts of the body and are most common in the legs, especially in porters, carriers, and laborers. It is first necessary to use shaking of the body from black bile many times forcefully.
Then let him be bled by cupping, but its treatment with iron is of two kinds: one is to cut and extract the black blood, and the other is to cauterize the vein and extract it all. As for cutting it, it should be done in this manner: first soak the leg in hot water.
Until the thick, turbid blood dissolves, then bind the patient's leg from above his thigh to below his knee with a turban, then cut the vein in one place or two places or three wide incisions.
Then draw out the black blood with your hand from below the leg upward and from above downward until a quantity of blood that you see as sufficient or that the patient's strength can bear comes out, then bind it up and order him to avoid foods that produce black bile, and repeat vomiting and cupping.
When the veins become full and this harms the patient, as for cauterizing it, it is done in this manner: shave the patient's leg if it has a lot of hair, then take him into a bath and soak his leg in hot water until it reddens and the vein swells or he engages in strenuous exercise.
If he does not have access to a bath until the limb is heated, then cut the skin opposite the vein in a lengthwise incision, either at its end near the knee or below it near the heel; then open the skin with forceps and strip away the vein from all sides until it appears to touch.
And when it appears, you see it reddish purple; and when the skin is removed, you also see it as if it were a tendon. Then insert a ligature beneath it until, when it rises above the skin, suspend it with a blind smooth snare, then make another incision near that one, to the extent of three fingers.
Then flay the skin from off the vein until it appears, then raise it with a ligature as you did before and suspend it with another snare as you did at first, then make another incision or many incisions if you need to do so.
Then draw it out and cut it at the end of the incision near the heel, then pull it out and draw it until it comes out of the second incision, then pull it up to the incision above it, and do this until you draw it from the third incision highest of all the incisions until it all comes out, then cut it.
But if it does not yield to drawing and pulling, insert a needle with a strong doubled thread and tie it and pull it, then insert a ligature beneath it and twist it with your hand in every direction until it comes out, and be careful that it does not break; for if it breaks, it will be very difficult for you to draw it out.
And harm will befall the patient from it; and if you draw it all out, place wool soaked in syrup and rose oil or oil upon the site of the operations and treat it until it heals. If the varicose vein is twisted and convoluted.
And was not straight as we said, it should be incised at each side of its convolutions and points of twisting, then hung by snares until you draw it all out; and be careful when you incise it that you do not cut the vein or injure it, for it will be difficult for you to draw it out if you do so.
Image of the instrument with which the varicose vein is incised:
Image of the blind cautery.
It does not have a groove like other cauteries and is not sharp at the end so as not to injure the vessel; it is thick and curved, smooth because if it were thin, it would cut the vessel with its sharpness. It should have the thickness we mentioned.
Chapter ninety-one.
On cutting a vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot countries like Hejaz and Arab lands, and in hot, arid and infertile lands, and it may be generated in other parts of the body besides the legs. It is generated by putrefaction that occurs under the skin.
As it happens inside living bodies, maggots, and the pulp of a fruit called gourd and maggots that are generated between the skin and flesh, the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a severe inflammation occurs in the leg and then the place puffs up, and then the vein begins to ooze out from that puffed-up spot.
As if it were the root of a plant or animal, and when its tip appears, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead weighing from one to two dirhams, tied tightly, and left hanging from the leg.
Whenever anything comes out of it, wrap it in the lead and tie it. If it grows long, cut off some of it and wrap the rest. Do not cut it from its origin before it has all come out because if you do, it will shrink and go into the flesh, causing a boil, putrefaction in the place and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it should be pulled and tugged little by little until it comes out entirely and nothing is left in the body. It may happen that this vein grows to a length of five or ten cubits in some people.
I have heard that it came out of a man twenty cubits long. If it breaks off while you are treating it, insert a probe into the hole and press it down along the body with a long bandage until all its contents are emptied, and try to heal the place with medicines for several days.
Then treat it with the treatment of tumors, and this vein may have many branches, especially if it appears in the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, so it will have many mouths and a branch will come out of each mouth, so treat it as we mentioned in the division and what preceded.
Chapter Ninety-Second.
Incision for worms generated under the nail, called bovine disease.
This disease is called bovine disease in some of our countries because cattle are often affected by it; it is a small worm that generates between the skin and flesh and crawls throughout the whole body, ascending and descending.
It becomes apparent to the touch as it crawls from one limb to another until it pierces wherever it has pierced the skin, creating a place where it comes out and forming it from putrefaction of some humors, as it is also subject to worms and animals, and pumpkin seeds in the abdomen.
And it is expected that its harm is that if it crawls in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open there and come out, thus destroying the eye; this often occurs. If you want to treat it and remove it, it must be done when it is crawling and apparent to the touch.
You should tighten above and below it with a strong ligature, then cut it open and remove it. If it has sunk into the flesh and you cannot find it, apply heat to the spot with fire until it is burned. As we said, the greatest harm it can cause is to destroy the eye.
If you see it has reached the head near the eye, tighten below it on the forehead with a strong ligature, then cut it open and remove it. The patient should take medicines that loosen foul humors and abstain from foods that cause putrefaction.
Chapter Ninety-Third.
On incision for the ailment known as nafir.
This disease which is called in our country nafir is a pain which appears in some organs and then moves from one organ to another, and I have seen it as I will describe to you.
I was called to a sick woman in some outlands, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a slight swelling in the tendon of the arm. When I stayed for an hour, I saw that swelling crawl along the vein like a worm crawling upward to her elbow as quickly as could be, like mercury.
Whenever it moved from one place to another, the pain would disappear from that location and settle in the elbow. Then I sat for an hour and it flowed throughout her whole body until it reached the other arm. Then she told me that it circled her entire body as she had seen.
I was amazed at the speed of its movement from one organ to another. I had never seen this disease with my own eyes in this way before, although I have seen groups of people who experience pain moving from one organ to another. But I had never seen it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
And I concluded that it must be because the woman was from the desert, with a dry body and visible veins, that this moving wind appeared to sensation. It follows that it would not appear to this extent in people of comfort and those with moist bodies and hidden veins.
Therefore, if you wish to treat it and the sufferer feels pain and it appears to you as we have described, bind tightly above and below it quickly and make an incision over it so that this trapped wind is released and the area is emptied.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes, treat it by loosening the body and using what expels winds and disperses them like loveage, spikenard, and similar medications.
Chapter Ninety-Fourth.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows may differ according to their types and according to the positions in which they are located in the body. As for their difference according to their types, some are large and some are small; some are hollow glass and some are solid glass; some have three angles and some have four angles.
Some have tongues and some have splinters. As for those that are according to the organs in which they are located, they are of two types: either the organs are major hollow organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and the like. So when an arrow falls into one of these organs and the signs of death which I will describe to you later appear, then you should avoid removing that arrow from it, for death will befall its owner in most cases. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow has not been concealed in the depths of the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain, if an arrow strikes it and penetrates the bone and wounds the dura mater on the brain, is that it will experience severe headache, headache and dizziness.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow has not been concealed in the depths of the organ, then remove it and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain, if an arrow strikes it and penetrates the bone and wounds the dura mater on the brain, is that it will experience severe headache, headache and dizziness. And redness in the eyes and redness of the tongue, convulsions, confusion, vomiting sometimes, and blood may come out of the nostrils or ears, and speech may be interrupted and the voice lost, and a white moisture resembling porridge will come out from the wound site, and it will flow like meat water.
If these signs appear to you, refrain from treating the patient and removing the arrow if it has not already come out. As for the signs of the arrow if it hits the heart and is close to the left breast, he will feel as if it has been inserted into something solid, not something empty.
And perhaps the arrow will have a movement resembling the pulse, and black blood will flow from the wound, followed by coldness of the limbs, cold sweat, and fainting. Know that death is inevitable. And a sign of an arrow if it wounds the lung is the release of frothy blood from the wound.
And the vessels following the neck swell and the color of the patient changes and he breathes with a loud breath, and requests to inhale cold air. If the arrow has indeed struck the diaphragm in the chest, then it will be close to the small ribs and the breathing will be great with severe pain.
And he sighs and all the limbs of the shoulders move. And if the arrow has indeed struck the liver, severe pain will follow that and blood resembling the liver in redness will come out from the wound. And if the arrow has indeed struck the stomach, perhaps something undigested from food will come out from the wound.
And its matter is apparent. And if the arrow has indeed struck the abdomen and lodged there and something of excrement came out from the wound or pus or an intestine that has been pierced, then there is no hope for his treatment or removal of the arrow. If the arrow has indeed struck the bladder and urine comes out.
And something protruded from it to the outside and the pain intensified upon the patient, then know that he is lost. As for the rest of the organs such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, upper arm, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, leg and so forth from those organs they have mostly been spared.
Provided that the arrow did not encounter a vein or nerve and the arrow was not poisoned, and I will tell you of some of what I have witnessed concerning these arrows so that you may deduce your treatment from it. It is that an arrow had struck a man in the fleshy part of his eye at the root of his nose.
So I removed it for him from the other side under the cartilage of the ear and he recovered, and no harm occurred to his eye. And I removed another arrow for a Jew that had struck him in the cartilage of his eye under the lower eyelid and the arrow had become hidden, and I only reached a small part of it that was stuck into the wood.
And it was a large arrow of the strong, composite arrows, square-shaped iron, smooth with no ears and the Jew recovered, and no ill occurrence happened to his eye. And I removed another arrow from the throat of a Christian and the arrow was Arabic.
And he who had two ears cut through between the jugular veins and it had lodged in his throat, I softened it until I extracted it, and the Christian was saved and healed, and I extracted another arrow for a man who had been struck in his belly and we estimated that he would die from it.
When thirty days or so had passed and nothing changed in his condition, I cut the arrow open and extracted it, and he was healed and nothing bad happened to him. I saw a man who had been struck by an arrow in his back and the wound had closed over it.
After seven years, the arrow came out at the base of his thigh, and I saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in her belly and the wound closed over it. The arrow remained, and nothing changed in her condition, nor did she find any harm in any of her natural actions.
And I saw another man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and the wound closed over it, and he did not find much pain from it. And there are many like this, and I extracted an arrow for one of the sultan's commanders that had been lodged in the middle of his nose, leaning slightly to the right side.
The entire arrow was concealed, and I was called to treat him three days after the arrow had struck, and I found the arrow wound very narrow, so I widened it with a thin probe, and did not feel any resistance, but he felt a throbbing pain under his right ear from the incision.
I thought that throbbing might be from the tip of the arrow, so I dressed the area with a bandage that had drawing power and ripeness hoping that the area would swell and a mark of the arrow would appear, so I cut him open, but nothing happened in the area to indicate that the arrow had reached that spot.
So I continued with the bandage for many days, but nothing happened, and during that time the wound closed, and the patient remained miserable from having it removed until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me the news, so I put a sharp, corrosive medicine on the wound for many days.
Until it opened and I probed it, feeling the slender point of the arrow stuck in the wood. Then I widened the wound with that sharp medicine until the point of the arrow appeared clearly to our sight, and it remained with me for a period of about four months.
Then, when the wound widened and I was able to enter the forceps into it, I drew and moved it, but it did not respond to coming out. I continued to treat it gently and maneuver it with various instruments until one day I grasped it firmly with all the forceps as will be shown in the figure at the end of this chapter.
And physicians used to rule that the cartilage of his nose could not be joined, but I joined it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered completely without any pain at all, and I tell you how some arrows are removed so that this can serve as a measure and guide for what I have not mentioned.
For the parts of this craft and their details cannot be grasped by description nor encompassed by a book, but rather the skillful craftsman measures the small against the large and what is present against what is absent and infers new work and a new instrument at strange emergencies.
If I descend from this craft, I say that arrows are only removed from the organs in which they have become lodged in two ways: either by drawing them from the place where they entered, or from the opposite direction, and those that come out from where they entered.
If the arrow is prominent in a place of flesh, it should be drawn and removed. If it does not respond to coming out at the time it occurred, you should leave it for days until the flesh around it rots, making it easy to draw and remove. The same applies if it lodges in bone.
And if it does not respond to coming out, leave it for days as well and try drawing and moving it every day, for it will come out. If it still does not respond after days, you should pierce around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine awl until it widens for the arrow, then draw and remove it.
If an arrow has penetrated the skull and entered one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of those symptoms which I have mentioned to you appear in the wound, then desist from drawing out the arrow and leave it until his condition is clarified after a few days.
Then proceed to draw out and extract the arrow; but if it is deeply embedded and does not yield to traction, use trephines around the arrow as I have described to you, then treat the area until it heals. But if the arrow has become concealed in some part of the body. And is beyond feeling, then search for it with a probe; if you feel it, draw it out with some instrument suitable for the purpose; but if you are unable to do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor blood vessel in that place.
Then make an incision to widen the wound so that you can grasp the arrow and extract it; if it has two wings, free the flesh adhering to them on every side by any means possible. If you are unable to free the flesh at the points of the wings, then break them off and split them until you are able to do so.
And if you attempt to extract the arrow from any location, use the twist of your hand with forceps in all directions until it is freed, and exercise the utmost gentleness lest the arrow break, for this will make it difficult for you to draw it out. If you are unable to do so at that time.
Leave it for a few days until the flesh around it decays, then return to it; for it will then be easier to extract. If bleeding occurs, use the remedies we have mentioned in the chapter on that subject, and take every precaution against cutting an artery, nerve or tendon, and use ingenuity.
In any case, you can remove the arrow, and let it be gently, cautiously, and steadily as I have described to you, and you should use when drawing out the arrow that the patient should assume the same position they were in when the arrow struck them, for this is the most appropriate.
If you cannot do that, then use whatever position is possible. As for the arrow that exits from the opposite side, it will either have something protruding outward or you will find the tip of the arrow close to the skin by feeling and see it emerging.
Make an incision on it, and let the incision be as wide as the arrowheads fit, then draw it out, for it will easily come out. If it is stuck in a bone, twist your hand so that the arrow affects the bone and widens itself, then draw it out.
Otherwise, leave it for a few days and return to it until it comes out. If the arrow's shaft is still in it, push it with it; if the shaft has fallen off, and you wish to use pushing, insert a hollow instrument into it so that its cavity enters the tail of the arrow and then push it with it.
If the arrow is hollow, push it with an instrument that enters into that cavity, for the arrow will easily come out this way. If the arrow is poisoned, you should cut out all the flesh where the poison has gone, if possible, then treat it with what is suitable for that.
If the arrow is in the chest or abdomen or bladder or side, and it is close to what can be felt with a probe, and you are able to make an incision on it, then make an incision and be careful not to cut a vein or nerve, and take it out.
Then suture the wound if it needs it, then treat it until it heals. Picture of the arrowheads with which arrows are shot:
Their tips are shaped like a bird's beak, made as if they were a rasp so that when you grip an arrow or something else, it will not let go. They can be made in large, small, and medium sizes, all according to the size of the arrow, the width, and narrowness of the wound.
Image of a hollow cannon.
Image of a closed cannon.
This is closed at the end like an arrow shaft to make it easy to insert into the hollow arrow and push it.
Chapter Ninety-Fifth.
On Phlebotomy.
The veins that are customarily phlebotomized in the body are thirty veins, including sixteen veins in the head: the two temporal veins behind the ears, known as the temporals, and the two arteries in the temples that are visible, and the two veins in the eye sockets, known as the viewers.
And the vein that stands in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the end of the nose, and the two jugular veins in the neck, and the two veins in the upper lip of the mouth, and the two veins in the lower lip, these veins are known as the jaw veins, and the two veins under the tongue.
As for the veins that are phlebotomized in the arm and hand, they are five veins: one of them is the cephalic vein, which is on the lateral side, and it is commonly called the head vein; and the basilic vein, which is the middle vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic vein, and it is commonly called the body vein.
And the basilica, which is located on the medial side, is also called the axillary vein, and it is commonly called the abdominal vein; and the brachial artery, which is located on the elbow, and the one that adheres to it, and the one that appears above the thumb clearly, and the median cubital.
It has two branches, and there are three veins in the leg and foot: one is under the knee bend on the lateral side; the second is the saphenous vein, located at the heel on the medial side; and the femoral vein, located at the heel on the lateral side.
And in the other leg there are three veins like them, but as for the two veins behind the ears, stopping them is beneficial for chronic colds, migraine, ringworm, and foul chronic head sores, and I will describe how to stop them.
You should shave the patient's head and rub the back of their head in the location of the veins with a rough cloth, rubbing thoroughly. Then, constrict the patient's neck with a turban until the veins appear behind their ears in the lower parts of the head.  Then feel for them with your finger; where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, mark that spot with ink.
Then take a sharp scalpel, the one known as a needle-holder, and insert it under the vein in the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut the vein and skin off with a cleanly severed cut. The length of the cut should be equal to two joined fingers.
Or thereabouts, then release the amount of blood you desire and bind them with bandages, leaving them until they heal. I have previously discussed cutting and cauterizing them in the beginning of this book. As for the two arteries in the temples, stopping them is beneficial for chronic migraine, severe headache, persistent ophthalmia, and acute profuse lacrimation directed towards the eyes.
I will describe how to stop them for you: constrict the patient's neck with a turban until the arteries clearly appear and their pulse is felt beneath your finger. Then mark them with ink, and lift the skin from above the artery upwards with your middle finger.
Insert the needle-holder scalpel from below and raise the artery upwards, cutting it off as you did with the other veins. Release the amount of blood needed, then loosen the constriction on the patient's neck and press your finger on the artery for an hour.
Then you put cotton and a bandage on it, and tighten it securely from above, and leave it until it heals. Their mention, separation, and ligature have already been mentioned in the beginning of the book. As for cupping the forehead vein, its benefit is after cupping the vertex for chronic facial conditions such as ringworm, ulcers, and erysipelas.
And as for how to cup it, as I describe to you, you strangle the patient's neck with a turban until the vein appears, then you take the instrument called the hatchet, and this is its image:.
You place the fork coming out of the head of the hatchet on the same vein and strike it from above with a comb or something similar, and leave the blood to flow in the amount you want, then loosen the patient's stranglehold and tighten him until he heals.
And it may be opened with a wide spatula, but it should not have a sharp end like other spatulas, but rather be slightly wide at the end, and you dissect it on the bend because the bone is nearby, and perhaps the spatula will break if it is thin.
As for the two veins in the temple, their benefit is for eye conditions from scabies, redness, ophthalmia, and facial diseases. As for how to cup them, it is that the patient tightens his neck with a turban, then you cup them while standing above his head, and let the cupping be on a slight bend lengthwise with a small spatula slightly wide.
For the place has no flesh, indeed if the spatula is thin at the end it may break, then you send as much blood as you need and put cotton on them and tighten them for one night, then loosen them. As for cupping the nose vein, it is beneficial for acute fever.
And for severe headaches, and for facial conditions such as the red lupus that appears on the nose, especially if it is chronic. The way to cup it is to have the patient tighten his neck, then hold his nose with your left hand and take a thin, long spatula.
You plunge it into the middle of the nose itself between the cartilage, on a straight line because the vein does not appear to the sense there; then the blood will emerge from it immediately. You should press your hand with the knife a little and draw from the blood what you need, then tie it for a night, for it will quickly become firm.
As for the veins in the testicles, their excision is beneficial for shortness of breath and the beginning of leprosy and black diseases that appear on the surface of the skin, such as black vitiligo, ringworm, and foul sores. The way to excise them is for the patient to be bound under them with a cord around his neck and for the practitioner to stand above the patient's head.
The patient sits on a chair, and then you cut the vein lengthwise, making a wide incision, then you draw from it a moderate amount of blood or according to what you see is needed. Then you do the same to the other vein, and then you untie the bandage.
You tie the veins moderately so that the patient does not choke, and leave them until the next day, for the wound will heal. As for the temporal veins, their excision is beneficial after cupping the head, as it is helpful against sores in the mouth, gum disease, foul ulcers, lip fissures, and foul sores.
Those that are in the nose and around it, and the way to excise them is for you to seat the patient in front of you and tie their neck with a turban then turn back their lips and look at the two veins, one of which you see on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, and identify them by their blackness.
And note that around them are thin, black veins, so you cut them off completely. If it is difficult for you and you do not know which ones they are, aim to cut the largest and most visible ones, and do the same with the two veins in the lower lip.
As for the veins under the tongue, it is beneficial to stop them after cupping the temples for the fistulas that occur in the throat from diseases of the mouth and jaw, and how to stop them is to have the patient sit before you facing the sun, raise their tongue, and look under the tongue on one side for a vein and on the other side for a vein, and their color tends towards black.
Cut them and preserve, do not dwell on cutting them, for beneath them are arteries; perhaps bleeding may occur from those arteries. As for the three veins that are cupped at the elbow, they are the ones commonly cupped in people, and cupping them is done in two ways.
Either by inserting a wide lancet or olive-shaped lancet into the vein, or by making an incision with a scalpel lancet, which is called a "neshl" [and this is its image], an image of the wide lancet.
It should be wide as you see so that it is suitable for opening the hollow, full, prominent, and thick veins that contain thick blood like tar, and this is an image of the olive-shaped lancet.
This lancet is narrower and has a thinner point, suitable for cupping thin veins that contain light yellowish blood, and this is an image of the neshl lancet.
This neshl is suitable for incision and comes in various widths and thicknesses according to the width and narrowness of the veins, and one can deduce this from others; it is well-known among craftsmen.
As for the basilica vein, which is one of these three veins, it is beneficial to cup it because it draws blood from the ailments that occur under the throat and neck, extending to the chest and abdomen. The phlebotomist should be cautious when cupping it and keep a watchful eye on the neck; for underneath it is an artery, and if they err and insert the lancet too deeply, they will cut that artery.
If bleeding occurs, the incision should not be made with a suturing knife but should be cut open with a lancet. If the ligature is not clearly visible, it should be avoided and another one sought or some of its parts requested.
Or you can incise the place of the brachial vein, for it is visible and cut it open with a lancet as we have said. If you wish to cut it exactly, you should feel the spot before tightening the arm so that you recognize the location of the pulse, then mark it with ink.
Then tie the arm and cut the vein, a slanting incision with a lancet as we have said, taking care that the stroke falls at a distance from the location of the artery. When you see, upon tightening the ligature, swelling in the spot that you marked with ink, then know that the swelling is the distension of the artery, so avoid it.
If you see the blood, when making the incision, pulsate like a boy's urine and it is thin and red, know that it is arterial blood. At that point, hasten to place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger; if the bleeding stops, which it often does, tighten the arm.
Leave it and warn the patient not to neglect it, let him keep his neck still and not move it for several days until he recovers. If the bleeding does not stop and overwhelms you and no medicine is available at that time, amputate the artery if it appears to you; its ends will contract and the bleeding will stop.
Or take a pistachio shell, split it and take one half and tie it tightly over the vein with a ligature and bandages until the next day. If the bleeding stops, well and good; otherwise, treat it as previously mentioned, using astringents to stop the bleeding. Cutting off its blood supply is not difficult in most cases.
Because the wound is small and the ligature in the arm is effective, inform him of this. As for the basilic vein, its incision is beneficial because it draws blood from the upper head and lower body since, as we have said, it is composed of a branch of the cephalic vein and a branch of the basilica vein.
And the one who is to be cauterized should be on the neck from which he is cauterized, for if there is a nerve beneath it, if the cautery needle penetrates further and reaches the nerve, numbness will occur in it, making its healing difficult, and it may not heal at all. This nerve often appears to the sense.
If it is hidden in some people and is thin and does not become apparent, you should make your incision for him a lengthwise cut with a knife and avoid the nerve as much as possible. If the vein is between two nerves, cut the vein lengthwise. As for the temporal vein, its benefit from being cauterized is that it draws blood from the head.
And it is beneficial for eye diseases, and in this vein especially, if you wish to cauterize it, it should be done with a puncture of the olive-shaped cautery or the wide, windpipe-shaped cautery because it is the safest of all veins because there is neither an artery nor a nerve beneath it.
However, when cauterizing, you must avoid the head of the muscle with the cautery and aim for the soft spot. It will not harm it if it is not hit in the first strike to repeat the cautery several times, unless it may swell in some people if it is not cauterized in the first strike.
But that swelling will not harm it at all. As for the manner of cauterization and its effects, and what should precede in its repair, first you must know that cauterization is either used for preserving health only.
Or it is used for diseases. The cauterization used for preserving health and maintaining it, and for protecting against the occurrence of diseases should be in one of the three veins at the elbow, namely the temporal, the ulnar, and the basilic, and the cauterization should be in early spring when signs of fullness appear.
And the cauterization should be on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours of daylight have passed. As for cauterization used for diseases, it does not have a limited time but can be done whenever necessary, day or night.
And at every hour and in every time, and it should not be cupped the boys until they reach fourteen years nor the elderly who have exceeded sixty years, so if someone intends to cup for any reason.
His intestines should be cleansed before cupping with a gentle enema if there is much retained filth so that it does not draw into the veins during cupping from the intestine, and bad odor harmful to the main organs, and one should not cup the fasting, intoxicated, or drunk until that passes from them.
And cupping should also be avoided after defecation, vomiting, and diarrhea and excessive intercourse, fatigue, exercise, sleeplessness, fasting, and everything that weakens a physical or mental matter; then you look at thinning the humors before that if the blood is thick.
With foods, drinks, and medications if possible; then he enters the bath unless something prevents him or practices some exercise to thin the blood and makes his cupping in the middle of the day as we said and aims to free his chest that day from all bad mental states.
Such as worries, anger, fear, and all bodily conditions such as excessive fatigue and sexual intercourse and the like; and his gathering place prepares things that people have been accustomed to using from various kinds of perfumes, incense, amusements and the like, each person according to what he can.
Then the cupper sits on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the person being cupped sits, then he takes out his arm and the cupper rubs it with his hand twice or three times; then he tightens the bandage with the leech holder and twists it twice or three times, let the tightness be moderate.
Because tightness, when it is not moderate, either prevents the flow of blood by excessive tightening or prevents the flow of blood by relaxation; then after tightening, the person being cupped should rub both his hands together with both palms.
Until the veins swell and become apparent to the touch, then one wipes the corrupt scalpel with a little of old oil, especially, and places the index finger of his left hand on the same vein below the place he wishes to cut slightly so that the vein does not retreat and avoid the blow. For some veins are like a chord, they retreat when cut, and some are full of air so that when the scalpel is placed upon them they sink beneath it and deceive the cutter, and he does not open the vein; and if he does open it, then it will only be a narrow opening.
Therefore it is necessary for the cutter to be sure and take his time in all these matters, then he lowers the scalpel; if the vein opens at that time, well and good; otherwise, he tries again a little below or above that place hastily, unless the place has become swollen.
But if there is swelling or the patient is frightened, leave him for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, for it may bring on a hot boil, and he should not enter the bath; then he may repeat the phlebotomy if he wishes. If the scalpel was inserted and the opening was small and the blood flowed thin...
And if you fear that the quantity of blood you desire will not come out, reinsert the scalpel into the same hole gently, keeping it straight, and widen the opening a little; do this quickly before the place swells, for in many people the place swells when the opening is small.
If you see it has swollen, do not work on it at all; it will not help you. Put some of the sediment from oil on it, for it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this place than oil itself or any other unguents.
Use the sediment from oil in all your phlebotomies of veins when the flow of blood is difficult; the "Faruq" remedy and the skhznaya may also do this, if one of them is placed on the place, for it will thin and dissolve the blood if it is thick.
If a large tumor occurs in the place of venesection, which often happens, especially to those who have never been bled or whose vein was opened only slightly, then quickly apply a sponge soaked in lukewarm water and salt to the tumor and bind it for an hour; it will dissolve.
This should be done after all the blood has exited from the vein itself or another vein. If some blackness or greenness remains in the place after several days, it does no harm. If you wish, apply something of patience and myrrh dissolved upon it.
Or something of the juice of fumitory and the like. Often a tumor and swelling occurs at the venesection of the basilica vein; place your hand upon it, and if it feels soft when you press it, then that swelling is benign. Be careful not to put anything of what we have mentioned on it.
For it may bleed arterially, but compress it with something constricting so that the area solidifies, and then treat it with all other remedies until it heals. It should be drawn from each person according to their strength and the predominant color of their blood.
If the blood is black, let it flow until it reddens; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it thins; and if it is sharp, let it flow until its sharpness subsides. One who is full and strong and needs to have a large amount of blood extracted at once
should have a wide venesection with a broad lancet; but the opposite is true for one who is weak. Blood should be extracted in stages, and the incision should be narrow. The best instrument to use for venesection is a sharp, well-honed, split lancet, not a puncturing one.
This type of venesection is safe from hemorrhage and severing nerves; it is better and safer than venesection by cross-section or length. One who is accustomed to fainting during venesection should be given, before the venesection, some bread soaked in pomegranate water or syrup of vinegar.
If he is melancholic and blood has been let from him three or four times, and his temperament is cold, let him take before phlebotomy bread soaked in the syrup of violets, or in the syrup of honey sweetened with roses, or in fragrant rose water.
If syncope occurs during phlebotomy and is due to the loss of much blood, he should be given broth and thin rose water to drink, and aromatic treatments with ambergris should be used; his chest should be rubbed with it. He should also use all that we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope in the section on divisions.
For him who wants to ease his arm and loosen his blood again, it is necessary for one whose phlebotomy resulted in much vomiting and who is weak, that the blood be let a little at a time, according to his strength, on consecutive days.
And for him who wants to ease his arm and loosen his blood again, and whose body is strong, let him do so after seven or nine hours from his first phlebotomy. And for him who wishes to draw the blood from his body to the opposite side to which it has inclined, he should be cupped on the second or third day.
And for him in whom there is much blood, which has become hot and inflamed, and has caused fever, all the blood should be let out at once, a large quantity should be extracted, and the incision should be widened until syncope occurs, after you have ascertained that all the conditions for phlebotomy are met. And place your hand on his pulse while the blood is flowing so that death does not occur in syncope; for this often happens if the phlebotomist is ignorant and neglectful. And it should not be done if you wish to loosen the arm and the blood again.
If the mouth of the vein has become closed and it is difficult for the blood to flow, do not press or twist hard, for that is very bad indeed. Either leave him until he can be phlebotomized again, or remove with a scalpel blade what has coagulated in the mouth of the vein.
Or apply to it something of salt that has been dissolved in water, or apply to it something of the electuary faruq or shakzanaya, and compress it gently until the blood comes out, if the vein had become swollen leave it.
And do not touch it until the swelling subsides, if necessity calls for releasing the blood again it is obligatory to do so, either by making an incision above that place or by making an incision in the other arm or in another vein.
As for bleeding the arm's tendon, it is bled instead of the radial and ulnar arteries if they are not found or are concealed because it is composed of them, and the way to bleed it is for the patient to immerse their hand in hot water until the sinew reddens and the vein appears clearly then tie a bandage above it with moderate tightness.
Then bleed the vein slightly askew, neither in width nor length, and let the opening be wide, and make your incision a little above the wrist joint, if the blood does not flow, return the hand to the bowl of hot water and let the blood flow into the water.
Until you reach your need, if it is summertime you may dispense with returning the hand to the hot water, and what makes blood flow into the hot water most in wintertime, and bleeding this vein is safer than all other veins. Because there is no artery or nerve beneath it, and as for bleeding the basilica vein from the right hand, it is beneficial for liver ailments, and the way to bleed it is to tie the wrist with a bandage or with your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells.
Because there is no artery or nerve beneath it, and as for bleeding the basilica vein from the right hand, it is beneficial for liver ailments, and the way to bleed it is to tie the wrist with a bandage or with your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells. And it becomes very apparent to the touch, then bleed it slightly askew, and even if you cut it completely it will not harm it, but be careful not to insert your hand deeply with the lancet because there is a finger nerve underneath, and the spot is bare of flesh, then return the hand to the hot water.
And leave it so that the blood flows through it. If you do not put it in hot water, the blood will congeal in the mouth of the vein and cease to flow. And when you have drawn out as much blood as is needed, apply ointment and salt to the vein so that it does not heal quickly.
And the same should be done with every narrow vein. As for the benefit of cutting it from the left hand, it is beneficial for splenic diseases and you do the same in cutting it as you did in the second vein. As for cutting the saphenous vein, its benefit is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as uterine diseases.
And retention of menstruation, kidney diseases, chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs, and other such diseases. And the way to cut it is for him to put his foot in hot water and rub it until the veins become prominent then tie above the ankle joint with a ligature and the vein is located at the heel visible towards the big toe.
And many branches diverge from it on the face of the leg, so cut it in the widest branch or at the heel where it joins, for this is better and safer. If you cut it on the face of the leg, be careful of the nerves underneath.
Make your cut with a slant as if you were amputating it, and the lancet should be sharp. If the blood does not flow freely, put his leg in hot water and let the blood flow through it until it is emptied. If the phlebotomist misses the vein at first.
Let him make the incision a little higher, for the location is safe and there is no danger to be feared if you are careful of the nerve as we have said. The same applies to the saphenous vein on the other leg. As for the vein of Venus, its location is as we have said, at the heel on the outer side.
And the benefit of cutting it is for pain in the hip if this is caused by hot blood. To cut it, have the patient enter a bath and quickly bind his leg from the hip to just above the heel with a thin long bandage.  For it will not be visible except in this way.
If it appears, excise it in any state that keeps you. Either distort it which is better or amputate it or make an incision upon it if its place is sound and in most people it is very slight indeed. If you do not find it...
If it does not appear to the senses at all, excise some of it, which appears on the back of the foot toward the little toe and next to it, preserve the nerves and send away as much blood as you desire.
Then relieve the tension and place cotton on the excision site and bind the area, for it will quickly heal.
Chapter Ninety-Sixth.
On Cupping and How to Use It.
Cupping instruments may be of horns, wood, copper or glass. Cupping is done in two ways: one with a condition and the extraction of blood, the other without a condition.
And this cupping without a condition is done in two ways.
And the cupping of the shoulders, and the cupping of the coccyx which is on the back of the tailbone, and the cupping of the arms which are in the middle of the arms, and the cupping of the legs, and the cupping of the armpits.
Cupping draws blood from the fine, scattered veins in the flesh. For this reason, it does not diminish strength like excision does and should not be used with fire or without fire for any diseases that are characterized by fullness until the body has been emptied completely.
If cupping is required by illness or custom, we employ it at all times, at the beginning of the month, at the end, and in the middle, and at any time.
This is because some people, when they have an excess of blood that needs to be removed by cupping, experience heaviness and headache in their head. Others experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. Still others experience itching on their face and sides, and darkness and swelling around their eyes. Some also experience itching where the cupping is applied.
Some laugh excessively, while others experience a taste of blood in their mouth and bleeding gums. They may spit up blood. Some sleep more, and some see blood, redness, slaughter, and wounds in their dreams, and similar things. Whenever we see something like that...
Especially if it occurs in the middle third of the month, we order cupping after two or three hours have passed. As for the benefits of point cupping, it is effective against heaviness in the head and water accumulating in the eyes.
But this should only be done after the whole body has been purged. This cupping can serve as a substitute for cephalic phlebotomy.  It is cautioned against for those with a cold brain or a cold, as it will greatly harm them.
Therefore, it should not be used by the elderly or those with cold conditions in their heads, nor by those who are addicted to it, as it can lead to forgetfulness.
Therefore, you should instruct the cupper to lower their hand with the cup slightly downwards to avoid inducing forgetfulness. As for shoulder cupping, it is a substitute for phlebotomy of the ulnar artery and the basilic vein.
Therefore, it is effective against asthma, shortness of breath, headache from the respiratory system, coughing, and fullness. Shoulder cupping should be raised slightly because if it is done lower, it can cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for cupping the temples, it is beneficial for headaches occurring in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, angina, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is a substitute for phlebotomy from the basilica vein. The barber should be ordered not to deepen his hand with the cup so as not to cut an artery and cause bleeding.
As for cupping under the chin, it is beneficial for ulcers in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and other diseases that occur in the mouth, and it may replace phlebotomy from the jugular veins in the lips. As for cupping the shoulders, it is beneficial for palpitation caused by fullness and heat.
As for cupping the abdomen, it is beneficial for what phlebotomy of the three veins, the basilic, the cephalic, and the median cubital, is beneficial for because it draws blood from all those thin veins that are in the flesh and draws those thin veins from other thicker ones so that the attraction reaches the three thick veins.
The barber should be ordered not to deepen the cup because the place is bare of flesh and beneath it are nerves and arteries. As for a single cupping applied to the coccyx, it is beneficial for hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers below.
The barber should be ordered that the cup be large and made of copper because the place needs strong suction, and a glass cup may break and it is necessary to apply many cups. As for cupping the legs, it reduces fullness noticeably.
Because it draws blood from the entire body and is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder; it brings on menstruation; it is beneficial for pimples and boils; and it replaces phlebotomy from the cephalic and basilic veins, except that it weakens the body greatly and fainting occurs in most people. Cupping the brachial veins has benefits similar to those of cupping the legs.
How to Apply Cupping: First, place the empty cupping glass and apply moderate suction. Do not leave the cup in place for too long, but rather place it quickly and remove it quickly so that the humors are drawn evenly to the area. Repeat this process until you see the area become red and open.
Redness of the blood then appears. At that point, you should make an incision and gradually resume suction. Then look at the constitution of the person; if they have soft flesh with loose pores, you should only make one incision so as not to cause ulceration.
Tell the barber to widen and slightly deepen the incision, and adjust the suction gently with a light motion. If the blood is thick, two incisions should be made; the first to open a path for the thin blood and its watery part, and the second to thoroughly extract the thick blood.
If the blood is very murky, repeat the incision a third time to achieve the goal. In general, if we want to extract a small amount of blood, one incision is sufficient. If we want to extract a large amount of blood, we make more incisions. And if we consider the blood to be thick...
the incision should be deep. The moderate limit for an incision is the depth of the skin only. What should not be used when applying cupping are ointments, water, and what the phlebotomist should avoid. As for someone who has thick, hard, dry skin with tight pores...
...the areas where the cupping glasses are to be placed should be softened with opening and dissolving ointments.  As for during the summer season, ointments such as good quality oil, violet oil, sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil may be used.
As for during the winter, ointments such as narcissus oil, lily of the valley oil, chamomile oil, hyacinth oil, and similar ones may be used. If the humor is thick and cold, the ointment should be one like that of marjoram, or henbane, or bean, or wild rue, and the like.
If the person who is being cupped has wide pores, the flesh should be pinched. Fat should be avoided for these people. They should wash their cupping sites with rose water, or cold water, or fox grape water, or pumpkin water, or rue water, and similar things. As for those whose blood is very moist.
They should wash their cupping sites with vinegar or water mixed with asafetida and sumac, and similar things. As for those whose superfluities are thick, they should wash their cupping sites with old wine or marjoram water or a decoction of bugloss or chamomile, and similar things. Cupping should be avoided in the bath and after the bath.
Rather, it should be used an hour or two after leaving the bath. No one should sleep after cupping. What the person being cupped and the cupper should do before and after cupping.
First, you should look to see if the person being cupped or the cupper is bilious and their blood is mostly sharp and inflamed. They should take coolants such as pomegranate, dandelion with vinegar, lettuce, syrup of vinegar, quince, and similar things. Their food should be chicken, lamb meat in stews, and similar things.
Whoever has a cold temperament should be given honey drink, or myrrh syrup, or vinegar syrup with raisins. They should take fragrant medium wine, which is between old and new wine. They should be ordered to eat little food and their food should be chicken, doves, sparrows, and young pigeons. Drinks on the day of cupping and bloodletting should be more than food.
Sometimes, some people should be given the Farooq antidote, musk medicine, or chamomile before cupping and bloodletting, or after it to strengthen the primary organs and thin the blood. It should not be given to pregnant women.
As for the lancets that are placed without a ligature, they are those that are placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, perineum, and the location of the kidneys and the right hip because these organs cannot tolerate a ligature, but rather the aim is to draw blood from one organ to another.
When we place the lancet on the breasts for a case of hiccups or use it to relieve the organ from cold flatulence that has become lodged in the organ, such as when we place the lancet on the abdomen and perineum, it loosens the organ and heats it up, removing pain by dissolving the flatulence.
It can also be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stone, and with strong suction, it may open the blockage or remove the stone from its place. Similarly, it does this when placed on the liver and spleen in cases of flatulence that disturbs them. These lancets may also be used empty by suction alone.
It may also be used with fire, or filled with lukewarm water in cases of colic. The lancet should be filled, preferably a large one, with hot water alone, or with water in which some herbs suitable for this purpose have been cooked.
Then it is placed full on the spot, held there, and removed, and repeated as many times as needed. This is an image of the lancet used with fire:
Its mouth is the width of two fingers open as depicted, and its depth is half a palm's breadth. There is a small hole on its side, about halfway along its length, large enough for a needle to enter. It is made of Chinese copper or yellow copper with a thick rim.
It is smooth and flat, polished so that it does not hurt the organ when placed upon it. In its center there is a transverse groove made of copper or iron where the candle is placed for the fire. This lancet may be made larger or smaller than described depending on the illnesses.
And if we are going to use it, then the forceps of boys and slender men are not the same as those for adult men, and as for how this forceps is put on fire on the member, it is that you put a wick on fire from firm cotton or a small candle from pitch and place it on the middle of the rigid rod which is in the middle of the forceps.
So that the fire ascends upwards toward the bottom of the forceps so that the patient's body does not burn, then it is placed on the member and the finger is put on the hole that we mentioned until when we hold the forceps as we need, the finger is removed.
And the vapor emerges from that hole and the forceps dissolves in its place, then the wick is put back on the way it was and it is repeated if needed, as for the forceps which is used in the disease of fistula with water, there is no rigid rod nor a hole in it.
And it is only used by being filled with water and placed on the member only, and this is its image:
And the larger this forceps is, the more water it can hold, the better it is.
Chapter Seventy-Nine.
On the Cauterization of Warts.
Cauterization is used most often in members where forceps cannot be placed, either because they are small, such as the lip and gums, or because the member is bare of flesh, such as the finger and nose.
And the way to use it is to take leeches from fresh, clean water from streams, then leave them for a day and night in freshwater until they are hungry and there is nothing left in their stomachs. Then the body is first evacuated by cupping or phlebotomy, then the affected member is wiped.
Until it reddens, then a leech is placed on it and when it becomes full, it falls off. If the area can be sucked by forceps, it is more beneficial. Otherwise, wash the area with vinegar, then with plenty of water, rub and squeeze it. If bleeding continues after the leech falls off and this is a discharge, soak a linen cloth in cold water.
And you place it from above until the hemorrhage stops; if the blood is profuse, sprinkle powdered alum or litharge or something similar of astringents upon it until the bleeding stops or half a pared quince is placed upon the spot.
Leave it until the quince adheres to the spot, for the blood will then stop. If it is necessary to repeat the ligature, do not use that ligature again if possible. If the ligature refuses to adhere, smear the spot with fresh blood.
Or insert a needle into the spot until some blood comes out, then apply it; for if it feels any blood, it will adhere to the place. And if you wish it to fall off, sprinkle some patience or salt or ashes upon it, for it will then fall off.
Chapter Three.
On Setting Bones.
This chapter also deals with what is necessary in the practice of medicine, namely, setting bones and reducing dislocations that occur in them.
Know, my sons, that this chapter may be claimed by ignorant physicians and laymen, those who have never browsed among the ancients or read a single letter from their books.
Because of this, this art in our country has become nonexistent and I have never encountered anyone who was truly proficient in it. I have gained what knowledge I possess from it through my extensive reading of the works of the ancients and my persistence in understanding them until I extracted the science from them, then I adhered to experience and practice throughout my life.
I have depicted for you in this chapter everything that my knowledge encompasses concerning this subject. And after bringing it closer to you, I refined it and freed it from the branches of prolixity, summarizing it to the utmost and explaining it with ultimate clarity. I have also presented for you numerous illustrations of instruments used in this practice.
If it is for further explanation, as I have done in the preceding two chapters, and there is no power except by Allah, the Most High, the Great.
The First Chapter.
It contains fine points and summaries concerning the matter of broken bones that must be presented before we begin mentioning the broken and dislocated members one by one, it is necessary to mention in the introduction to this chapter some general statements and sections. You are first compelled to understand them and grasp their truth, both you and anyone else who is eager to learn this honorable craft.
So I say, that whenever one suffers a fracture or dislocation or sprain or fall, you should hasten first to reduce it or immobilize it, or both. Unless something prevents it, such as weakness of strength, or the one who suffered this was a child or an old man, decrepit with age, or the time was extremely hot or very cold indeed.
Then he should restrict his diet to cold legumes, poultry meat, and fresh game, and avoid drinks and thick meats, overeating, and any food that fills the veins with blood, until the swelling subsides and there is no expectation of fluid accumulating at the site.
Then, let the patient return to his initial treatment as he is accustomed, and if the broken bone becomes stuck during reduction, the patient should eat nourishing foods that are thick and rich, such as barley porridge, rice pudding, heads of livestock (sheep's or oxen's heads), and beef tripe. Eggs, fresh fish, thick drinks, and the like are also recommended. For with this treatment, the fracture will heal faster and better. Know that broken bones in strong men and old people can never completely reunite and fuse to their original state.
Because of the dryness and rigidity of their bones. What may fuse are only those bones that were extremely soft, like the bones of young boys. But nature grows upon a broken bone from all sides something resembling glue, which is thick, clings to it, and binds it so tightly that the fragments adhere to one another.
And he connects them together until they come in the utmost strength and firmness as they were at first, so that nothing hinders him from his actions.
For this reason, it is necessary that the patient's food be those foods that have tenacity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.  Know that fracture may differ in its types according to the difference of the members, for a fracture of the leg bone is different from a fracture of the head bone, and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the back bone.
Likewise, all the other members are different from each other. We will come to mention each type of fracture explained in its chapter in detail separately. A type of bone fracture may also differ in itself.
Because it may be a fracture by crushing without splintering, or a fracture along the length of the bone with splinters and excrescences, both detached and attached. The fracture may occur with a wound and rupture in the skin, or the fracture may be a slight crack.
Each type has a particular method for healing, as will be mentioned in detail in its place.  What distinguishes a bone fracture is its crookedness, swelling, and tenderness, and its crepitation when you pinch it with your hand.
So when there is no apparent crookedness in the place, no crepitation, and no tenderness when you touch the bone with disturbance, and the patient does not experience much pain, then there is no fracture. It could be a sprain or a slight crack. It should not be moved by stretching and pinching at all.
Rather, apply the medications that will be mentioned later to the appropriate location, and then bind it with a gentle compression. Know that if the bone breaks and splits into two without splintering, each part is separated from its counterpart.
You should hasten to straighten and align it as soon as possible before a hot swelling occurs. If a hot swelling occurs, leave it for several days until the swelling subsides, then straighten it in any gentle and skillful way you can.
Know that setting and straightening it is easier than a bone in which fragments have occurred, then tighten on what will be mentioned later. If the bone has fragments, the fractured limb must be extended from both sides, whether it is a hand or a foot.
Either with your hands if the limb is small, or with cords, or with both cord and hand. Let the position of the limb be on a level surface in its natural shape so that when the broken bone fragments are extended, then cut off those excesses and return them to their places by all means possible with skill and gentleness.
Strive your utmost to not cause the patient pain or discomfort with your actions, and make every effort to join one bone to the other in the best position. At that time you should touch and feel them with your hand, for if you see something amiss, correct and straighten it to the best of your ability.
Beware of excessive extension and forceful manipulation as many ignoramuses do, for they often cause a hot swelling or inflammation in the limb as I have witnessed many times from their actions.
Then, after the setting, perfection and tightening, confine that limb to rest and tranquility. Warn the patient not to move it while awake or asleep, when turning and restless, when defecating, and in all his movements as far as possible, and let him seek a position for the limb where pain is avoided.
And this is so that whenever he feels pain or discomfort in the position of the limb, let him move it to a different position where he does not feel pain, while still ensuring that his new position is level and straight.
So that the limb does not become crooked when it heals. As for how to splint a broken limb, I will describe it to you. Know that broken limbs differ in size and shape; those that are small, such as the arm, finger, forearm, and so on
The bandages should be of fine, soft linen. The thicker ones, such as those for the thigh, back and chest, should be wide and firm because the broad ligament binds a large limb and draws it together evenly from all sides without any displacement.
Then, after you have finished setting, you apply the appropriate paint. Place a soft pad over the fracture site and then begin to wrap the bandage around the fracture itself three or four times, depending on what the limb requires, tightening your hand slightly with each wrap. Then, take it up to the upper part of the fracture site.
Tighten it less than you did at the fracture site, then space the wrap a bit away from the fracture and loosen the tension slightly until you get something suitable from the correct position, then take another bandage and wrap it over the fracture site as well.
Make several more wraps, then take the wrap down to the lower part of the fracture. Do as you did with the first upper wrap in terms of tightening and loosening. Then place soft padding or cloths between the wrappings to correct the angulation of the fracture.
If there is angulation, do so; otherwise, put nothing in it. Then wrap another bandage over it and apply firm splints on top of these bandages, unless there is swelling or hot inflammation in the limb.
If there is swelling or hot inflammation, apply something to soothe it and reduce the swelling. Leave it for a few days, then tighten the splints. The splints should be made of wide, carefully carved reed halves or from ravenwood.
They can be made of pine, palm leaves, tamarisk, or similar materials that are available. Each splint should be this width and shape exactly.
Unless the splint applied to the fracture itself is thicker and slightly wider than the other splints, as for the length of the splint, it should be made according to what suits the size of the broken limb.  Image of a splint:
Then tighten the splints with another bandage according to your initial tightness, then tie firmly from above with threads as we have mentioned regarding the tension, which is that your tension should be greater at the site of the fracture. And the farther away from the fracture, the less the tension.
The threads should be medium in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of damp linen, especially since if the threads are thick as I have seen done by ignorant people who make their threads from woven linen strips, it is a great mistake.
Because the tension with them will be excessive, and fine threads are also unsuitable because you will not achieve the desired tension with them, and there should not be less than the width of a finger between each splint.
If the patient feels pain from the ends of the splints after tightening them in the correct places, put soft padding or puffed wool underneath so that it does not cause him any harm. As for if the fracture is with a wound and there is a rupture in the skin, we will discuss it separately.
Know that not every broken limb should be immobilized with splints from the first day, for if the limb is large, splints should not be applied to it until five, seven, or more days have passed, depending on your confidence in avoiding a hot swelling.
This is a description of the bandages that were used by those who came before to bind fractures, dislocations, and sprains. A general bandage, briefly described: it binds fractures and is suitable for most temperaments, especially for boys and women because it is not excessively hot or cold.
Take some dust from the millstone, which is the bran that clings to the walls of the mill during grinding, and knead it as is, without sifting it, with the white of an egg. Make the dough neither too thick nor too thin, then apply it.
A plaster for setting fractures, dislocations, and sprains: Take ten dirhams of each of the following: mastich, frankincense, acacia, rue, and magnesia; five dirhams of each of mirrh and patience; twenty dirhams of marshmallow; and twenty dirhams of Armenian or Roman clay. Pound all the ingredients together and mix with marshmallow water or egg white if the patient's constitution is hot. Apply this plaster, for it unites well and sets broken bones quickly. It is suitable for most people due to its temperate nature.
Another plaster, also beneficial for fractures and sprains: Take ten dirhams of each of magnesia, mastich, and white henna; five dirhams of each of myrrh and patience; six dirhams of acacia; and twenty dirhams of Armenian clay. Pound all ingredients finely, sift them, and knead with water or egg white. Apply the plaster.
A plaster for joints and bones that have slipped out of place, which relieves the accompanying pain, bone headache, and fractures: Take purified wool, soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area. This plaster does not have bone-setting power.
However, it is excellent for relieving hot swelling and expelling pain, especially. Another plaster for setting broken bones: Take the leaves of wild fig and poppy, pound them all together, and apply them while damp. A shorter plaster recipe used when a bone has been set.
If you want to analyze the remaining swelling, take from the root of henna, chamomile, nard, and caraway flour a part of each; pound them all together and knead with mastic if the member is not inflamed. If it is inflamed, knead it with coriander water or plain water and apply it.
Description of another plaster stronger in resolution than the first, used when a hard tumor occurs at bone union, take from the root of marshmallow and flaxseed and fenugreek and rosemary and marjoram and violet and chamomile, one part from each.
Everything is pounded and kneaded with water of barley or with fresh water or with gum, all that according to the heat of the member and its tranquility, but Hippocrates did not mention in his book to put it on the broken member when setting it.
Except for the plaster of Quiret, made from wax and oil only, and it is described to be moderate between thickness and thinness, but Galen saw that things with hollows should be placed on the broken member when setting it, with some heat such as myrrh and patience and frankincense and what we have mentioned.
Description of a plaster beneficial for weakness and pain, take equal parts of mastic and roasted sesame seeds and human hair from a barren person or bird feathers and marshmallow and salt, pound it, sift it, knead it, and bandage with it, and as for the amount that should remain on the ligament.
Then it dissolves, so look and see if the patient does not experience pain or itching or movement of the broken bone from its place, then do not dissolve it for many days, but if there is severe itching or disturbing pain or swelling in the place.
Then hasten to dissolve it at the time and do not delay it at all, and remove the plaster from it, then take a soft cloth or a marine sponge moistened with lukewarm water and wash the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain is relieved, then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Then apply wool softened in vinegar and oil or rose ointment to it and tie it on for a night until you are safe from the hot tumor, and relieve the swelling of the limb and its pain goes away, then return it to gentle tension and light plastering, and do not tighten it as your first tightening.
And dress it until it is healed. If you see that the swelling, redness, pain, and distension and all the symptoms have gone entirely and require a dressing and binding, prepare it as you did originally, whether or not anything of what we mentioned occurred in the limb.
Do not loosen it except after three, four, five, or seven days, or even twenty days, all of this depending on what appears to you from the condition of the limb as we said, until if breaking is necessary and the flesh is about to knit together.
Also increase the binding at that time more than your initial binding altogether and also increase the strictness of the patient's diet as previously mentioned. If you see that the place of the fracture has become dry and loose more than is necessary, know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it.
So wash it with lukewarm water each time you loosen it, and let this be every three days, and slightly reduce the binding. For by doing this, nourishment will flow to the limb and it will heal quickly. As for what ignorant binders do by breaking the limb again...
If it was not first bound as it should be and is bound crookedly, this is a mistake on their part and a great deception. If it were correct, the ancients would have mentioned it in their books and acted accordingly, and you would not have seen any trace of it from any of them. And the right thing is not to do it.
Chapter Two.
On Accidental Fracture in the Head.
There are many types of accidental fracture in the head, with various shapes and ingeniously diverse causes. Some fractures may result from a sword blow, either completely splitting the bone until it reaches the dura mater beneath the bone ... just as a chisel splits wood.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called chiseling. Or the sword may cut a portion of the bone and only split its surface, without penetrating to the end, and this type is called a complete avulsion. The wounds from these two types of fractures can be either large or small.
And of fracture there is that which is a bruise or a fissure, and its cause is a blow with a stone or a fall upon a stone or the like. This fracture is either penetrating, having nearly reached the membrane beneath the bone, or it is in the face of the bone.
And the wound of these two fractures is also either large or small, and there are fractures that are concealed in the bone at a hair's breadth, which is a slight crack.
That is why this type of fracture is called hairy, and there are fractures that occur from a fall or a blow with a stone or the like that enter the surface of the bone inward and cause the place to become concave, as happens to copper when it is struck, a portion of it entering inward.
And this is most common in the moist head bone, such as the skulls of boys. All these types of fractures may have fragments that are loose and those that are not, and we will mention the treatment of all of them in their proper place. We recognize all these types of fractures by examining them.
And by probing them and removing the corrupt flesh from them. As for the hairy type, it is recognized by exposing the bone, touching it, and smearing it with ink; the fracture will appear black. As for the treatment of a fracture, you first look at the symptoms of the patient.
If you see in his symptoms a clear indication of fear, such as vomiting bile, stretching, loss of mind, cessation of voice, fainting, and a sharp fever, redness and twitching of the eyes, and other such symptoms, then do not approach the patient or treat him, for death is upon him with these symptoms in most cases inevitably.
And if you see symptoms that do not frighten you and hope for his safety, then take him into treatment; because if the wounded person comes to you soon after being injured, and this was during the winter days...
It is necessary to make every effort to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case, and if it is during the summer days, you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest what is under the bone of the membrane be corrupted, and thus expose those symptoms that we have described.
If the fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain and there was a comminuted fracture, then you should cut away the crushed part as I will describe to you, which is to shave the head of the wounded patient.
Expose the bone in any way that is possible for you, depending on the shape of the wound and what appears to be best for the patient. If upon exposure of the bone, you encounter bleeding or a hot swelling, then treat it accordingly.
This is done by stuffing the area with cloths soaked in rose water and ointment, cleaning the wound until the swelling subsides and bleeding stops. Then proceed to grind and extract the bone, which can be done in one of two ways.
As for the first method, it is to cut the bone with a delicate, narrow blade. Here's an illustration:
Then you use another cutter after this one, slightly wider, and here's its image:
Then use another cutter, also wider than the second one. You should have several cutters of different widths and lengths, all with extremely sharp ends, made of good Indian iron or steel.
Use gentleness when striking the cutter so as not to shake the head and cause him pain. If the bone is strong and hard, you should drill around it before using the cutters with non-piercing drills, which are called that because they are not deep-piercing.
This is because they do not exceed the limit of the skull bone and go beyond it. The drill has a circular shape below its sharp head, resembling a collar or small circle, which prevents it from diving and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
You should make many of these drills, each one suitable for the thickness of that bone so that you have for each skull a pierced point, in length and shortness, according to the thickness of that skull. This is an illustration of three types. Of drills large, medium and small:
As for how to drill around a fractured bone, it is that you place the drill on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated then move the drill to another location and make the distance between each hole the thickness of a knitting needle or thereabouts.
Then cut with the saw between each two holes and do this as gently as you can, as we said, until you remove the bone either with your hand or with something else from some of the tools prepared for that.
Such as forceps and fine tongs, and you should be very careful that the drill or saw touches nothing of the peritoneum, and if you crushed the bone and it is separated from the peritoneum, and you take it out, then it should be cleaned.
And smooth the roughness that remains in the bone with another instrument resembling a saw, but it should be thinner and finer than all other saws, if there are any small bones or fragments left, take them gently with the tools you have.
Then treat the wound afterwards with bandages and ointments which will be mentioned, and the other side of this work is a very easy side far from danger, its mention by Galen and his great praise for it.  This is what he said. You should first begin by exposing a part of the bone from the place where the fracture is most severe and prominent so that when you expose that part, you place the end of this lenticular saw underneath it. This is its illustration:
The lenticular part of it should be smooth so that it does not cut anything, and the sharp part of it is on its sides extending in length as you see, so that the lenticular part rests on the peritoneum and the sharp face of the saw is on the bone, then strike the saw from one side.
With a small hammer, until you cut all the bone gently as it rotates and you are safe from the membrane so that nothing frightening happens at all, even if the healer is the most ignorant and cowardly of people, yes, even if he were sleepy.
If anything of the membrane remains adhering to the bone in some places, scrape it off with the tip of the lens cutter itself and free it gently, for it will come away without harm or fear.
But if the fracture of the bone has not extended to the membrane and what has broken off from the bone has a rough surface and fine splinters, then you should remove that roughness and those splinters with fine scrapers of which several have been made in various sizes so that you can use the one most suitable and best for each place according to what your work dictates.
And with the same broken bone and its shape, you should use in your scraping first the widest of those scrapers, then use a narrower one afterward, and continue to do that in sequence until you come to using the narrowest and thinnest of them all.
As for all the small, hair-like fissures and fine fractures, treatment appropriate to each one should be used according to what leads to its healing, which is something that does not escape those who have even the slightest training in this craft and have studied what we have written and explained about major fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed after you have removed the bone, you should take a linen cloth the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound, then take another cloth folded in half or into a triangle. Soak it in syrup and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth, making sure to do this as lightly as possible so as not to weigh down the peritoneum, then use a wide bandage over it and only tighten it enough to hold the wound together.
Leave it with this treatment for a day or two until the hot swelling is secure, then dissolve it and afterwards use medicines which have a drying effect, such as the root of marshmallow, caraway seed powder, candy root powder and zedoary, and so on. Make a poultice from these medicines.
Spread it on the wound as is, dry. In general, use a medicine that cleanses without stinging. Strive to keep the wound clean at all times during treatment, free from oily residues, dirt, and do not allow pus to collect in it at all.
For pus, if it collects on the membrane of the brain, will corrupt and spoil it, and as a result of this the patient will suffer greatly. It may also occur in the periosteum of the head when the bone is exposed, especially if its treatment is neglected.
If you see blackness on its surface and the patient shows the symptoms we have mentioned, know that he is inevitably lost. If the blackness occurred due to a medicine applied to it, and if the strength of that medicine was such as to cause it.
You should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, beat them well together, and soak a cloth in the mixture. Then place it on the periosteum and treat it with the types of treatment that are appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter Three.
On setting a broken nose.
Know that the only part of the nose that can break is its upper segment, either both or one, for they are bone. The lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, but may suffer bruising, bending, or displacement.
If one of its segments breaks, you should insert your little finger into the nostril and straighten the fracture from within with your index finger and thumb on the outside until the nose is returned to its natural shape. Do this gently and carefully so as not to cause pain to the patient.
If the fracture is at the top of the nose and no finger has been injured, it should be straightened with the end of a probe slightly thickened. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same. He should hasten to set it on the first day after the fracture.
If possible, otherwise after the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling subsides, then insert a wick of linen cloth into the nostril hole if the fracture is on one side, or insert two wicks if the fracture is on both sides.
Let the wick be thick enough to fill the nostril hole, and some of the early setters mentioned that the wick should be soaked in butter and changed every day. I do not see this, but it should be soaked in egg white mixed with mill dust.
Then leave the wick until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens, and goose feather tubes may be inserted into the nostril in place of the wick after they are wrapped with soft linen; this will hold the broken nose more firmly, so that the patient does not refrain from breathing.
This is not necessary if you wish to do it, and if you wish to make wicks. If swelling occurs in the nose during your work, bandage the nose with cotton or with cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or something from the Diachylon plaster.
If hot swelling does not occur, it should be bandaged from the outside with fine semolina flour and finely ground benzoin mixed with egg white; then put a soft bandage on top, and do not tie the nose with anything at all. If the nasal bones have fractured into small pieces.
Or if they have shattered, it is necessary to make an incision on them and remove them with the instrument suitable for this, then stitch the incision and treat it with ointments that promote healing and closure. If a wound occurs inside the nose, it should be treated with a wick and lead tubes should be used. Until it is healed.
Chapter Four.
In the setting of a lower jaw fracture.
If the lower jaw is fractured and there is no wound, then if the fracture is only external and has not broken into two pieces and fallen inward, it will be easy to recognize.
If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left side, insert the index finger of your right hand and gently raise the bump of the fracture from the inside to the outside.
With your other hand, from outside the bone, guide it into alignment. If the jaw fracture has split into two pieces, a spreader should be used on both sides to straighten it so that you can align it. If it happened in the teeth, they will become loose.
Or they separate, so tighten any that you hope to keep with gold, silver, or silk thread; then place a plaster cast on the fractured jaw, and on top of it a folded cloth, and on the cloth a large, tight splint or a piece of shoe leather equal in length to the jaw. Then tie it from above according to what is available and suitable for fastening so that it does not loosen, and order the patient to be quiet and still; and make his food soft porridges. If you think that something has changed in the shape of his face on any side, hasten to correct it on the third day.
Then tie it from above according to what is available and suitable for fastening so that it does not loosen, and order the patient to be quiet and still; and make his food soft porridges. If you think that something has changed in the shape of his face on any side, hasten to correct it on the third day. Then fix what you bandaged with rye flour mixed with egg white or semolina after removing the plaster from it and apply a soft bandage over the dressing. As long as that bandage sticks to it and the bone condition does not change, leave it.
Do not remove it until it is healed and the fracture is strong, as this fracture often becomes strong in three weeks. If there is a hot swelling during this period, use what we have mentioned many times to relieve it until that swelling subsides.
If the fracture is with a wound, and if it has been freed from bone fragments, whether single or multiple, proceed delicately to extract those fragments using an instrument suited for their removal. If the wound opening is narrow, widen it with a scalpel as needed.
Then, if you have extracted all the fragments, suture the wound opening if it is wide; otherwise, apply one of the dressings suitable for that purpose. Stitch the wound until it heals.
Chapter Five.
On Setting a Broken Clavicle.
The clavicle most often breaks in front of the end near the shoulder, and the fracture can occur in one of three ways: either it breaks and splits into two without any fragmentation, which is the easiest to set;
or fragmentation occurs in the fracture, which is more difficult to set; or the fracture may be accompanied by a wound. If the fracture is without a wound, have two assistants hold the arm next to the broken clavicle, one supporting the arm and the other extending the neck toward the opposite side.
Then, straighten the fracture with your fingers until it assumes its proper shape and there are no bumps or irregularities. If you need to extend it further, place a ball of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit.
The ball will provide the necessary elevation and extension, allowing you to raise the clavicle and press it into proper alignment. If you are unable to draw the end of the clavicle outwards because it has sunk deep, the patient should lie on their back.
Place a medium-sized pillow under their elbow, and have the assistant press down on their elbow so that the deep clavicle bone rises upward. Then, correct and align the fracture with your fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the clavicle has been broken and is moving, it should be incised upon and that fragment carefully extracted. If the fragment is lodged in the bone, endeavor to cut it with one of the instruments prepared for that purpose. After you place the instrument that preserves the peritoneum under the clavicle, which is an instrument of wood or iron, and this is its image:
It resembles a spoon without a handle, and its width should be according to the size of the bone, whether large or small. As for its length, it should also be according to what you are able to work with. Let it have two ends as you see, one end wider and the other narrower.
But if the incision made when extracting the bone fragment is wide and you are confident there will be no hot swelling, bring the edges of the wound together with sutures. If the incision is slight or you fear hot swelling, dress the wound with lint and bandages according to the extent of the incision.
If hot swelling appears, soak the lint in rose oil and vinegar or wine and apply it. As for setting a bone if there is no wound or incision, compress the bone with a poultice made of mill dust mixed with egg white. Place a soft bandage over it, then place a ball under his armpit if needed. Then take a turban which is very long and about a span wide. Carry a folded bandage over the bandage and poultice. Let its width be three fingers and its length the same, then insert it into a cloth, then insert that cloth along with the splint into the part of the turban which is over the fracture, then tighten the turban on the fracture as it turns. And place it on his neck and under his sound armpit and under the armpit of the injured side, and return it many times on each side, as you see that the tightening sets the fracture firmly, which is not hidden from you.
And know that the splint should never be removed from the broken bone. Therefore, you should check on the patient every day, and whenever the bandage relaxes and you see that the splint has come loose, fix it and tighten the bandage, then make the patient sleep on his back and place a small pillow under his armpit when he sleeps at night.
So that his arm is raised from his side, raising the clavicle fracture with the raising of the elbow, or tie his arm to his neck, and do not loosen the bandage unless there is an incident in the place such as scratching or swelling until twelve days have passed.
Then renew the dressing if you see a need for it. Return to tightening and leave it until the clavicle fracture heals and becomes firm, and strengthens even more in twenty-eight days. And it may be less for some people.
Chapter Six.
On setting a broken shoulder. The shoulder rarely breaks in its broad part, but rather its projections. Whenever a part of it is broken or it breaks in the middle, this is known by touch; then according to the shape of the fracture, proceed accordingly.
Set it and return it to its natural shape as much as possible by any means, then apply rye flour powder mixed with egg white and a soft poultice to the area, then place a bandage of folded cloth on top, and then put a wide splint made of wood over it.
Make it thin enough to cover the whole shoulder or a little wider, and if there is a bandage under the splint in one of the places on the shoulder, smooth that bandage with gentle pressure until the splint lies flat, then tie it firmly with a long turban.
Tie it tightly and make sure the splint does not move from its place, check the bandage every day, and whenever the bandage loosens tighten it and straighten the splint if it moves, let the patient lie on their right side, and the shoulder will heal in twenty days.
In twenty or twenty-five days, and when this period is complete, untie the bandage and you will be safe, for it is one of the bones that does not fear breaking or shattering, and if a fragment of bone protrudes and sinks under the skin, cut over it and remove it. Do what was mentioned in the fracture of the clavicle to relieve any hot swelling that may occur.
Chapter Seventh
On Setting a Broken Breastbone.
The breastbone may break in the middle, which rarely occurs, while its ends are more prone to breaking and shattering.  Among its symptoms, if it breaks in the middle, is a downward slant, severe pain, difficulty breathing, and coughing.
Sometimes there may be blood discharge, and the depression in the broken bone becomes apparent and is not hidden to the touch. To set it, let the patient lie on their back, place a cushion between their shoulders, then press down on their elbows and bring the ribs together with the hands from both sides, gently adjusting it as much as possible.
Continue this until the bone regains its proper shape, then apply a bandage and pressure dressing over it, place a splint made from a thin board of linden wood or similar lightweight material on top after wrapping it in cloth. Then refine its tying to the broken bone so that it does not loosen, and pass the ligature over the back in a circular fashion several times and tighten it firmly. Then examine the ligature at all times, and whenever it relaxes, tighten it.
And if necessity requires its undoing, at the appearance of pain or swelling in the place, hasten to undo it, remove the dressing and rectify what appeared by treating it accordingly, then return the dressing if you deem it necessary. And immobilize it with a bandage so that it heals properly.
Chapter Eight.
In setting ribs when they are fractured, know that fractures in ribs occur in the thickest places following the back and at their ends in front because these parts receive blows due to them being cartilaginous; and knowledge of this is not hidden from feeling upon examining with fingers.
Set it by straightening the fracture with your fingers in a competent manner until the shape is aligned as it should be, then dress and bind the broken bone with a splint if needed. If the rib fracture is angled inward, it will cause the patient severe pain.
And a condition like pneumothorax may occur, which happens to those with a rib fracture because the bone punctures the diaphragm and causes him shortness of breath, coughing, and spitting up blood; this is difficult to treat, and those before us have tried many tricks in it.
Some say it is necessary to make the patients diet consist of things that produce flatulence and gas so that the abdomen inflates and expands, pushing the fracture outward; we disapprove of this lest it encourage the occurrence of a hot abscess, and if one has occurred, it will increase and aggravate it.
Some said that a cupping glass should be placed on the spot and then sucked forcefully, which is similar to measuring it; however, they fear that the cupping glass may draw excess blood to the area due to its weakness. Others have said that the area should be covered with wool soaked in hot oil.
And the dressing should be applied between the ribs until it is full, so that the bandage becomes level when wound around the curve. Then the patient should be treated with the regimen for contusion, in terms of diet and medication, unless the patient is subjected to a severe ordeal which they cannot endure. The bone was depressing the diaphragm in a harmful manner, and we feared for the patient, so it is necessary to make an incision at the site and expose the broken rib; then place the instrument that preserves the peritoneum, which has been previously described, underneath; and cut the bone carefully and remove it.
Then we suture the edges of the wound if it is large and treat it with ointments until it heals. If a hot swelling appears during this time, hasten to soak dressings in rose oil and apply them to the area; and treat the patient internally as well with remedies that reduce swelling.
And he should lie on the side which makes sleeping easier until he recovers.
Chapter Nine.
On Setting Fractured Vertebrae of the Back and Neck.
As for the bones of the neck, if they are fractured, which rarely happens, and also the vertebrae of the back, if this occurs to someone and you wish to know whether it will heal or not. Observe whether his hands have become relaxed and numb, and are lifeless, and he is unable to move them, extend them, or clench them; and if you prick them or insert a needle into them, he does not feel it, nor does he experience any pain in them, then know that he will not heal in most cases and that he is doomed.
If he can move them and feels the pricking and insertion, know that the marrow of the bone is safe and that the patient will heal with treatment. If a fractured vertebra of the back occurs similarly and you wish to know whether it will also heal or not,
observe his legs; if you see that they have become relaxed and the same thing has happened to them as the hands, then if he lies on his back, wind and stool pass involuntarily; and if he lies on his stomach, urine passes involuntarily. And if he lies on his back and is unable to urinate, know that he is doomed, so do not concern yourself with treating him. If none of this occurs, the matter is less serious, and the treatment for what has happened is to aim to relieve the hot swelling.
Apply rose oil alone, or with roasted egg yolks, to the diseased area three times a day until the hot swelling subsides. Then apply one of the strengthening and absorbent bandages to the area and tighten it with a bandage. Order him to rest.
He should only sleep on the side where he does not feel pain until he is healed. If a bone fragment or something else that has healed occurred during the injury, the skin should be incised and that bone removed. Then the edges of the wound should be brought together by suturing if it is large, and then treated with healing ointments until it heals. If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the tailbone, is broken, you should insert your left thumb into the anus.
Straighten the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible, and according to what is attainable. Then apply a bandage and splint if needed, and tighten it.
If you feel a broken fragment in it, incise over it and remove it. Treat the wound with the treatment mentioned previously until it heals.
Chapter Ten.
On setting a broken hip.
It is rare for the bones of the hip to break. But when they do, the fracture usually consists of crumbling at its ends, splitting lengthwise, and tilting inward. The patient will experience pain in the area, numbness, and paralysis of the leg on the side of the fracture.
To set it, pass your hand over it until you determine the nature of the fracture. If the fracture is only at its ends, straighten it as much as possible so that it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is lengthwise or has inclined inwards, lay the patient on his stomach so that you may set the bone. Once it is straight, apply a poultice to it and then put a splint of wood or leather upon it and bind it tightly.
Fear not displacement of the fracture nor loosening of the splint, and equalize the hollows of the bandages by filling them so that the binding may be uniform. Order the patient to sleep on his back or on his right side; if hot swelling should occur.
Cease stretching and setting it until the hot swelling subsides, and apply what will relieve it as mentioned before; then return to setting and binding it as is proper. If there should be splinters or fragments in the bone, they should not be removed.
Let them alone and straighten from without as we have said, and leave it bound until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
On Setting a Fracture of the Humerus.
The humerus is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder. If it is fractured, set it in one of two ways: one is to take a smooth, curved stick of medium thickness, in this form:
Tie strings at its two ends and suspend it from a raised place; then let the patient sit on a chair, and cast his broken arm upon the stick so that his armpit may be attached in the middle of the curve of the stick; then hang something heavy above it.
Or have a servant extend it downwards, and then the surgeon straightens the fracture with both his hands until the fracture is returned to its proper place; the other way is for the patient to lie on his back and suspend his hand from his neck by a string.
Then order two servants to hold it: one above the fracture with his hands and the other below; let each extend to his side. If you wish the extension to be stronger, tie a bandage below the fracture and another above it, and let each of the servants extend them to their sides.
If the fracture is near the end of the shoulder blade, the middle of the ligature should be placed under the armpit and the other ends under the fracture towards the elbow. Similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, the ligature should be placed on that spot and on the elbow itself.
Then the fracture should be set gently without violence until the fracture is aligned properly and a good union is achieved, then it should be tightened unless there is a hot swelling; if there is a hot swelling leave it untightened until the seventh day and put on it a poultice soaked in vinegar and rose oil.
Until the swelling subsides, then tighten it; the way to tighten it is to hold the dressing on the fracture and then hold a bandage of new cloth over the dressing, then gather the arm against the humerus itself and put his hand open on his shoulder blade.
Hold the cloth and bandage tight on the humerus and arm so that the arm acts as a splint, unless something prevents you from doing so and nothing has changed for you from the broken bone; if you fear that something will change for you from it, then use splints.
And it is to place on the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than all the other splints, and let there be the width of a finger between each splint; and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an increase of three fingers from each side.
Then tighten on the splints the tightening that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is to be a tighter bandage on the place of the fracture.
And the further from the fracture, the less tight the bandage should be; if you see that the placement of the splints and the tightening as we said when setting the limb is correct, then do so.
And if you fear a hot swelling, leave the tightening and splints until the seventh day as we said, then check the ligature every three days so that no chafing or distention occurs in the place, or that food is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightness, correct all of this as we mentioned.
If you are confident that none of this will happen, do not untie the ligature for many days. The patient should lie on his back with his hand on his stomach and a bolster stuffed with wool placed under his arm.
Check at all times, both night and day, lest the shape of the broken limb be disturbed or the ligature relax; correct all this with your utmost effort. Let the patient's diet be such as we have previously described, that it should be light at first until the bone begins to knit.
Then his diet should be gradually increased. For it is usual for the arm and leg to knit in forty days; then the ligature should be untied, and he should use a bath and be treated with suitable ointments. If the fracture is severe and crushed.
Do not untie the ligature for fifty days or even two months.
Chapter Twelfth.
On Setting a Broken Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones called the radius and ulna; one is smaller, which is next to the thumb, and the other is larger and situated beneath the smaller one. Sometimes the larger bone breaks alone or the smaller one alone, and sometimes they both break together.
When the smaller, upper bone breaks, setting it is easy and healing is quicker. When the lower bone breaks, the fracture is worse, healing is more difficult, and worst of all when both bones are broken together. If the bone that has broken is the smaller, upper one...
The physician, when setting it, should make the extension slight and gentle so as to straighten it. If the larger bone is broken, he should make the extension stronger. If both bones are broken, the extension should be much stronger.
The shape of the hand should be placed upon the dressing and extended on a cushion, with the thumb raised highest of all the fingers, the little finger lowest of all, and the ring finger squarely based upon itself.
The cushion should be of a height opposite him so that the patient is not put to trouble.
Then a servant extends the arm from below, either with his hand or with a bandage, and another servant extends it from above in the same way; then the surgeon straightens the bone until he returns it to the best shape possible. If there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, they are removed.
Return every splinter to its place as much as you can; if a clean splinter appears and it is undermining the skin, and there is no hope of stitching it, then cut over it and remove it in the manner we have described previously. If the fracture is with a wound, a chapter has been devoted to it.
You will find the treatment for that in the chapter on fractures with wounds. If, at first dressing, a hot swelling appears, soak a cloth in rose-ointment and white wax, and let it be of medium thickness, then bind it gently until the swelling subsides.
Then remove the rose-ointment and apply a poultice prepared from mill dust mixed with egg white; then fit on the splints, and let the splint placed directly on the fracture be a little wider and stronger. Know that the number of arm splints is six in most cases.
Whether the fracture is in one bone or in two together, then make your binding on the seat of the fracture strongest and tightest; and whenever you turn in binding upwards or downwards, make the binding a little looser, as previously mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
Let the cloths that are wound around the fracture be soft and damp cloths, not very stiff, and let the thread with which it is bound be flax, especially of medium thickness, as we have described. Examine the limb and dressing after a few days.
If something needs to be repaired, such as a sprain in a limb, the limb should be immersed in warm water until the sprain subsides, and the limb should be left unstrained for a night so that it may rest, then straining should be resumed.
If the strain has relaxed and the bone has shifted, or something similar has occurred, do your utmost to remedy all of that. Also observe whether the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive straining; if so, you should loosen it slightly and leave it for several days until nourishment flows to it, then strain it again.
If none of the aforementioned ailments occur to the patient, he should not be discharged until after twenty days or so. Then his hand should be hung around his neck and let his arm be moderate; he should conserve his effort from agitated movements and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm heals within thirty days or in thirty-two, and perhaps even in twenty-eight; all of this depending on the states of temperaments and strengths.
Chapter Thirteen.
On Setting a Fracture of the Palm of the Hand and Fingers.
The metacarpals of the hand and phalanges of the fingers rarely experience fractures, but they are often subject to contusions. So whenever the palm experiences a fracture or contusion...
The patient should sit cross-legged with a chair directly in front of him.
Then he should place his hand on it extended, and the bone-setter's assistant should extend the fractured limb. The physician straightens it until a good union is formed. Then a bandage and splint should be applied if no hot swelling has occurred; then a splint is placed over it according to the situation.
I have inserted it into a soft cloth. If the fracture is towards the bottom, near the palm, make a semi-sphere from cloth and instruct the patient to grasp it with his broken hand; then tighten it with a long cloth.
Let the splint be made of leather, which is soft so that the skin may conform to the bending of all the hand, and it should be tightened as needed; if the fracture is outward, then one splint should be placed above and another below on the hand so that the hand remains open and upright.
Then the tension should be carried as the hand rotates and it should be secured between the fingers with a bandage; if the fracture is to one of the metacarpals of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, let it be straightened as needed and then tightened with the hand, and if you wish, you may make a small upright splint for it to support the fracture.
It should not be moved; if the fracture is to any of the other fingers, such as the middle, index, ring, or little finger, let it be straightened and bound with the finger next to it that is sound, or bind them all together on a splint, which is best, or place upon them a small upright splint.
As we said in regard to the thumb, and inspect it during your splinting and afterward at a distance from the hot swelling, meet it as needed whenever something of that sort occurs, as has been repeatedly described.
Chapter Fourteen.
On Splinting a Femoral Fracture.
The femur often fractures and becomes apparent to the touch because it displaces forward and backward.  Splinting is done by tightening a bandage above the fracture and another below, with the patient lying face down.
Then each bandage should be extended to its side, maintaining balance; if the fracture is in the middle of the bone. But if it is near the origin of the femur, then a soft bandage, either of wool or similar material, should be tightened.
At the origin of the femur towards the pubis, so that the extension is upwards and the other bandage below the fracture; similarly if the fracture is near the knee, let the bandage be near the knee with the extension downwards. Then the physician straightens the bone with both hands until it is returned to its natural form.
When the bone has united well, it should then be bandaged and supported, unless the limb has become hot and swollen; if swelling occurs, leave it for a few days until the heat subsides, and then resume treatment.
As for supporting it, a wide, firm bandage should be wound twice or thrice over the fracture; what is left over should then be wound around the leg until the heel is at the level of the thigh bone. A long thread should then be passed between the thigh and the leg near the knee, below it, with the ends extending upwards on both sides.
The remainder of the bandage is then wound around the leg and thigh. Splints are then applied to the thigh at the site of the fracture, making a single splint on the shinbone; the space between the thigh and leg is then filled with soft rags so that the support is even.
Begin with firm bandaging in the middle, over the fracture site, making three or four turns; as you move the bandage away from the fracture site, make it looser and less tight.
Then take hold of the two ends of the thread that you passed between the thigh and leg and tie them to the splints above; then pass the ends of the thread downwards until they reach the ankle, and tighten them there as well to the splints on the other side.
So that the bandage does not slip out of place, it should be left in position as long as the limb does not experience pain, swelling, distension or anything similar. If any of these things occur, immediately undo the bandage and rectify whatever has happened, as we have described many times before.
If there are bone fragments that protrude, they should be straightened if possible; otherwise, cut through them and remove them. Treat the wound as previously described until it heals. This type of fracture can sometimes be treated by supporting the thigh alone without splinting the leg.
As we mentioned in the forearm and arm, although its setting is thus not accompanied by limping for the patient, if it is set alone without being joined to the leg, then its owner will necessarily always limp.
Know that the thigh strengthens in fifty days or a little more or less, all of that depending on the difference in temperaments and other conditions.
Chapter Fifteenth.
In Fracture of the Patella.
The patella is rarely fractured, but it is often bruised. If a fracture occurs, it is either a crack or a fragmentation into its parts, with or without a wound.
You determine all of this by feeling, and you set it by straightening the separated parts with your fingers until they come together and join as best you can, with proper alignment, gentleness, and skill. Then apply a bandage and a circular splint if needed.
Then tighten the corresponding bandage above it, and observe all the conditions we described in other fractures, such as hot swelling and the like, treating each occurrence with what is appropriate until it heals.
Chapter Sixteenth.
On Setting a Fractured Leg.
The leg has two bones, one thick and called the tibia, and the other thin and called the fibula. They are subject to the same types of fractures as the arm bones. Therefore, setting it is the same as setting the arm, and the process is one. If both bones are fractured, the leg turns in all directions. If the thinner bone is fractured, the leg turns forward. And if the thicker bone is fractured and this occurs below, then it will be obvious to you.
Use traction and alignment, and bind the splints accordingly, unless it is a severe fracture with many fragments, in which case the traction should be less and gentler, and you should strive to set it carefully.
And in the leg there is something more to do than in the arm, and that is that when you have leveled the splints and finished all your work, take two pieces of pine wood which are used to level the rooms that are placed between the cracks of the boards or they can be made of palm leaves or the like.
Choose from them one that is slightly thick and is not thin, and let its length be along the leg from the knee down, then wrap two rags lengthwise on each one and place one on the leg and the other on the other side.
Let it be from the knee to the bottom of the foot, then tie the two pieces in three places at the ends and the middle, for with this binding the leg is prevented from leaning right and left and it is well immobilized, and sometimes a gutter of wood can be used along the length of the leg.
And it is put in it to keep it from moving, and this should be done most especially in a fracture if there is a wound with it, then check the leg every day and take great care of it for swelling or bloating or anything else like that. So whenever something like that happens, treat it accordingly until it is healed, and the bone of the leg is rejoined in thirty days or so.
Chapter Seventeenth.
On fractures of the bones of the leg and fingers.
As for the heel, it is not subject to fracture at all, and as for the bones of the leg, they may be fractured, and the fingers are rarely fractured, but they are more often bruised.
If the bones of the leg are fractured and you see that those bones are overlapping, let the patient put his foot on the ground upright as when walking, then you put your foot on what has risen from those bones and step on them to set them straight.
Until it returns to its place, then carry a bandage and splints from above and place under the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads, then tighten the foot firmly after wrapping it with rags and all that it needs.
If three or four days have passed, release the bandage; you will find the bones aligned, whether they were broken or dislocated. The procedure is as you see it. As for if some fingers are broken, splint them and set them according to what I have described for you in setting the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger, along the length of the finger and slightly wider than it. Then place under the foot that board which I have described to you and tighten it firmly, if two, three or more bones are broken.
Make for each finger a splint of appropriate size inserted into a soft cloth, and tighten the board under the foot, leaning each end of its head outward from the sole of the foot for good fixation.
You should remember all that we have mentioned to you in the fractures of all the conditions we have described and treat each condition accordingly.
Chapter Eighteen.
On a fracture of the female pubis bone and the male pelvis.
When a woman's vulva is fractured, seat her upright and then incline her slightly backward while holding her from behind, and have the midwife pack her vulva with cotton until it is full and becomes like a ball in her vulva.
Then shake the woman and raise her spine slightly; that cotton will come out until it forms a ball at the opening of the vulva, and the bone fracture will be reduced. Then apply a bandage to her back. Whenever she wants to urinate, remove the cotton gently so that she can urinate.
Then replace it as you first inserted it, and she returns to her original bandage. Do this for seven days or so, because it will heal. If you wish, take a sheep's bladder, stretch a reed tube over its opening, and insert the entire bladder into her vulva.
Then blow strongly into the tube until the bladder swells inside the vulva, for the fracture will return, then stuff it with cotton and stay on what we described for several days until it heals, and as for when the pubic bone is broken in a man or woman, it uses...
And it is arranged as we described in the hip bone, and it is not hidden from you the correctness in these strange fractures that rarely occur, especially for those who have some experience and understand this book of mine, yes, because the fracture itself indicates to you in most cases.
On the right path in setting and tightening it, so understand, and as for mentioning a man if his thigh is broken like a goose's throat, then enter the penis into it, then put a bandage of cloth on it and bandage it and leave it for three days or so until it heals.
Chapter Nineteenth.
In setting fractures of bones if they are with a wound.
It is necessary for whoever has a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or humerus or something similar, to hasten and cupping from his time if the conditions of cupping helped you as we presented.
If the wound bleeds blood, then it is necessary to hasten to cut it by sprinkling powdered alum on it if nothing else is available for you, then take to setting the fracture on that very day and do not delay it.
If a hot swelling does not occur, if it occurs, leave the setting to the ninth day until the hot swelling subsides and do not approach it at all on the third and fourth day, for it is subject to bad symptoms.
If the broken bone is protruding on the exposed skin, you should try to return it and straighten it with your hands gently and a little stretch. If you cannot return it and straighten it with your hands, return it with this tool which is made of iron seven or eight fingers long. And expose it according to the extent of the wound.
Therefore, the physician should take three or four of them according to the type of treatment needed for each fracture, and let them be round with a slight thickness so that they do not bend when pressed upon during work.
Let its tip be sharp and have a curve at its end, with the top being thicker and gradually thinning from the middle to the bottom. This is its form:
It is called in Greek "perim," meaning a small awl. The sharp curved end should be placed on the protruding bone and driven in once so that when the bone returns and becomes somewhat even, the perim straightens the broken ends to each other.
If the broken end is thin and the instrument does not grasp it well, then the end of that bone should be cut so that the instrument can grip it. If it is not possible to reduce the bone as described at all, then cut it according to the shapes of the sections we have mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the saws as much as you can, then remove any remaining roughness or thin scales from the bone. If you reduce the bone and the patient still experiences severe pain after reduction, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you are able to return it to its natural position, then do so for you will greatly benefit the patient. Once you have finished setting the bone, dip a cloth in a black astringent liquid, especially if it is summer. Do not place any plaster or anything oily on the wound.
So that decay and putrefaction do not occur. Then use bandages when you are finished setting the bone, and leave the wound exposed by cutting a hole in the wrappings according to the size of the wound.
Beware of tightening the wound with a fracture, for ignorant physicians often do this and cause their patients either death or suppuration or gangrene. The constriction should be loose and relaxed, unlike the constriction of other fractures.
If the wound is bad, or a large one, and you fear some of the bad symptoms we described, and he finds a troublesome pain in the place, then you should not put bandages on it. Make rolls for him from strong linen in the place of the bandages and bind them tight.
If after a day or two you see that the wound has begun to produce pus, remove from it the cloth that you placed on it with drink, then use lint and ointments which we are accustomed to treating wounds with, such as the fourfold ointment and the like, and you should loosen the ligature.
And inspect the wound every evening and morning until it heals and is cured, and you should position the limb so that pus flows easily downward. If many days pass and the wound does not close nor does the pus stop flowing from it, then know that there are small bone fragments.
Therefore, you should search the wound with a probe. If any of those fragments are cleansed, remove them and take them out. And if any of them are not cleansed and they afflict the limb and cause pain, then cut them into pieces and remove them in any way you can.
If the wound shows a cold, or an eating away, or some other kind of decay and putrefaction, then you should meet each of those symptoms with the treatment that we described in its chapter.
And what you should stand by and keep in mind is that if a large bone breaks, and it's on a limb like the femur or humerus, and the like of these large limbs, then do not expose it to pulling or extraction. For very often death results from that, but leave it until it becomes putrid. Perhaps it will fall away by itself after twenty days or thirty.
Then treat the wound if you see a place for treatment, otherwise leave it.
Chapter Twenty
On the treatment of complications that arise after some fractures.
This complication often occurs after the fracture has healed, especially those near the joints, as a result of which the shape of the limb becomes unsightly and it may prevent the limb from performing its natural function.
If the complication is soft, use astringent drugs such as myrrh, frankincense, gall, euphorbia and acacia, or some of them, kneading them with an astringent syrup, egg white, or vinegar.
Apply this to the complication with pressure, tightening it firmly and leaving it for many days without loosening. Then loosen it and apply another one until the complication disappears, God willing, or tighten a firm lead plate over it.
Lead has a property that removes all growths in the limbs. If the complication has become hardened and severe, and necessity dictates its removal, cut it open from above, remove the excess that results, or pare it with some rasps until it is gone, and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On the treatment of a fracture if it has knitted and the limb afterward remains weak, unlike its original state.
If a bone fracture has knitted and the limb afterward remains weak and feeble, this is due to many reasons. One of them is either due to excessive loosening and retying of the bandages, or excessive tightening of the bandages, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb, or excessive manipulation, or excessive movements at the wrong time, or a lack of blood in the patient's body and its weakness.
The treatment for this is to nourish the patient and enrich his body so that blood increases in him, use the bath, and introduce joy and happiness to him, and so on. Then apply pitch to the limb so that it attracts a lot of nourishment or continue to manipulate it with lukewarm water. So that nourishment may flow through it and it may return to its natural form.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In the Treatment of Broken Bones When They Are Bent and Prevented from Performing Their Proper Function.
If a limb, after its healing, shows a bending or a prominence of the broken bone, or a complication which has distorted the form of the limb. Unless the limb is prevented from performing its natural function, it should not be accepted that one who claims to break the limb from its head, for many ignorant physicians and bone-setters used to do this in our country.
This act is highly reprehensible and leads to great harm, which is difficult to remedy; but if the bending and complication are mild, it should be treated with water in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as marshmallow leaves and its root, rosemary, and so forth.
And it should be bandaged with softening bandages, such as well-made diachylon, or saliva from the marshmallow root can be taken and mixed with chicken fat and sheep fat and bandaged on, or a ripe fig is pounded with pigeon dung and other remedies called "contradictory to hardening" are used.
And the complication may be dissolved by continuous gentle massage with the hands, using movements of the limb in all directions at all times; if the bending has become old and severe and has hardened, and iron is necessary for its treatment.
It should be incised above and the connection of the bone released, and any excess complication or bone cut in fine sections; gentleness should be used with great effort and care. Then the wound should be treated as previously mentioned until it heals.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
Dislocation is the separation of a joint from its socket, hindering movement and disfiguring the limb; it causes severe pain to the sufferer. Whenever dislocation occurs, it should be promptly reduced.
Do not delay it at all, for if he delays, the place will swell and become inflamed, making it difficult to return the jaw to its place. Therefore, it should not be delayed, nor moved or stretched while it is swollen, because this often causes stiffness and painful aches in the patient.
But if this happens, he should hasten to bleed the patient and then leave him until the swelling subsides a little, then bathe the limb with hot water and ointment, then gently return it and treat each member as mentioned in its place.
The chapters on fractures have also been arranged according to the order of their occurrence in the body, from top to bottom.
Chapter Twenty-Fourth.
On the Treatment of Lower Jaw Fractures.
The jaws rarely dislocate, and their dislocation occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their places and relax a little, or they are completely dislocated and relax fully. Towards the chest, so that the patient's saliva flows and he is unable to hold it, and cannot clench his jaw, and his tongue stumbles in speech. As for if the dislocation is slight, it often returns on its own with the greatest ease.
But if the dislocation is complete, it should be hastened and returned quickly without delay. The assistant should hold the patient's head, and the physician should insert the thumb of one hand into the base of the jaw inside the mouth if the jaw is on one side.
Or insert both thumbs if the jaw is on both sides, and with the other fingers from outside, he straightens it and orders the patient to relax his jaw and let it go in all directions, while the physician straightens the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to return them, especially if both jaws are involved, use a compress with hot water and oil until they are easily returned and do not delay their return at all, as we said. Then, when they have returned and aligned and the patient's mouth has closed and they have not relaxed, then place strips of cloth on them with splints made from wax and oil and red lead.
Then tie them gently with a loose bandage, and let the patient sleep on their back with their head raised between two pillows so that they are not moved right or left and do not chew anything but make their food soft mush.
Until the pain is gone and the jaw has set, let them eat what they like, and use it gently and do not force opening their mouth when eating, drinking, or yawning until the jaw has set and healed.
If it is difficult to return the jaws if they have become dislocated at some time and do not return to their place, this often results in fevers and constant headaches and perhaps the patient's abdomen will start and perhaps they will vomit repeatedly; if you see that, know that it is corrupted.
And often those who suffer from this die within ten days.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On returning the clavicle and end of the shoulder blade.
As for the clavicle, it does not dislocate from the inside due to its connection to the chest, but it may dislocate outward and this will become apparent through feeling; force the patient to lie on their back and extend their arms.
Then press the area with your hand firmly, and it will return; then apply a compress and bandages and tighten them. As for the end that follows the shoulder blade and connects to it, it rarely dislocates. But if it does dislocate one day, it should be returned and straightened as we have mentioned and what seems appropriate to you.
Then you put a plaster, bandages, and a tight dressing on it, and order the patient to keep still and rest until he recovers. With this very treatment you can also return a dislocated shoulder blade to its place.
Chapter twenty-six.
In returning a dislocated shoulder blade.
Know that the shoulder blade is dislocated in three ways: one is towards the armpit downwards, the second is towards the chest, and rarely it dislocates above the shoulder blade.
It is not dislocated behind the shoulder nor in front of the nerve, and it is most frequently dislocated downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with little flesh because it comes out quickly and goes in quickly for them.
As for those with much flesh, it is the opposite, meaning that it comes out with difficulty and goes in with difficulty.  It may happen to some people that they receive a blow or fall, causing the shoulder blade to swell and become hot, so they think it has been dislocated. It should be examined to confirm its condition.
Then you proceed with its treatment, and recognize the dislocation if it is downwards towards the armpit. If you compare between the dislocated shoulder blade and the healthy one, you will find an obvious difference. You will find the head of the shoulder blade dented and under the armpit, upon touching, the head of the shoulder blade feels like an egg.
The patient will not be able to raise his hand to his ear or move it in all directions. Likewise, if it dislocated towards the chest or upwards, you will find that apparent upon touching and it will not be hidden.
This dislocation can be easily returned if it is recent or the patient is a boy. To return it, have an assistant raise his hand upwards, then place the thumbs of your hands under his armpit and lift the joint forcefully upwards to its place. The assistant raises his hand and extends it upwards.
Then he puts it down, and if it returns quickly, that is sufficient. If it does not return as mentioned and the fracture has been present for many days, the patient should bathe in hot water and use a poultice that loosens and softens, such as cooking the root of marshmallow, fenugreek, and rosemary in water and applying it.
Then the patient lies on his back, and a ball of wool is placed under his armpit, which should be moderate between softness and firmness. Then the physician places the patient's heel on the ball and holds the patient's hand with his hand and extends it downward.
He pushes the ball with his foot, and it returns to its place. If you wish to return it in this way, prepare a man taller than the patient and have him stand on the side, inserting his elbow under the patient's armpit and raising his armpit upward until the patient is suspended in the air. Another attendant pulls the patient's hand down toward his belly. If the patient is light, something else should be hung on him to weigh him down, for the fracture will return to its place in an hour. It can also be returned in another way.
Another method involves fixing a long wooden post in the ground, its head being round-shaped like the pestle of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin. A soft cloth is placed on the top of the post, and the patient stands upright along the post.
Then he extends his hand downward from the other side and also stretches his body from that side with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly. If it is difficult to return it by all that has been mentioned, use this treatment: take a wooden plank about two arm's lengths long. Its width should be about four fingers, and its thickness should be about two fingers. It should have a rounded head to facilitate entry into the depth of the armpit in this manner:
Then a soft bandage is tied around the rounded head so as not to hurt the wooden splint. Then it is placed under the armpit and the whole hand and arm are extended onto the splint down to the fingertips, and the splint is tied onto the upper arm and forearm and end of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a horizontal beam, and the hand is extended downwards. The rest of the body is left hanging from the other side. Since the joint enters from its own time, if it can enter in any way, then a ball of moderate size made of wool should be placed under the armpit.
Then a bandage prepared from mill dust with frankincense and egg white is applied to the entire shoulder as it rotates upwards. Then the ball is tightened firmly from under the armpit, and it is wound over the bandage from above. His hand is then hung around his neck.
He should leave his hand motionless for seven days, and the patient's diet should be kept light so that the limb will grow stronger, which is quicker for healing. Then after seven or five days it is loosened and exercised with movement. If it remains stable and does not become loose, it has healed.
If the joint dislocates repeatedly due to moisture or some other cause, it should be cauterized with three white-hot cautery irons as previously described in the chapter on cautery. If all of this is done and the bandage is loosened after seven days and the joint does not remain stable...
the bandage and constriction were repeated several times, but it did not remain stable; it fell and relaxed and was unable to be lifted upwards. Know then that the nerve in the head of the shoulder has been severed or stretched or relaxed.  Know then that the joint will never remain stable in its place.
As for the dislocation towards the chest, breastbone and back, it is reduced by pushing and stretching with the hands until it returns. All constriction and treatment are used until it heals. If after healing stiffness occurs in the limb and movement is slow...
Let the patient use the bath many times so that the flesh softens and returns to its former nature.
Chapter the Twenty-Seventh.
In the treatment of dislocating the elbow.
The elbow joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty as well. It dislocates in all directions, especially forward or backward. Its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is under sight and touch in any form of dislocation.
And if you compare the dislocated elbow to the sound one, it will become clear to you by the apparent depression of the joint, and the arm cannot be bent nor touched at its elbow. You should hasten and return the dislocation from the start before it becomes subject to a hot swelling.
For if it becomes subject to a hot swelling, it will be difficult to return it and it may not heal at all, especially if the dislocation is backward, for it is the worst of all types of dislocations and the most painful, and death often comes with it.
And if it can be returned, the assistant should extend his hand with both hands and arms outstretched, and the doctor's hand above the elbow and below it, while pushing the joint with both thumbs or the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
As for if the dislocation is forward, it may be returned by bending the hand at once so that the base of its palm strikes the elbow opposite to it. If the dislocation does not return, use a very strong stretch, which is to extend the arm by two assistants.
And the patient should also be held by two assistants so that he does not move during the stretch, then the arm is rotated in all directions after a folded cloth or a wide bandage is wrapped around his hand. If the doctor handles the joint with his hands, he should rub it with oil to facilitate the sliding of the joint easily.
Then the joint is pushed strongly until it returns, and after its return, it should be held with a dressing containing astringents and drying agents mixed with egg white, tightened firmly, and the arm suspended from the neck of the patient and left for several days.
Then the bandage is removed, and if the joint remains in its place, the ligature is removed from it and it is left alone. If you see that the joint has not become firm, reapply the dressing and ligature and leave it for several more days until it firms up, then remove it. If swelling occurs after the joint has returned to its place and the bandage has been removed.
If there is difficulty with movement, use moistening in the bath and gentle massage and manipulation until it softens. Or place a thick sheepskin over the joint and tie it on for a day and night, then remove it and put him in the bath; when he sweats, rub the joint moderately.
Then repeat the sheepskin application twice more, along with bathing, until it softens. If you wish to apply damp cow dung mixed with butter and tighten it on, do so several times, for it will soften and return to its former state.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On the Treatment of Wrist Dislocation.
The wrist is often dislocated, and its reduction is easier than that of other joints, but it should be quickly reduced at the time it dislocates before the area swells or a hot swelling develops.
To reduce the dislocation, place the patient's wrist on a board and have an assistant extend his hand. The physician then places his hand on the prominence of the joint and pushes it until it returns. However, he should observe whether the dislocation has moved into the palm of the hand.
The patient should place the back of his hand on the board when extending and reducing. If the dislocation is prominent on the back of the hand, let him place the palm of his hand on the board so that the physician's hand falls upon the same prominence of the joint.
Leave it alone and do not manipulate it, for it cannot bear it, and you will not be able to return it after a few days have passed. However, the joint will remain on its burden and will not harm the patient except if the hand rests and is unable to grasp anything.
Then you will know that the nerve has been severed or become putrid, and there is no remedy except to pull it with a ligature; perhaps it will be beneficial and perhaps not. If the wrist is successfully returned, apply the bandage we have described and then bind it tightly, leaving it for five days.
Then it is released and the hand is exercised. If its movement is difficult and there is some stiffness in it, soften it with warm water and massage several times until it becomes supple.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On the Treatment of Dislocated Fingers.
Fingers may dislocate in any direction. When a finger dislocates towards the back of the hand or its palm, extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumb until it returns. Then tie the tip of the finger and hang it towards the side to which it dislocated.
Leave it for two days, then release it and extend it until it stands straight that day. If it is at night, tie it in the same way. Do not stop releasing it during the day and exercise it with movement, tying it at night. Continue this for several days until it becomes strong.
Do the same if it dislocates towards the palm of the hand, tying it towards the same side and repeating the first procedure until it heals. Also do the same for any other direction of dislocation.
Chapter Thirty.
On the Treatment of Dislocated Vertebrae.
When a vertebra in the back or neck becomes completely dislocated, or several vertebrae become displaced from their positions, there is no remedy because death hastens towards the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's stool comes out involuntarily and he cannot hold it back, and often some of his limbs relax, either his legs or his arms, or one of them; and if one lump moves from its place, it often disappears altogether.
Its disappearance occurs in four directions: that which disappears backward is called a hump. As for its treatment, you should look and see; if the hump occurred in childhood, there is no treatment for it, nor will there be any recovery at all.  As for that which occurred from a fall or a blow, or something similar...
The ancients mentioned it with various treatments in lengthy explanations, most of which are not very beneficial. I have summarized this, and what little is needed suffices instead of much of what they presented, having drawn closer to the meaning and explained it, and depicted the instrument differently from how they described it.
I say that the hump that occurs in front of the chest is beyond remedy, and so is that which appears on either side. However, the one that occurs on the back can be treated, especially with what I will describe, which is to lay the patient face down.
On a flat workbench near a wall, spread a damp cloth underneath so as not to hurt his chest; then place a vertical plank fixed into a hole in the ground at one end of the bench towards his head and another plank towards his feet at the other end of the bench.
Have a servant hold the plank, which should not be fixed in the hole; and have another servant hold the other one in that position. Then wrap a soft, tight bandage around the patient's chest and under his armpits. Extend one end of the bandage to the plank at his head and tie it there.
Then tighten another bandage over his thighs, above his knees and at his ankles. Gather all the bandages together and tie them to the plank at his feet; then each servant pulls his plank with the bandage and the planks do not move from their fixed positions.
But they are not reliable as we have said, and the physician places his hand on the hernia with force until it returns or he places a board on it and then leans on the board with his legs until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, he takes a board which is about three cubits long.
And you dig in the wall which we said to be near the patient a place where the end of the board enters, then you put the middle of the board on the prominence and the physician puts his feet on the other end and pulls very hard until he presses the hernia.
And it returns to its place, and if you wish to make it with the screw that is twisted by hand, which is to insert into the ground at the head of the patient in the last part of the bed two pieces of wood whose length is a cubit, and also at his feet in the last part of the bed.
Let the distance between each piece of wood be a span, and let there be made in every piece of wood a hole through which the screw is inserted and the wood is all secured in the ground well so that it does not move at all, and you insert a round stick which is the screw on which the bandage is twisted into the holes of the two pieces of wood.
And at its end there is a hole in which a stick whose length is a span is secured, and it is twisted in the two other pieces of wood as well. Then you tighten the bandage that you tightened on the patient's chest in the screw that is at his head and the bandages that you tightened on his legs in the screw that is at his feet.
Then a servant stands at each screw and twists his hand with the wrench by which the screw is twisted, and the physician smooths the prominence as we have presented. And this is a picture of the screw, the bed, and the patient:
Then after the hernia returns and the place is leveled, it should be covered with a bandage dried with egg white then with tow, and then a splint of a board whose width is three fingers or so is placed on top of the bandage, and its length is as much as takes the place of the prominence.
And on some correct pearls, then it is tied with the appropriate ligature and the patient uses fine food until he recovers. If some swelling remains in the place at the end of recovery, it is necessary to use softening and relaxing medicines with the use of the board that we described a long time ago.
A lead plate may be used for this. Sometimes a swelling appears at the end of the back pearls and it is thought to be dislocation, but it turns out to be excess bone that has grown. Do not subject this to this treatment, for death may occur.
Chapter Thirty-One.
On the Treatment of a Dislocated Hip.
Know that the hip joint and the shoulder joint are only subject to dislocation, and not to the slight displacement and flattening that affects other joints. The hip joint dislocates in four ways.
This is because it dislocates inward, outward, forward and backward. It most often dislocates inward and rarely dislocates forward or backward. The sign of inward dislocation is that if you compare the patient's healthy leg to the injured one, the injured leg will be shorter.
The knee will protrude more than the healthy one, and the patient will not be able to bend his leg at the hip. The area below the hip will be warm and swollen, as it is clear that the head of the femur has moved there.
The signs of outward dislocation are the opposite of these signs. The sign of anterior dislocation is that he extends his leg fully, but he cannot bend it without pain. There will be pain in the knee, and if he tries to walk, he will not be able to do so forward.
He will also have difficulty urinating and his groin will be swollen. When he walks, he will land on his heels. The sign of posterior dislocation is that he cannot extend his knee or bend it before bending his hip. His leg will also be shorter than the other.
The Arabic is relaxed, and the head of the thigh is clearly at the level of the waist. As for returning the types of this fracture, it is to look and see if the fracture is old, had been with its owner and no attempt was made to return it, and it remained in its condition, there is no treatment at all.
It should not be exposed to it, and as for the fracture that is recent, and was of any type from the four aspects of the fracture, hasten to twist the joint and extend it inward and outward and move it to the right and left, perhaps.
It will return and will not need any other treatment, if it does not return like this, you should prepare a strong servant to help extend his leg from below either with his hands or with a tourniquet tied to his leg above the knee, and another servant to extend it from above.
By putting his hands under his armpits, then tightening a soft tourniquet on the thigh root, and another servant holding the end of the tourniquet, the third servant will extend it either from the front from the Arabic side to the collarbone side or from behind to the back side.
And all of them extend at the same time until the patient rises with his body from the ground and remains suspended, this type of extension is common to all four types, if the fracture returns as we said, otherwise there must be a special treatment for each type as I mentioned.
As for its special return if the fracture is inward, the patient should lie on his right side then a tourniquet should be made at the thigh root between the head of the femur and the place under the Arabic.
Then extend the bandage upward from the Arabic side to the upper body to the collarbone side, then another strong servant takes hold with his arms and embraces the thick part of the affected thigh and extends it outwards with a strong extension, for it will return to its place.
This type is easier than all other types of treatment by which this member is returned, for if it is impossible for you and this type of treatment does not suit you at all, then it should be tied with a strong soft bandage on the heels and knees of the patient.
And the distance between each one of them should be the width of four fingers, and the affected leg should be extended more than the other by two fingers, then the patient is hung from a wooden beam in the house at a distance of two arm spans from the ground.
Then you order a strong boy to embrace the head of the femur and another boy hangs onto the patient, and the other boy pushing on the embraced thigh with force, for the joint returns to its place quickly, as for returning it if the jaw is out.
Then the patient should lie on the plank as we described in the case of the hump, and tighten the bandage on his affected leg especially and on his chest, then two planks are placed one at his feet and the other at his head, then an additional plank is placed in the middle of the plank firmly fixed.
A wet rag is wrapped around it so as not to hurt the patient, so that the plank is between his thighs so that he does not slip down during extension, then each servant extends to his side and the doctor straightens the hip with his hands, if it responds by returning.
If not, put the board on him and press it as we mentioned in the hump except that the patient should lie on his right side, and if the dislocation is forward, then the patient's leg should be extended once while he is in this exact description on the plank.
The doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected thigh, then presses it with the other hand, however, making the pressure extended downwards towards the knee, and if the dislocation is backwards, the patient should not be extended downwards.
It should be raised above the ground, but it should also be placed upon something solid, as it is necessary that his hip be extended outwards, as we have previously described regarding his position on the surgical table while he is lying face down and the bandages are tightened.
As we have previously stated, the pressure plate should also be applied to the location where the joint has dislocated. Once the hip joint has properly returned, and the signs of its return are not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's leg.
If you see them level, and the patient is able to grasp and extend his leg without difficulty, know that the limb has returned properly. At this point, join the thighs together and apply the bandage tightly with a turban so that the hip does not move in any direction.
The patient must remain at rest for three or four days, then the bandage and bindings should be removed. Compare his leg with the other one. If they are equal in size, know that the joint has been stabilized, so allow the patient to walk. If you see any laxity in it,
reapply the bandage and tighten it according to your initial tightness, leave it for another three days, then remove it. Have him walk slowly on it for several days until it strengthens, God willing.
Chapter Thirty-Third.
On the Treatment of Knee Dislocation.
The knee dislocates in three ways: inward, outward, and downward - meaning backward - it never dislocates forward at all. The sign of dislocation is that you instruct the patient to bring his leg up to his thigh.
If it does not stick to the thigh, know that the knee is dislocated. To set all types of dislocations, have the patient sit down with his legs extended if he is able, and have an assistant sit behind him to hold his waist and twist him slightly backward. Then, you should sit on his thighs.
You press your back against his face and place his leg between your legs, then you fix his knee with your hands and interlock them between your fingers on his knee, then you press with your hands the sides of his knee firmly, while another attendant extends his leg until the knee returns to its place.
The sign of its return is that the leg will adhere to the thigh in a non-compulsive softness, then bandage it and stick the leg to the thigh then tie them all together with a bandage for three or four days, then release them. He should not use anything but a little walking for a few days until it strengthens.
If returning it by what we have described is difficult, otherwise use strong traction with the bandages whose description I have presented in the treatment of the hip until it returns.
Chapter thirty-three.
On the treatment of a fractured heel.
The heel may have a slight displacement or it may fracture completely. The fracture can be either inward or outward, and the sign of a fracture is that you will see the heel swollen and protruding towards the side to which it has fractured.
As for the treatment of its displacement, it is easy to return it; stretch it gently with the hands and straighten it until it returns. But if it has fractured completely, the patient should sit down and a strong attendant should hold him from behind in the middle of his back.
Then, hold his foot with your right hand from the top and with your left hand from the bottom of his foot at the ankle, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and then twice with your left, then stretch it with your left and push the front of the foot with your right toward the leg without force.
Do this twice as we have described, then push the front of the foot towards the leg in the third attempt while pulling at the ankle. If it returns in one or two attempts in this manner and you see the foot straight, otherwise repeat the process because it will return.
If it is impossible to return her as we have described, then lay the patient on his back on the ground and fix a wedge firmly in the ground so that it lies between his thighs with a cloth wrapped around it so as not to hurt the patient; then have an attendant hold his thigh.
Then another attendant should extend the man's leg, either with his hands or with a bandage tied around the man's neck. Then let each attendant extend in the opposite direction of the other and keep the wedge between the patient's thighs to prevent his body from being pulled down during extension; then the surgeon straightens the jaw with his hands.
Another attendant should hold the sound leg down; then the jaw will return quickly. When the jaw has returned and you see that it is set correctly, apply a bandage and compress it tightly with straps. Bind the foot to the strap below. You must be careful of the nerve above the heel from behind.
Do not bind it too tightly so as not to hurt it, then leave it for two or three days. If the bandage loosens, tighten it, and then release it on the third or fourth day. The patient should refrain from walking for forty days.
If he wants to walk before this period, you cannot be sure that the jaw will not dislocate again and become worse, and it will then no longer be amenable to treatment. If a hot swelling appears, use the remedies we have previously described for other ailments and continue until it subsides.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
On Treating a Dislocated Finger Joint.
You should straighten what is dislocated with a slight extension, without force; this is not difficult but rather easy. If the dislocation is in some of the phalanges of the foot, the patient should place his foot on a flat surface.
Or on a plank while standing like one is walking, then you should place your foot on what is dislocated from those joints and then press it down with force until it returns and you see that it is aligned, and no bump appears in the location.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot, so that it takes the whole foot and has two heads; then bind it tightly for three days; then unbind it and keep him from walking for many days until it becomes strong and you are safe from its return if God wills.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On the types of dislocation which occur with a wound or with a fracture or with both.
Whenever any of these things happen, and you treat it by setting and binding, it often results in death.
Therefore, it should not be attempted to treat such a thing except by one who is skillful in the craft, long practiced, gentle, compassionate, and deliberate, not hasty nor bold, and he should use, at first, only medicines that soothe hot inflammations, and surrender the patient.
To God's decree, except for what you hope for safety from harm with the ease of the disease, and it appears to you that there is some hope in it, then return it at once, before the hot inflammation occurs.
If the limb returns as you wished, use the treatment that soothes hot inflammations and treat the wound with drying ointments suitable for it; if the dislocation is with a fracture and there are loose fragments in the bone, then remove them. Follow what we mentioned about simple diseases, which has been previously stated in its place.
Strive with all your might and keep yourself from entering the path of risk, as I have previously advised you; for that is more lasting for your reputation and safer for your appearance, if God wills.
