When the author of this book completed for you, my sons, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its entirety and reached the ultimate goal therein in its clarity and explanation, he saw that he should complete it for you with this treatise which is a part of work done by hand.
For manual work is in our country and time utterly lacking, so much so that its science was almost lost and its effect ceased. And what remained of it were only slight diagrams in the books of our predecessors, which hands had corrected and which error and confusion had obscured until its meanings became hidden and its benefit distant.
So I saw it fitting to revive it and to compose this treatise on the path of explanation, clarification, and abbreviation, and to include images of sharp surgical instruments and all other tools of work, as this is from the increase in explanation and what is necessary for it.
And the reason why there is no skilled craftsman with his hand in our time is that the craft of medicine is long, and its possessor should first be trained in anatomy as Galen described it. So that he may understand the benefits of the organs, their forms and temperaments, their connections and separations, and knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, their number, origins, and the arteries, veins, pulsating and non-pulsating, and the locations of their exits.
And therefore Hippocrates said that physicians in name are many, but in deed few, especially in manual skill, and we have mentioned a part of this in the introduction to this book.
For he who is not knowledgeable about what we mentioned of anatomy is bound to fall into error that may kill people, as I have witnessed many who imagined themselves in this science and claimed it without knowledge or experience.
This is because I once saw an ignorant physician who incised a cystic tumor on a woman's neck, and he severed some of the arteries in the neck so that the woman bled until she died at his hands.
I saw another physician who had advanced in removing a stone from a man who had been stabbed in the tooth, and the stone was large, so he crumbled it and removed it with a piece of bladder. The man died in about three days, and I had been called to remove it, and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that this was beyond my capabilities.
I saw another physician who was making a living from medicine among some of the leaders of our country.
It happened to a black boy who had a fracture in his leg near the heel with a wound, so the physician, in his ignorance, hastily bound the fracture on the wound with bandages and splints tightly and did not leave the wound any room to breathe.
Then he released him to his desires and left him for days, ordering him not to loosen the bandages until his leg and foot swelled and he was on the verge of death.
I was called to him, so I quickly untied the bandages and he felt relief and recovered from his pain, but the damage had already become entrenched in the limb and I could not restore it.
The corruption continued to spread in the limb until he died.
I saw another physician cauterize a cancerous tumor, and it ulcerated after a few days, greatly increasing the suffering of its owner. This is because if cancer is purely from a black humor, it should not be treated with iron at all.
Unless it is in a member that can tolerate the removal of all of it.
Therefore, my son, you should know that work done by hand is divided into two categories: work that is accompanied by safety and work that is followed by harm in most cases.
I have warned in every place that comes from this book about the work that involves risk and danger, so you should beware of it and refuse it.
So that the ignorant may not find a way to speak and revile, take care and caution for yourselves, and adorn yourselves with gentleness and deliberation.
And employ the best path leading to safety and a happy outcome, and shun dangerous and difficult diseases.
Purify yourselves from what you fear may lead to doubt in your religion and your worldly affairs, for it is the most lasting safeguard for your honor and the highest attainment in this world and the next for your station.
For Galen said in some of his precepts, "Do not treat a bad disease and become bad physicians."
And this treatise has been divided into three chapters.
The first chapter.
On cauterization with fire and cauterization with caustic drugs, a well-arranged chapter from the beginning to the end, and illustrations of instruments and iron cautery tools and everything needed for working by hand.
The second chapter.
On incision, dissection, cupping and bloodletting, surgery, and the extraction of arrows and the like, all well-arranged and with illustrations of instruments.
The third chapter.
On splinting, dislocations, and the treatment of ulcers and the like, all well-arranged from beginning to end, with illustrations of instruments.
The first chapter.
On cauterization.
And before we mention how to perform it, it is necessary to state the benefits and harms of cauterization, and in what temperaments it should be used.
I say that speech concerning the manner of cauterization's benefit and harm is a long discourse, a subtle science, and a hidden secret, and many sages have spoken on it.
They differed among themselves, and I have summarized a little of their speech for fear of prolixity.
I say that cupping is generally beneficial for all bad humors, whether with or without material, namely hot and dry humors without material.
As for dry humor with material, they differed on it; some said that cupping is beneficial in it and others said the opposite that cupping is not suitable for a disease that comes from heat and dryness because the nature of fire is hot and dry.
And it is impossible to be cured of a hot dry disease by a hot dry remedy, and he who says the opposite said that cupping with fire may benefit from a hot dry disease that occurs in people's bodies. Because when you add the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you reach a cooling for the body of man.
And I say what he said because experience has revealed it to me many times, but it should not be imagined by anyone except who has been accustomed and trained in the matter of cupping with extensive training. And he stood upon the difference of people's temperaments and the state of illnesses in themselves and their causes, symptoms, and duration of time.
As for the rest of the temperaments, there is no fear from them, especially cold and wet diseases; all physicians have agreed on it and did not differ in its benefit.
And know, O sons, that the secret of treatment by cupping with fire and its excellence over cupping with burning medicine is because fire is a single element whose action does not exceed the member that was cauterized and does not harm another connected member except for a slight harm.
Cupping with burning medicine may exceed its action to what is beyond the members and may cause a disease in the member that is difficult to treat and may even kill, but fire, due to its honor and generosity of essence, does not do that except if it was excessive.
This has been made clear to us by experience, through long service and attention to the craft, and by arriving at the truth of the matter.
Therefore, I have dispensed with lengthy discourse, and if it were not unbecoming of my book, I would relate to you in this treatise a hidden secret and the manner of its doing in bodies, its negation of diseases, with philosophical, demonstrative speech that would pierce your understandings.
Know, O sons, that they have differed concerning the time that is suitable for cautery and have made the best time to be spring.
And I say that cautery is suitable in every time, for the harm caused by time is surpassed by the benefit that is brought about by cautery. Especially if the cautery is from necessary, intense pains that cannot be delayed, lest what is feared should follow—a destruction greater than any internal harm caused by time.
Do not entertain, O sons, what the common people and ignorant physicians imagine, that cautery which cures a disease has no return and make it obligatory.
For the matter is not as they think, for cautery is like a medicine that changes the temperament and dries up the moistures which are the cause of pains arising.
Except that cautery excels medicine in the speed of its success, the strength of its action, and the intensity of its power.
And it is possible that the illness may return at some time, according to the temperament of the patient, the strength and establishment of his illness, and what is prepared in his body from the gathering of superfluities and negligence in acquiring them from foods and suchlike causes.
Except that the illness in which cautery is used be a delicate one and in an organ with little superfluity and moisture. As for the removal of a tooth for pain and the like, it may be that the pain will not return in it, at least.
As for the common saying that cautery is the last resort of medicine, it is a correct statement, but not in the way they understand it, because they believe that no treatment is beneficial by medicine or otherwise after cautery has taken place, and the matter is otherwise.
Rather, the meaning of "cautery is the last resort of medicine" is that when we have used various treatments for a disease and those medicines have not been successful, then we use cautery as a last resort, and it succeeds; therefore, it is said that "cautery is the last resort of medicine." Not according to the meaning that the common people and many ignorant doctors have gone to.
The ancients have mentioned that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this because of the temperance of gold and its noble nature, and they said that it does not cause suppuration at the site of the cautery, and this is not true at all.
Because I have tried it and found that it only does so in some bodies and not others, and cautery with it is better and more excellent than iron as they said, except that if you heat the iron in the fire from the gold, it will not become clear to you when it has heated up to the degree that you want for the redness of gold.
And because it quickly cools down, and if you increase the heat on it, it melts in the fire and spills, so the maker falls into trouble from that. Therefore, cautery with iron has become faster and closer to correctness for us to work with, God willing.
And I have arranged this chapter on cautery into sections organized from the head to the foot so that it is easy for the student to find what he wants from it, God willing.
Chapter one.
On cauterizing the head: a single cautery.
This cupping is beneficial for the predominance of moisture and cold over the brain, which are the cause of headache and frequent catarrhs from the head towards the eyes and ears, excessive sleepiness, toothache and sore throat. And in general for every disease that arises from cold such as paralysis, epilepsy, stroke and the like of these diseases.
The image of this cupping is to order the patient first to vomit with a laxative medicine purified for the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, his age and habit.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor, then seat him between your hands squatting, having placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his eyes and where your middle finger ends, mark that spot with ink.
Then heat the olive-oil lamp which has this shape.
Expose from the bone the size of a toothpick head or a caraway seed, then lift your hand, otherwise replace your hand with the same iron or another if it has cooled. Until you see from the bone what I mentioned to you, then take some salt, dissolve it in water and soak a cotton ball in it and place it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then place a cotton ball soaked in ghee on it and leave it until the crustiness from the fire goes away, then treat it with the fourfold ointment until it heals, God willing.
And they said that the wound, the longer it remains open and discharges pus, the better and more beneficial it is.
And some mentioned that the skin should be burned down to the bone, and hold the iron until part of the thickness of the bone burns, then remove what has been burned from the bone afterwards and treat it.
Others said that cupping should be excessive so as to strongly affect the bone until a piece falls off, like the shape of a small horseshoe or a pellet, and they claimed that steam from the head is released from that spot and the wound is left open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals, and I do not see these two types of burns at all except in some people and by chance. Leaving it with me is best and goodbye if that is the case, for the head weakens when its natural connection is separated, as we have seen in all other organs.
Especially when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first type of burn is safer and better with me, and I will use it. Do it and be safe, God willing.
Chapter Two.
Burns on the head also.
If a persistent pain occurs throughout the head and this continues in the patient, and poultices, ointments, compresses, and bandages are used, especially if he has been burned with the single burn that we have described and nothing benefits him from that, then look. If the patient's head is strong in nature and not weak, and he feels a severe cold, then apply another burn over it slightly. Then apply a burn to each horn of his head so that the thickness of the skin goes away and is exposed from the bone in the amount we have described. Apply a burn to the back of his head in the place known as the axe, and lighten your hand in this one, do not expose the bone because the patient will experience severe pain from it, unlike the pain of all other burns on the head. I will mention this burn in its place.
The iron with which the horns and back of the head are burned should be finer than the iron with which the middle of the head is burned, and this is its image.
Chapter Three.
In non-chronic migraine.
If pain occurs in the temple of the head with a headache and the pain extends to the eye, let the patient purge with purifying medications for the head and use all the treatment I mentioned in the divisions of diseases. If that does not work, then burn it on two sides. Either with a sharp, burning medicine or with iron.
As for cauterization with a burning medicine, it is to take one clove of garlic, peel it and cut off its ends on both sides, then make an incision in the painful area from the temple with a wide spatula until there is a space under the skin that can fit the clove.
Insert it under the skin until it disappears, then tie it tightly with strong bandages and leave it for fifteen hours, then untie it and remove the garlic, leaving the wound for two or three days, then carry on.
Cover it with cotton soaked in clarified butter until the area suppurates, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing. If you wish, you can do this with some of the burning medicines that I have mentioned in the eighteenth article on burning medicines.
As for cauterizing it with iron, it is done as follows: heat the iron which has this shape:
It is called a nail iron because its head is shaped like a nail with some grooves and a small projection in the middle.
Then place it on the painful area and hold your hand while turning the iron slightly, burning a depth equal to half the thickness of the skin. Lift your hand so as not to burn the artery below, which would cause bleeding, then soak a cotton ball in salt water and place it on the area, leaving it for three days. Then carry on with the cotton soaked in clarified butter, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing.
If you wish, you can cauterize this migraine with the pointed tip of the iron, especially preserving it from cutting the artery in this non-chronic migraine.
Chapter Four.
On Cauterizing Chronic Migraine.
If you have treated the migraine with the aforementioned treatment and the division of diseases, and the treatment has not been effective, and you have seen from the cause what cannot be treated by the aforementioned first cauterization with medicine or fire. You should heat the surgical iron until it glows white, then apply it to the area of pain in a line half a finger long or so, and leave your hand once while tightening it until it cuts the artery and reaches near the bone.
However, you should be careful not to touch the moving jawbone during chewing, as this could burn the muscle or the nerve that moves it, causing paralysis.
And be wary and cautious of bleeding from the artery you have cut, for there is danger in cutting it. Especially for those who are ignorant of what they are doing and are not experienced practitioners and abandon the work first.
The management of bleeding that arises from the artery will be mentioned in its proper place in the book, God willing. If you see from the cause what this cautery cannot treat.
And you saw the patient's body capable of enduring it, cauterize in the middle of the head as we described and treat the wound until it heals, God willing.
And if you wish, use the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on severing the artery with a double-edged iron, for it is better and more effective than this.
Chapter Five.
Cauterization for Earaches.
If pain occurs in the ear due to cold and is treated with laxatives and other treatments mentioned in the division, but the pain does not subside, heat the iron called "the point," which has this shape.
Then, after heating it, apply dots around the entire ear as it turns or all around them if the pain is in both. Remove the cautery from the root of the ear slightly after learning the location with ink. The cautery should be the size of ten dots in each ear or so, then treat the areas until they heal, God willing.
Chapter Six.
Cauterization with a hot iron.
The type of cautery that treats diseases caused by phlegm, as mentioned in the classifications of diseases.
Avoid cauterizing the type that occurs from dryness and nerve constriction.
If you have treated this type of cautery with irrigations, poultices and gargles and your treatment has not been successful, then the patient should be cauterized with three cauterizations. One at the root of the ear, the second slightly below the cheekbone, and the third at the junction of the lips.
Make your cauterization opposite the affected side, because relaxation occurs on the side that appears healthy.
The image of the cautery is to make a cautery opposite the upper tip of the ear, slightly below the horn of the head, and another on the cheekbone, its length being the length of the thumb.
Lower the cautery with your hand until it burns half the thickness of the skin. This is the image of the iron, which is a type of scalpel that has been advanced in its form, but it is slightly finer than it, as you see. The scalpel should have a slight increase in thickness, then treat the area as previously mentioned until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
Cauterization for chronic stroke.
If the stroke has persisted and you have treated it as we mentioned, and your treatment has not been successful and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them four times. On every century of its head, a cautery and a cautery in the middle of the head as we mentioned, and a cautery at the back of the head as previously stated.
The description of the cauteries as mentioned above, and a cautery may also be applied to the mouth of the stomach for greater effect, then treated as previously stated.
Chapter Eight.
Cauterization for Forgetfulness.
That which is from phlegm, the patient should first be given large doses of emetics and purifying herbs for the brain.
Then his whole head should be shaved and a mustard plaster, as written in the article on plasters, should be applied to the back of his head repeatedly, for it is a type of cautery.
And do this on the rank mentioned there, if he is cured by it, otherwise cauterize three times in the back of his head, lined up from the top of the head to the nape of the neck.
Make the space between each cautery the thickness of a finger, then treat the cauteries as previously stated. If you want to increase it and the patient can tolerate it, cauterize the middle cautery again.
If you want to increase it further, cauterize the temples and treat them until he is cured. The cautery iron should be olivewood as previously described.
Chapter Nine.
Cauterization for Paralysis and Relaxation of the Whole Body.
You should first proceed with purifying the head with emetics and what we have mentioned, then shave the patient's head, and cauterize in the middle of the head, on each temple, and on the back of the head.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck. If you need, in cases of relaxation of the body, more than that and the patient can tolerate it and the disease is strong and persistent, cauterize four times on the vertebrae of his back. Heat the cautery until it burns most of the skin, then raise your hand and treat it as previously mentioned so that it heals, God willing, and the iron should be olive.
Chapter Ten.
On Epilepsy.
Only an epileptic whose seizures are caused by phlegm should be cauterized. First, his brain should be purged with large enemas and all the treatments mentioned in the section on purging should be administered if the patient is an adult and able to take medication.
But if he is a child who cannot tolerate medication, gargles and purified masticatory should be used to purge the brain several days beforehand along with an improved diet.
Then his head should be shaved and one cautery should be applied to the middle of the head as previously described, and another cautery to the back of his head. And on each temple of his head, one cautery should be applied. If the patient is strong and able to tolerate it, apply the cauteries mentioned for paralysis and relaxation of the body, extending from the nape of the neck to the lower back. The iron should be olive as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, make the cautery gentler in this manner.
Chapter Eleven.
On Cauterization for Melancholia.
If the cause of melancholia is corrupt humors and thick phlegm, apply the cauteries we mentioned for paralysis.
If the cause of melancholia is an excess leaning towards blackness and the patient's body is moist and corrupt, purge his brain as previously mentioned in the section.
Then shave the patient's head and make a tight cake of linen in the shape of a circle, then lower it onto the center of his head. The patient should sit upright, holding on to each side, then take one pound of old sheep fat.
Then heat it over a moderate fire as much as the finger can bear when inserted, then empty it in the middle of its head in the circle and leave it until it cools. Do this for the patient once a week with all his good treatment until he recovers, if God wills.
And if you wish, cauterize it with many small punctures without holding your hand on the iron, for this type of cautery moistens the brain moderately.
Then apply cotton soaked in butter or chicken fat to it.
Chapter Twelfth.
On cauterizing the descending water in the eye.
If the beginning of descending water in the eye becomes apparent to you by the signs mentioned in the division, hasten and make the patient clean his head and protect it from all moisture and sweat him in the bath on an empty stomach for several days.
Then shave his head and cauterize a spot in the middle of it, then cauterize two spots on the temples if the beginning of descending water is in both eyes, or on one side if it is in one eye.
Then cut with the iron all the veins and arteries under the skin, let the cauteries be long in width as the temples, and prevent the bleeding of blood.
If you see anything of it, cut it on the spot with any treatment possible, and I will come to wisdom in cauterizing the arteries and cutting them while preventing bleeding.
It may also be cauterized under the two bones in the nape of the neck with two strong cauteries.
Chapter Thirteenth.
On cauterizing chronic tears.
If the tears of the eye are chronic and constant, and they were previously from the veins and arteries on the outside of the head, from outside the head, and you are certain that this is from cold superfluity, thick and phlegmatic, then cauterize the cautery which I described precisely in the beginning of descending water. Two cauteries in the middle of the head and two on the temples and two in the nape below the bones, and if you need more cauterize one on each side of the tail of the eye at the end of the eyebrow with a small iron.
Chapter Fourteen.
On Cauterizing the Nose.
If you treat it with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment does not work, hurry to make the patient fast for three nights, then shave his head and cauterize the middle cautery with an olive iron. Then cauterize it with a nail iron, two above the eyebrows under the hair a little, and beware of the artery, do not cut it. This is an image of the nail iron.
Chapter Fifteen.
On Cauterizing Relaxation of the Eyelid.
If an eyelid relaxes from illness or moisture, cauterize the eyelid with one cautery using this crescent-shaped iron.
And if you wish, cauterize above the eyebrows a little two on each side, keeping away from the temples, and the length of each cautery is along the eyebrow.
Do not overdo your hand with the cautery, but cauterize only to the extent that one-third of the skin is burned, and the shape of the iron will be as follows.
Chapter Sixteen.
On Cauterizing the Eyelid.
If its eyelashes turn inward and irritate the eye, cautery is done in two types. Either cautery with fire or cautery with a burning medication. As for cauterizing it with fire, you order the patient beforehand to leave his eyelashes alone if he is one who plucks them so that they grow long and even.
If it irritates him when they grow, tighten his eyelids with a bandage so that they do not move until they sprout. When they have sprouted and become even, place the patient's head in your lap, then draw on the eyelid with ink a mark in the shape of an aspalath leaf.
The sign should begin near the eyelashes, then a cotton swab soaked in egg white or in the saliva of a boy is placed under the eyelid; then this iron shaped like it is heated.
Then it is cauterized on the shape you have taught little by little in many times until the surface of the skin which is like an aspen leaf burns entirely, its appearance being particular and a sign of your work's success being that you see the eyelid become wrinkled and the hair rises from the flesh of the eye.
Then raise your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then carry a cotton swab with ghee on it until the scab comes off; then treat it with ointment so that it heals if God wills, for if something of the hair returns after a while and the eyelid relaxes.
Then cauterize that place again as you did first, and if the hair is in the lower eyelid, pluck it until it returns to its natural position so that it does not pull on the eye; as for cautery with a burning medicine, order the patient to leave off the eyelashes until they lengthen and become even.
Then make a shape of an aspen leaf out of paper, then take from the usual soap and quicklime not yet slaked, one dirhem weight or thereabouts from each, and grind them all together thoroughly, doing this quickly so that it does not dry. Then spread it on the paper you have made in the shape of an aspen leaf and place it on one or both eyelids, putting a cotton swab soaked in egg white underneath the eye, with the patient's head in your lap.
Place your index finger on top of the medicine and press it a little, moving it whenever the patient feels the burning sensation from the medicine because he finds it pleasurable like fire, so as long as he feels the burning, leave the medicine and move it with your finger; and when the burning stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And observe, if you see the eyelid has risen as it rises when scorched by fire or cutting, otherwise apply more of the medicine to the spot where it did not take effect and did not blacken until your work is complete and the eye is scorched; then place cotton soaked in butter upon it until the scab comes off.
Then treat it with palm salve or another until it heals, and you should, when working, take the greatest care that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye; for if the eyelid relaxes after a few days and we fear some hair will fall into the eye.
Reapply the medicine to that part of the eyelid which has relaxed, especially as you did at first; then treat it until it heals. This is an image of a fig leaf.
Know that people's eyes vary in size, so the scorching should be done accordingly. This is not a subtle path to righteousness for one who has practiced this craft.
Chapter Seventeenth.
On the Naasur that Appears in the Eye Socket.
If you have treated the naasur as described in the divisions of diseases and your treatment has not been successful, it should be cauterized in this manner.
Order the patient to place his head in your lap, and have a servant hold his head firmly between your hands so that it does not move or shake.
Then place cotton wool soaked in egg white or the saliva of a sparrow on his eyes, and heat the iron which is pictured here.
It should be hollow like the quill of an eagle's feather from one end, which is where the cautery will be applied. If you wish, it can be pierced at the other end; if you wish, it can be closed off like a pomegranate seed. However, this hollow one is best for your work, God willing.
Then you press the abscess if it is open, and the pus will come out; you dry it. If it is not open, you open it and extract the pus. Then you place the cautery iron on it while it is very hot, holding it with your hand until it reaches the bone.
Withdraw your hand a little way from the eye towards the nose so that you do not make a mistake or disturb the patient, and the iron does not fall into the eyeball and spoil it. If you reach the bone in the first cautery, otherwise repeat the cautery a second time if you need to.
Leave it for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals. If forty days pass and it does not heal, apply a sharp, eating medicine so that the bone is exposed, and scrape it as will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
Another method of cauterizing an abscess, mentioned by some of the ancients, is to deliberately cut into the abscess and then place a slender cone into the same incision; its shape is as follows.
Pour into it a weight of lead equal to a dirham, melted. Hold the cone firmly with your hand so that it does not move at all, so that the molten lead does not flow into the eye. You should place cotton soaked in egg white or water over the patient's eye.
For the lead will burn the abscess and heal it in an astonishing way. If the abscess heals with the cautery and treatment mentioned, that is sufficient. Otherwise, you must resort to using nasal puncturing and redirecting the abscess back into the nasal passage as will be explained in its proper place.
Chapter Eighteen.
On the incision of the lip.
A fissure often occurs in the lip called a harelip, especially in the lips of boys, it often happens. If you have treated this fissure with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment was unsuccessful, then heat a small, smooth iron in this manner.
Make its hollow on the sharpness of a knife, then place it, protected by haste, in the fissure itself until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissure, then treat it with cerate so that it heals, God willing.
Chapter Nineteen.
On the cauterization of a wound in the mouth.
If a tumor appears in the gum, or palate, or roots of molars, then it dries and bursts, and pus flows from it, forming an ulcer, and you treat it and treatment is unsuccessful, then you should heat an iron to the extent that fits within the ulcer.
Then insert it, protected, into the hole of the ulcer and hold your hand until the iron, protected, reaches its depth and end. Do this once or twice, then treat it afterwards with what we have mentioned from treatment until it heals, God willing.
If the matter is cut off and healed, otherwise it is necessary to examine the place and remove the decayed bone according to what will come in its chapter, God willing.
Chapter Twenty.
On cauterizing teeth and relaxed gums.
If the gums relax due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and they are unsuccessful, then place the head of the patient in your lap, then heat the iron that will be shown after this, after placing the tube on the tooth.
Insert the iron into it, protected by haste, and hold your hand for a little while until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth, then raise your hand, then repeat the iron several times as you wish, then let the patient fill his mouth with salt water.
He holds it for an hour and throws it away; the mobile tooth becomes fixed, the relaxed gum tenses, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On Pain in the Tooth.
If the toothache is from cold or there is a worm in it and medicine does not relieve it, cautery is performed in two ways: either with butter or with fire.
As for cautery with butter, take cow butter and boil it in an iron ladle or a shell. Then take cotton, wrap it around the end of a probe, dip it into the boiling butter, place it on the aching tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools.
Then repeat it several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth. If you wish, you can dip a wick or cotton in cold butter and place it on the aching tooth, then put a heated iron on top of it until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
As for cauterizing it with fire, take a copper or iron tube, making sure its body is somewhat thick so that the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth. Then heat the branding iron, which has a pointed shape, and place it on the same tooth, holding your hand until the iron cools down. Repeat this several times.
The pain will go away either that same day or the next. After cauterization, the patient should fill his mouth with good butter and hold it for an hour, then spit it out. This is a picture of the branding iron.
Cauterize with whichever end you wish, to the extent possible. This is a picture of the tube.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On Cauterizing Warts.
If warts are from phlegm and cold humors, and they do not mature with medication, and you desire rapid maturation, heat a hollow branding iron, which has this shape, with openings at both ends.
Let the smoke escape when cauterizing from the other end and place it protected on the same tumor once or twice if needed, until it reaches the depth of the tumor. If the tumor is small, place the iron according to the size of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and apply cotton soaked in butter on it until what was burned by the fire is gone, then treat it with ointment and wicks until it heals, God willing.
Chapter twenty-three.
On cauterization for hoarseness and shortness of breath.
If moistures prevail in the trachea, especially if it is accompanied by a cold temperament, the patient should first be purged with laxatives, then cauterized with a cautery in the hollow of the neck at the base of the pharynx in the lower part.
Be careful not to reach the pharynx with the cautery and do not burn more than half of the skin, then cauterize another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last cartilage of it vigorously, the iron being nail-shaped as previously described.
Then treat it with what was mentioned before until it heals, God willing.
Chapter twenty-four.
On cauterization for lung disease and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold moistures and the patient does not have fever or phthisis and the disease is chronic, cauterize two cauteries above the clavicles in the low soft empty spots and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
The iron should be nail-shaped as previously described, or if you wish, cauterize with a point iron called "the point" whose shape was previously shown in the cautery for earache and pain. The points should be from thirty to near that number.
Then treat it with what has been previously mentioned until it is healed. It is possible to make an iron with three branches in this shape, and hasten cauterization with it because you cauterize three burns at once with it. This is the image of the iron.
Chapter twenty-five.
In the cauterization of the armpit.
If the head of the humerus has become dislocated due to slippery moistures, or if it has not been fixed when it was returned so that it becomes habitual for it to return and then dislocate at the slightest movement as we have seen, then the jaw should first be returned. Then the patient should lie on his back or on his right side, and then lift the skin inside the armpit upwards with the fingers of your left hand if the joint has dislocated inwards.
Then heat the iron with two branches, which is pictured like this.
Then cauterize the skin with it until it penetrates to the other side, and the shape of the cautery will be four burns. It is also possible to cauterize with an iron with three branches so that the shape of the cautery will then be six burns, and the branches should be on the neck of the humerus.
This is the image of the iron with three branches.
The number may be increased by one so that the cauteries are eight, then apply pounded alum mixed with salt to the cautery and bind the patient at rest and do not move the limb for a time until it becomes strong. If the dislocation is upwards, this rarely happens.
So cauterize above the elbow with one good puncturing cautery or many punctuating cauteries, for the joint will become strong and the moisture will go away and the patient will recover.
Chapter twenty-six.
In the cauterization of the abdomen.
If cold and much moisture occur in the stomach until they expel it from its temperament, and frequent fluxes come to it, and it is treated with kinds of treatment but are not successful, then the patient should lie on his back, extend his legs and hands, and then be cauterized three times. A cautery is made under the spoon of the chest the size of a finger with a nail iron, and two cauteries are made below the sides of the one cautery so that the shape of the cauteries becomes triangular, and they are spaced apart lest they come together when they heal. The depth of the cauteries should be one-third the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the cauteries should be.
In this manner and to this extent, no more.
And if you wish, you may cauterize one large cautery in the middle of the stomach in this manner.
The iron with which this single cautery is made should be in the shape of a circle in this manner.
And the stomach may be cauterized by points for those who are frightened of this cautery, and that is to draw points on the stomach to the desired extent with ink, then cauterize them with a pointed iron, then treat it with the treatment previously mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Seventh.
On Cauterization of a Cold Liver.
If pain arises in the liver from cold and moisture or from a strong wind until it has exited from its natural temperament excessively, and the patient is treated with what we have mentioned in the division but it is not successful. Then the patient should lie on his back and three cauteries should be drawn with ink in this shape and exact amount on the liver below the ribs, where a human's elbow ends.
And the distance between each cautery should be the thickness of a finger, and the cautery should be straight along the body, and do not grip tightly with the iron.
Let the amount that you burn of the thickness of the skin be half, no more. And let the patient stand on his feet; if he is not able to stand, let him lie down with his legs extended and arms raised. This is an image of the iron.
And you may cauterize these ulcers with a surgical iron if you have skill and experience in the craft, taking care not to press too hard lest you burn all the skin and reach the abdomen, for the skin there is thin, so be warned.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On Cauterizing a Liver Abscess.
If an abscess appears in the liver, and you wish to know whether that tumor is in the flesh of the liver or in its peritoneum, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will experience heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the peritoneum of the liver, there will be sharp intense pain; and you see that physicians have grown weary trying to treat it, then the patient should lie on his back and a poultice should be applied to the warm spot.
Then heat an iron in the fire; it is an iron resembling a hammer, and this is its image. Cauterize it with a single cautery to burn all the skin and end the cautery in the peritoneum so that all the pus comes out, then treat it with treatment for abscesses until it heals.
This type of cautery should not be used except by one whose training in medicine has been long and who has treated these diseases many times through experience; only then should he undertake such work, and leave it with me if not.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On Cauterizing a Fistula.
Those who came before me mentioned cauterizing a cold fistula in this way: take one of the long dried roots of the zedoary plant, as thick as your finger, dip it into oil, and heat it in fire. Then make one cautery between the connection of the collarbone to the neck and two small ones below the jawbone, slightly inclined towards the side under the chin, and two large ones above the breasts, between the third and fourth ribs.
Also make two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly inclined backwards, and another in the middle of the chest and one above the stomach, and three cauteries from behind: one between the shoulders and two on either side of the spine below the cautery that is between the hands.
Your hand should not be deepened with the cautery, but rather a branding should be made on the surface of the skin. Some of the ancients have mentioned that some people used to use an iron poker, shaped like a horseshoe, which they would heat and insert between the ribs until it reached the tumor itself.
The tumor is then extracted as we described in the case of a liver tumor, and with this cautery method there is great danger; either the patient will die immediately or an incurable fistula will develop at the site.
Chapter Thirty.
Cauterization of the Spleen.
If you have treated spleen disease with the remedies mentioned in the division and your treatment has not been successful, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four cauteries lined up along the length of the spleen.
Arrange them in the shape of liver cauteries as previously described, with a distance of the thickness of a finger or slightly more between each cautery. The iron should be of the same type as mentioned for liver cauteries, and your hand should not be deepened with the cautery. The patient should be lying on his back.
The second method is to lift the skin opposite the spleen where the patient's left elbow ends and raise the skin across the width of the body so that the cauteries will lie along the length of the body.
Then insert the two cauterizing irons, well-protected, until the skin is pierced on the other side. Then withdraw the iron so that there are four burns. If you wish to cauterize with the other iron which has three points.
Then treat the burn site after leaving it to drain pus for many days, for this is more effective than all the previous treatments mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-One.
On Cauterization for Dropsy.
Cauterization is only beneficial for ascitic dropsy, especially if you have treated the patient with the types of treatment mentioned in the division and your treatment has not been successful. Then you should cauterize four burns around the navel and one burn on the abdomen.
Another burn on the liver, a burn on the spleen, and two burns behind his back between the shoulder blades - one opposite his chest and the other opposite his abdomen. The depth of the burn should be close to the thickness of the skin. Then leave the burn open to drain pus for a long time.
Do not neglect the patient's treatment after cauterization with what is necessary so that he benefits from both, and his recovery is hastened. The shape of the iron used to cauterize the back is nail-shaped as previously described, and the one used to cauterize the front is olive-shaped.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
On Cauterization of the Feet and Legs.
If the feet become swollen in dropsy and fill with yellow water, then they should be cauterized on the back of the foot in the hollow between the little toe and the next toe.
Hold your hand steady with the iron and do not bend it, then lift your hand and do not return it at all, for yellow water will be secreted and the iron will be in this shape.
Then cauterize two burns on each leg, the burn being made with the pointed end of the iron. The burn should be along the length of the leg: one below the knee and the other lower down towards the middle of the leg. There should also be two burns on each thigh.
Leave the fistula open without treatment for a long time so that water may discharge from it, then treat it with all that we have mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On the fistula of diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is from cold and moisture until it weakens the holding and digestive powers that are in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated with various treatments but does not recover, and you see the patient capable of a fistula and strong, then make a large fistula on his stomach. As previously mentioned in the stomach fistula, with a circular iron and four small fistulas around the navel, delicately made with a fine awl-iron, and a fistula on the cotton above the bone, large or two.
If you see the moisture is abundant and the patient can tolerate it, then make a fistula on the groin and one on each buttock, and perhaps add two small fistulas to the stomach near the large one. For this is a successful treatment that does not fail in its benefit if God wills.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
On the fistula of hemorrhoids.
If there are many chronic hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from thick cold humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with what we mentioned in the division but the treatment does not succeed, then make for the patient three fistulas at the bottom of the sacrum under the table a little, triangular.
And a fistula under the navel the size of two fingers, and if you think his stomach has become cold and his food does not digest and you see his face swollen, then make for him a large fistula on the stomach as previously mentioned and one on his liver. And another on his spleen with a fine awl iron, and leave the fistulas open for a while, then treat them until he recovers if God wills.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
In the matter of ulcers.
After cutting them, if the warts are cut, take a heated iron resembling a spatula and insert it, still hot, into the very same warts that have been cut, and press your hand until the iron reaches the mouth of the vein from which the blood flows. Do this once or twice.
If the warts are numerous, cauterize each one as we have described and then treat them with ointments suitable for them until they are healed. And if you cauterize a large wart also on cotton, it is more beneficial.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
On the Cauterization of a Fistula That Occurs in the Buttocks and Its Surroundings.
If the patient does not respond to incision and the procedure that we have described in its place, and they refuse it, perhaps they will be cured by cauterization. And if a fistula occurs in one of them, and pus and foul moisture flows from it, then first you should measure it with a thin probe.
Then know the depth of it with the probe, and take a heated iron resembling a spatula and insert it hot into the very same fistula, straight along the path of the fistula and to the depth that the probe entered, and repeat the cauterization until all those corrupt humors are burned away once or twice or three times according to your need.
And be careful not to burn a nerve if there is one, or a large vein; and if the fistula leads to a bladder tumor or an intestinal tumor.
So be careful of all these places, and only do this if the fistula is in a place of flesh and you have determined that it is not penetrable; then treat the area until it heals. If the area closes and the discharge ceases and remains so for some time, know that it has been perfectly cured.
And if the discharge does not cease, know that it is penetrable or there is a large corrupt bone in its depth or something similar to what will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter Thirty-Seven
On the kidneys.
If pain occurs in the kidneys due to cold or harsh wind and a gathering results from this, it should be cauterized on both sides above the kidney, with a branding iron as previously mentioned, three times in succession, forming a line of three cauterizations for greater benefit.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
On cautery of the bladder.
If weakness and relaxation occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, so that the patient cannot retain urine, cauterize below the perineum on the bladder where pubic hair begins, one cautery to the right of the perineum and another to the left.
The cautery on each side should be the size of a thumb joint, and an additional cautery should be performed below the lower back or two if necessary, using the previously mentioned branding iron.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
On cautery of the womb.
If a substance of cold and moisture forms in the womb, preventing conception and corrupting its humors, making menstruation difficult, or if pain occurs during menstruation, three cauteries should be applied around the perineum as described for cautery of the bladder. And a cautery on the cotton below the lower back or two, using a branding iron.
Chapter Forty.
On cautery for hip dislocation.
Erroneous humors may sometimes accumulate around the hip joint, causing it to dislocate. The sign of this is that one leg will be longer than the other when measured against each other and a void will be felt at the site of dislocation. In this case, a semi-circular cautery should be applied directly to the hip joint itself.
After you have learned with the pen about truth as it revolves to fall in the middle of a circle and let the iron which presents its form be in the belly, if this iron does not come to you then take three cauteries with the large olive iron.
Make the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of all the skin and then treat it until it recovers, God willing.
Chapter Forty-One.
In Cauterization of Sciatica.
If pain occurs in the right hip and its cause is cold and moisture, and you have treated the patient as mentioned in the division and the treatment has not been effective and time has passed, then it is necessary for the patient to ease thick humors with hellebore or colocynth and the like.
Then cauterize and direct the cautery in two ways, either with burning medications or with fire. Cautery with fire is done in many ways, one of which is to cauterize on the right hip itself three triangular cauteries like this.
Make their depth appropriate and the distance between each cautery according to the thickness of a finger, using an olive iron. There may be a cautery in the middle on the head of the hip itself, making four cauteries. If you wish, you may cauterize with the circle mentioned previously in the cautery for dislocation of the hip, one cautery.
Let the circle encompass the whole hip and burn all the thickness of the skin, this is the characteristic of cautery in sciatica if the pain is constant to the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
But if it extends to the thigh and leg, cauterize two cauteries on the thigh in the place the patient indicates pain and one cautery above the ankle bone by four fingers to the lateral side slightly, using a thin iron. The depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin only.
And if he indicates that the pain extends towards the toes, cauterize it where he points with a point iron three or four times, or more if necessary. And if he indicates pain below the knee toward the leg, cauterize there one small cautery.
And be careful in all your cauteries not to burn a nerve or large artery, lest you thereby inflict on the patient a bad malady or lameness.
I have seen one or two who cauterized above the ankle and pressed hard during the cautery, so that the leg swelled until the swelling reached the foot, and it all became ulcerated and corrupted the whole leg; then diarrhea and death followed. If the pain is on both sides, cauterize them in this same manner.
Some of the wise scholars have mentioned that in cauterizing the hip, this is the way to do it: Make a kind of cup out of iron, its diameter half a cubit, and at its mouth make it as thick as the kernel of a date or slightly less. Inside this cup there should be another cup, and a third cup within that.
The space between each pair of cups should be the width of a thumb joint, and the cups should be open on both sides, their height being about one or two thumb joints. A handle made of iron is securely fixed to them, and this is its form.
Then it is heated in the fire until it glows red and the sparks are removed, then it is placed on the hip bone; the patient should be reclining on his sound side and it cauterizes three circular cauteries at one time, then it is left for three days and dressed with butter. The wound is left open for several days.
Then it is treated with ointment until it heals. The author of this book says: This type of cautery is rarely used by us because of its ugliness and frightening appearance, and few are found who can endure it, although it is a good cautery for those who can bear it and are struck in the proper place.
As for cauterization with burning medicines, it is to make two cups resembling a throat into which the molten lead from copper or iron will descend.
Their edges should have a height equal to two or three knots, and the space between them should be the thickness of a finger, with the bottom open and the top closed, while their sides are held together in this manner.
Then you lower it onto the affected area of the hip and thigh, with the patient lying on his right side. You firmly hold your hand in place and then pour hot vinegar between the two circles. Hold it for a duration of an hour glass and the patient will endure its sting and burning, as he will feel a pleasure like that of fire.
Until the stinging subsides, then you lift your hand with the instrument and wipe all the vinegar from the hip with fresh water, then leave it for three days and apply butter to it until the blackness of the burn disappears. Leave it for a few more days so that pus may flow from it, for this is most beneficial.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a mold for him that will hold water, just as you did for the hip. This is the description of hot vinegar, and its effectiveness has been proven in my treatise on the Correction of Medicines.
Take one part each of saltpeter and unquenched lime, crush them together, and place them in a new pot with a single small hole in its bottom, just large enough for a mortar to fit through. Place another glazed pot underneath the bottom of this pot.
Pour fresh water over the saltpeter and lime until it covers them by a finger's breadth, after firmly pressing them together with your hand. Leave the pot until the hot vinegar drips into the glazed pot below, then collect all of that water and pour it onto fresh lime and saltpeter.
Then it becomes very sharp and can be used for many medical procedures and to cauterize all the limbs, because it acts like fire itself. Some medications can also cauterize the hip, such as thafsia, honey of bladderwrack, and lime with soap ground up.
Galen related a story about an ancient man's treatment for hip pain and sciatica, greatly exaggerating its importance and claiming that no other treatment was needed and that it cured with a single application.
He even claimed that a person might enter the bath carried in and leave cured. The treatment involves taking green chisturaj, if not available, use fresh dried chisturaj. Grind it with some fat and apply it to the hip where it hurts, or on the leg or thigh.
Bind it tightly and leave it for three hours or as long as the patient feels relief from the burning sensation. Then put them in a bath; if their body sweats, put them in the tub. The pain will go away and they will be cured, God willing. If not cured, repeat the poultice after ten days.
God willing, they will be cured. Know that no one should cauterize with these medications except after the body has been purged. Dioscorides mentioned that burning sciatica with goat hair is beneficial.
Cauterization should be done as follows: Take wool soaked in old oil and place it on the deep spot between the thumb and index finger, closer to the index finger. Then take a dry goat's hair.
Ignite it with fire until it becomes a coal, then place it on the wool and leave it until it goes out. Then take another one and continue doing so until the sensation reaches the middle of the arm to the hip and the pain subsides, God willing. This type of cauterization is called hair cauterization.
Chapter Forty-Two
On Pain in the Back.
Pain in the back may arise from many causes, such as a fall, a blow, excessive vomiting, and the like. It is caused by the effusion of cold, moist matter, and cupping alone falls into this category.
When pain is caused by the effusion of cold matter, after the patient has vomited with a hot drink or similar remedy, he should be cupped on his back where the pain is located in three rows across the width of the table itself. After marking the location with ink, five or more cups should be applied in each row, depending on the patient's constitution and strength as you judge it.
The cupping should be done with a point-iron, or if you prefer, three or four cups can be applied with a medium-sized nail-iron in this manner.
Chapter Forty-Three.
On Cupping for the Beginning of a Swelling.
This ailment often occurs in young children, and its initial sign in a child is shortness of breath when standing or moving. You will find a protuberance at the end of his vertebrae which protrudes above all other protuberances.
If you see this and want to stop it, cup him with an iron that is round in shape like this. Let each cupping be taken on all sides of the vertebra equally. If you prefer, cup around the vertebra with a point-iron in two or three rows, the points being close together; then treat the area as we have described until it is healed.
Remember to use cupping only for swellings that are due to nerve tension.
Chapter Forty-Four.
On Cupping for Gout and Joint Pains.
If joint pains are caused by the effusion of cold, moist matter into any part of the body, and if the pain occurs in the legs, physicians usually call it gout.
If cold gout is treated with the types of treatments mentioned in the division and the pain does not go away, then cauterization will remove it. This is done by cauterizing after vomiting around the joints of the legs with many cauterizations, using an olive-wood iron medium in size as shown in this figure.
And if you need to cauterize on the face of the man, do so with a puncturing iron. If the pains rise to the knees or to all the joints, which often occurs, then cauterize each knee three or four times on each side with this same olive-wood iron.
If you need more than this cauterization, then do so and do not deepen your hand with the cautery, but make it about the thickness of the skin only. If the pains rise to the hips or the back, use what we mentioned about cauterization in its chapter.
If the pains are only in the hands, then cauterize around the wrists as if drawing two rows. If the pains remain in the fingers, then cauterize each knuckle with a point and on the back of the hand. If the pains rise after a few days to the elbows or to the shoulders
cauterize them on each side, and do not neglect the patient from good treatment and taking medicine. For if he improves his diet and expels phlegm, he will be healed with this cauterization, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On Cauterizing the Gouty.
If a hernia appears in the groin and some of the intestines and fat descend to the testicle, and this is recent and near the beginning, then you should order the patient to abstain from food for a day and use laxatives that will expel stool from his bowels.
Then have him lie down on his back between your hands and order him to hold himself until the fat or intestines protrude, then push them back in with your finger. Then draw a mark under the hernia on the pubic bone, shaped like a half-circle with its ends pointing upward towards the body.
Then heat this iron in the shape.
Until it comes white, throwing sparks, then return the intestine or the rupture to its place, then a servant places his hand on the spot so that the intestine does not protrude, and after the patient's thighs have been separated and a cushion has been placed under him, another servant binds his legs.
And another on his chest holding his hands, then the iron is lowered onto the same mark and your hand with the iron stands straight and holds it until it reaches the bone or returns it again if it did not reach the bone the first time.
And preserve your effort from the protrusion of the intestine while you cauterize it so as not to burn it, for this would cause the patient either death or a great affliction. Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work will not succeed. The cautery iron for boys should be gentle according to their ages and for adults according to theirs.
Then treat the cautery site with butter after three days until the dryness of the fire is gone, then treat it with all kinds of ointments until it heals and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound closes.
And his food during his treatment should be what softens his stomach so that the intestine does not protrude when he strains and defecates, then if he wants to get up after forty days, use a tight bandage and hold it for another forty days, and reduce exertion, fullness from food and drink, and loud shouting.
For if he uses this treatment in this way, he will be completely cured, God willing. I will mention the treatment of hernia by incision in its chapter, God willing. As for the hernia that occurs in the rest of the abdomen and is in its early stages, if you want it not to increase, cauterize a circular cautery on it according to its size. Let what is burned of the skin be like a third of it, then treat it as we have mentioned, for it will not increase, God willing. And some of the ancients have mentioned that a hernia should be cauterized with a triangular iron in this manner.
After you have learned about the hernia with a pen and make the line that is across in the upper side of the hernia, and the other line to the bottom, then lower your hand in the middle with one cauterizing, pincer-like burn, the first burn is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter forty-six.
In cauterizing the scrotum.
If it happens in some of the limbs from a fall or a blow, pain and that pain lasts for a long time, and medicine does not work in it, then it should be cauterized with a pointed iron, and the burn of each limb should be according to its size, weakness, and strength.
And it eliminates the pain and scrotum from it. If he recovers from the first burn, otherwise repeat the burn on him, because it is customary for these pains to move from the limb to what is near it, so you should follow them with a burn until the patient recovers.
Chapter forty-seven.
In cauterizing leprosy.
As for lepers, they may benefit greatly from cauterization, especially the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
If you want to cauterize him, look and see if the leprosy is in its early stages and treat it with what we have mentioned in the division, and it does not subside nor stop, and you fear for the patient that corruption will take over all of his temperament, then cauterize him on the head five times. One in the middle of the head as usual, the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the temples, and one from behind on the nape of the neck, and apply your hand to the burn a little until it affects the bone slightly.
And scales are removed from it to facilitate the escape of thick vapors, and a cautery is also applied to the spleen itself as previously mentioned. But if leprosy has persisted in the patient and appeared clearly, then these cauteries that we mentioned should be applied to the head. A cautery on the tip of the nose, and two on the cheeks, and two on the hollows of the neck, and six on the hollows of the back, and one large one on the coccyx at the base of the tailbone and another above it in the same area, and two on the thighs, one on each thigh. And two on the knees, one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the shoulders, and a cautery on each joint of the fingers of his hands and feet, and one on each heel of his feet, and on the wrists of his hands.
And preserve the nerve at the back of the heels lest you burn them, and one may cauterize a cautery on the pubic bone, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver, and know that the more cauteries you apply the more beneficial and effective it will be.
And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because his body is numb, and the cauteries should be of varying sizes according to the limbs and joints as previously mentioned in the characteristics of the irons.
Then treat the cauteries with carob bean powder mixed with honey and all other treatment until he recovers, if God wills.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
Chapter Forty-Eight: On Cautery for Numbness
Then treat it with ointment until it heals, and it may be cauterized for some numbness that occurs in the hand and foot in the back of the body at the exit of the nerve that moves that limb, so the numbness goes away.
Let no one undertake this except one who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of organs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
The Forty-Ninth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Leprosy.
If leprosy has become chronic and no remedy of medicine has been effective, cauterize it slightly according to the thickness of the skin so that the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with lentil flour mixed with rose oil, plantain leaf, pigeon blood, or the blood of snipes—one part of each—mix them all together, apply to a cloth, and bind the area until it heals.
The Fiftieth Chapter.
On Cauterization for Cancer.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with a circular iron around it as if drawing a circle. Some sages have mentioned cauterizing severely in its center, but I do not advise this because I expect it to ulcerate; I have witnessed this many times.
Therefore, the correct method is to cauterize around it in a circle as previously mentioned or with numerous cauterizations.
The Fifty-First Chapter.
On Cauterization for Fistulas.
If someone develops a fistula and it is slow to mature, either due to the effectiveness of the cause, or because the patient is old and has little blood, or simply due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the fistula, cauterize around it with many small, punctuating cauterizations.
Then leave it alone; it will hasten maturation. If you wish to cauterize the fistula itself, hold a hot iron in this shape.
And lower it into the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the skin, and let the cautery be from what is below so that the pus can flow easily, then treat it as necessary until it heals.
The Fifty-Second Chapter.
On cauterization of ulcers.
An ulcer is a corruption that progresses in the member and eats it away as fire consumes dry wood. If you see an ulcer in a place that can tolerate cauterization with fire, then prepare numerous small and large iron nails as appropriate for the location of the ulcer.
Then cauterize it from all sides until the corruption is completely eradicated, leaving nothing at all. Then leave it for three days and apply powdered sulfur mixed with oil to the cauterized areas so that all the scabs and corruption are removed.
Then treat it with flesh-producing ointments. If, after three days, you see that the flesh is growing healthily without corruption, then well and good. Otherwise, repeat the cautery on any remaining corrupted areas. The ulcer may also be treated with strong medications.
For it acts in place of fire more quickly and effectively. I have already mentioned its treatment with strong medications in the appropriate section, so take it from there when you need it.
The Fifty-Third Chapter.
On Cauterization with Reversed and Unreversed Nails.
This ailment often occurs on the soles of the feet, and it is something rough that causes pain to a man. Cauterization can be performed in two ways: either with fire or with strong water.
As for cauterization with fire, heat a hollow iron tool resembling an eagle's feather, made to encircle the nail on all sides and have a thin edge. Then lower it onto the nail while hot and turn your hand with the tool around the nail until the tool reaches the depth of the nail.
And you leave it for three days to ripen the pus, then dress it with wild barley boiled in salt and leave the dressing on it for a night, for it will detach from its roots. Then treat the wound site with flesh-producing ointment until it heals, if the pins are not reversed.
It often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, so you should take a tube of copper or iron or an eagle's feather and lower it over the pin or wart, then pour a small amount of sharp water into the tube.
Hold your hand while turning it slightly with a pinch to make the edge of the tube affect the base of the pin, so that the sharp water finds its way down to the base of the pin and the patient endures the sting of the sharp water for an hour.
Then you leave it, for the pin will detach from its roots. You do this one by one until you have removed all of them from the body, then treat the sites after they are detached with flesh-producing ointments.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On Cautery.
If someone suffers a cautery burn from cold in a nerve or from fever quartus or other ailment, you should apply four or five cauteries on the vertebrae, placing one cautery between each vertebra and one on his chest. And apply a cautery to his stomach with an olive-wood iron, for cautery soothes and accelerates the maturation of the cold illness.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
On Cautery for a Wound in the Body.
Ugly boils may erupt in the body, caused by thick, spoiled cold matter. Upon their first appearance, a gentle cautery should be applied to the head of each boil using a slender as wood stick with one end ignited, or with long asparagus root, or with a lentil-shaped iron.
And the tumors may be cauterized in their first outbreak in this manner, so that it does not increase and the effective agent is dissipated, and the patient recovers from it, but this should only be done after the patient has been bled.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
On Stopping Bleeding That Occurs When an Artery Is Cut.
Very often, bleeding of blood occurs from an artery that has been severed when a wound is exposed externally or when a tumor is incised or a member is cauterized, and so on, making it difficult to cut.
If this happens to someone, hurry your hand to the mouth of the artery and place your index finger upon it, pressing firmly so that the blood is confined under your finger and nothing comes out; then put several small and large olive-wood pegs in the fire and blow on them until they become very hot.
Then take one, either small or large according to the wound and the place where the artery has burst open, and apply the peg to the same vein after quickly removing your finger; hold the peg until the bleeding stops.
If the bleeding rushes out when you lift your finger from the mouth of the artery and the peg is extinguished, quickly take another peg from those prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after another until the bleeding stops.
Be careful not to burn any nerves that may be there, for this would cause the patient further suffering.  Know that if blood flows from an artery, it cannot be cut, especially if it is a large artery, except in one of four ways: either by cauterization as we have said, or by amputation if it has not already been amputated. For if it is amputated, both ends will contract and the bleeding will stop; or it may be tied tightly with thread, or medications that staunch bleeding may be applied and bound firmly with bandages.
As for someone who attempts to cut it with a ligature or by pulling with cloth or applying burning objects and the like, it will not be severed at all except in rare cases. If this happens to someone and neither a physician nor medicine is available, let him hasten to place the index finger on the mouth of the wound itself as we have described.
Press it very hard so that the blood is confined and flows from above the wound and onto the artery and finger, which should not be removed with very cold water at all times until the blood freezes and thickens and stops. During this time, look to see what it needs in terms of cautery or medicine.
Chapter Two.
On Incisions, Cauterization, Phlebotomy, and Surgeries and the Like.
As we mentioned in the first chapter, every disease that can be treated with cauterization by fire and burning medication, its reasons and causes, instruments and images of cautery tools have been made chapters from beginning to end.
And I will follow the same path in this chapter to make it easy for the student to attain what he desires...
Before I begin with that, you should know, my sons, that this chapter contains more intricacies than the first chapter on cauterization.
Therefore, caution should be even greater in this chapter because the work here often involves vomiting blood, which sustains life, when opening a vein or making an incision on a tumor or cauterizing an abscess or treating a surgical wound or removing an arrow or cutting for a stone and so forth. All of these carry danger and fear, and most often result in death.
I advise you against venturing into anything doubtful, for in this profession you will encounter various types of people with different ailments. Some may be weary of their illness and find death appealing.
Due to the severity of their suffering and the length of their affliction, they may show signs indicative of death. Others may offer you their wealth, providing for your needs in hopes of recovery, but their illness is a fighter. You should not help those who come to you with this disposition at all.
Let your caution be stronger than your desire and eagerness, and do not undertake anything of this until you have certain knowledge that what results will be a happy outcome. And employ in all the treatment of your illnesses the advance of knowledge and warning against what leads to ruin.
For in that you have help in gaining praise, glory, remembrance, and gratitude. May Allah inspire you, O sons, with right guidance and not deprive you of truth and success, for that is in His hand. There is no god but He.
And I have arranged this chapter into sections, building upon what was presented in the chapter on cautery from antiquity to the present, so that it may lighten for you your pursuit of whatever you desire, God willing.
Chapter One.
On the treatment of water that gathers in the heads of infants.
This ailment often occurs in infants at birth if the midwife presses the infant's head without gentleness, and it may also arise from a hidden cause that is unknown.
I have not seen this ailment in anyone but infants, and everyone I have seen with it quickly succumbed to death, so I decided to refrain from treating it. I once saw an infant whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger every day. Until the infant could no longer sit upright because of the size of its head, and the moisture increased until it died.
This moisture either gathers between the skin and bone, or it gathers under the bone on the peritoneum. The procedure for this depends on whether the moisture is between the skin and bone, and if the swelling is small; then one should make a single incision across the middle of the head, about two inches long so that the moisture can drain. This is a depiction of the scalpel.
But if there is more moisture and the swelling is larger, then make two intersecting incisions like this:
If the moisture is under the bone and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head open from every side and the water descends if you press it with your hand into the inside and this is not hidden from you, then you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner.
And after the incision, all the moisture will come out, then tighten the incisions with rags and bandages, then dress it from above with syrup and oil until the fifth day, then loosen the bandage and treat the wound with twisting and ointments, and do not leave the head tight, but feed the patient with all dry food that is low in moisture.
Until the organ becomes strong and heals, another description of the incision is to look where the bone of the swelling appears and the gathering of water, because it may be more in the back of the head or in the front or on the right or on the left.
So aim the incision where the swelling and filling of water appeared for you, and cut it as much as you can, while being careful not to cut an artery so that bleeding occurs and the patient dies from that bleeding along with vomiting moisture.
Chapter Two.
Cutting the arteries behind the ears, known as the temporals.
When someone suffers from a sudden cold in the eyes or chest and this persists, and medication does not work for it, then the treatment for that is to cut these two arteries.
So if you want to cut them, shave the patient's head with a razor, then rub the place with a coarse rag so that the artery appears, then tighten the patient's neck with their own garment, then look where the pulse beats and their locations are the two lower places behind the ears; they rarely hide except in some people.
Then mark them with ink, and cut them with a dissecting knife down to the bone; this should be done across the head. If you wish, you can insert the knife under the artery and pull it upwards while cutting; the length of the incision should be about two joined fingers.
If the vein is severed, blood will spurt forth in a pulsating manner, advancing and receding continuously. If the artery does not appear to touch, one should measure three finger-breadths from the earlobe and then mark with ink, cutting down to the bone.
Send six cups of blood from the median vein, perhaps more or less, all depending on the strength of the patient and the fullness of his arteries. Then look at the wound; if any peritoneum remains on the bone, cut it away.
This is done to prevent a hot tumor from forming, then bind the wound with a linen wick and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter Three.
Cutting the Arteries in the Fingers.
If a person suffers from chronic migraine or acute illnesses brought on by humid heat and muscular soreness in the fingers, or severe persistent headache, and is treated with various medical remedies without success, we have found that cutting or cauterizing the arteries in the fingers, as we have described, can be effective.
The procedure for cutting the arteries involves shaving the hair from the fingers and locating the prominent artery in the fingertip; its pulse will be apparent, and it is rarely hidden except in a few individuals.
If the artery is concealed due to extreme cold, have the patient warm their neck by pulling up their collar, then rub the area with a cloth or apply a hot compress until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the scalpel depicted in this image. Carefully incise the skin with the scalpel until you reach the artery. Then insert a snare and draw it upward to expose the artery from its sheath, freeing it from all surrounding connective tissue. If the artery is thin, twist it with the tip of the snare. Then a portion is cut from it, according to the distance between its ends, so that it constricts and does not bleed. For if it is not amputated or severed, the blood will not rise at all; then six to three ounces of blood are drawn.
If the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong doubled thread, the thread being either silk or oud strings so that gangrene does not hasten to it before the wound heals and bleeding occurs.
Then what is between the ligatures is cut, doing this at that hour or later. If you wish, you may cauterize it close to the bone with a cautery iron until its ends are severed, which will perform this action just as well or better, as we have said.
Unless the patient has a fever or is melancholic, because cauterization helps destroy moisture and so is more beneficial. After ligating the arteries, the area should be stuffed with soft cotton and tight bandages applied. After healing, it should be treated with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and bandaged until it recovers, God willing.
If bleeding occurs from the artery during your work, immediately cut it, either by cauterization or by filling the area with pitch and pressing your hand until the blood stops. If you have none of these, place your finger there until the blood coagulates.
Wash the area with very cold water until the pain subsides and bandage it properly. Something lighter and easier than ligating the artery is to cauterize the vein with this two-bladed iron after marking the locations with ink.
Lower it fiercely until it reaches the bone, so that the vein is severed in two places for its ends to separate; it will not join together at all with this cauterization. This is an image of the iron.
The knives should be sharp like small tweezers, but much less sharp than a knife, for if they were as sharp as a knife, the cold would quickly reach them and the flesh would not cut easily. If there is some thickness in them, it will hold the heat of the fire.
And it cuts the flesh quickly, and this action is better than all actions, lighter and easier, and let the distance between the knives be the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
In the treatment of continuous hot tears flowing to the eyes.
If the tears are continuous and flow from the veins on the head outside, and he does not benefit from any medical treatment with medicine, and you see that the face of the patient has reddened. And he feels a tingling in his forehead like the crawling of ants, and his eyes are shaken and wet, their lids have become swollen from the severity of the tears, so those who came before us in treating it resorted to this procedure, which is called treatment with the sword, which is that you order the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then you make three parallel incisions on the forehead along its length, each incision being about two fingers long. The first incision is parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second a short distance from the movement of the muscle that is in the temple, and the third on the other side.
Be careful not to cut the arteries on either side, and keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws. The distance between each incision should be about three closed fingers. Have prepared pieces of sponge or a lot of absorbent cloth ready to dry the blood.
Then insert the sharp, double-ended probe, pictured here. From the incision next to the temple to the middle incision, and scrape off all the skin between them with the periosteum on the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision. Then remove this probe. And one also enters into the first incision a tool called a skin knife, sharp on one side and smooth and not sharp on the other, and this is its image:
Its sharp side is turned upwards towards the flesh attached to the skin and its smooth side towards the bone, and it is pushed until it reaches the middle incision, cutting through all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without the cut reaching the outer surface of the skin.
Then you do the same in the middle incision to the other, and after a moderate amount of blood has flowed, press the places where the solidified blood has formed. Then place a wick of cotton wool soaked in a mixture of wine vinegar and oil or vinegar and oil in each incision.
This is done so that a hot swelling does not occur. On the third day, the ligature is removed and much irrigation with lukewarm water is used. Then it is treated with basilicum ointment mixed with rose oil and all other remedies for wounds until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Five.
On the treatment of tears and discharges to the eyes from within the head.
When one suffers from frequent, sharp, continuous discharges and sees the eyes as small and shaking, vision has weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated with eyelashes falling out. There is a sharp, painful ache deep in the head and continuous sneezing. Know from these symptoms that these substances and discharges come from many deep vessels, and the best treatment for this is as follows: Order the patient to shave his forehead and then make one incision in the middle of the forehead.
There is a sharp, painful ache deep in the head and continuous sneezing. Know from these symptoms that these substances and discharges come from many deep vessels, and the best treatment for this is as follows: Order the patient to shave his forehead and then make one incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise it slightly across and begin the incision from the left temple to the right, reaching down to the bone, keeping your hand away from the temporal muscles that move during chewing. Continue until the bone is exposed and all the blood has been absorbed with a sponge.
Separate the edges of the incision with lint or a flax twist, then tie over it with ligatures and soak the ligatures in wine and oil so that a hot abscess does not occur. When you release them and see that the hot abscess has broken, you should rub the bone until flesh begins to grow there.
Then treat it with a drying remedy that promotes flesh growth, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of tragacanth, and making an ointment from them to be used in the growth of flesh in such wounds.
Chapter Six.
On the Treatment of What Falls into the Ear.
Anything that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone or something like stone, such as iron and glass; or a vegetable seed, like chickpeas, kernels, and the like; or something liquid, like water, vinegar, and the like.
Or an animal. When a pebble or something like a pebble falls into the ear, and it is not too large for the ear, hold the ear up to the sun; if you see the pebble, put a drop of violet oil or ceruse in it, then try to remove it by moving the head or sneezing with a quill. Plug the nostrils when you sneeze, after putting a collar of cloth or wool around the ear and pulling the ear upwards; it often comes out with this treatment. If it doesn't, then try to remove it with a fine probe, which has this shape.
If it comes out with the probe, or else try to remove it with a fine, flexible blind snare. If it doesn't come out that way, make a tube of copper and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal carefully.
Seal around the tube with softened pitch so that the wind has no other path but the tube, then draw it up with a strong suction; it often comes out this way. If it does not come out as we have described, take a little mastic from gum arabic or hunter's gum used to catch birds and place it on the end of a probe.
After it is firmly wrapped in cotton, it is gently introduced into the ear canal after the ear has been dried of moisture. If it does not all come out as we have described, proceed to incision before hot swelling or rigidity occurs.
The incision is described as follows: you first make a cut on the patient's scalp and let out blood according to his strength. Then you hold the patient between your hands, turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear near its cartilage in the lowest part.
The incision should be crescent-shaped until it reaches the stone, which is then removed as best you can with instruments. Then the incision is quickly sewn up and treated until it heals.
If the thing that has fallen into the ear is one of the grains that swell and become inflamed, try to remove it as we have described. If this does not work, take a fine, delicate spoon like this.
Try to cut this type of grain that has fallen into the ear with it, but only do so if you are sure that the grain has become moistened by the ear's vapor until it becomes many small pieces, then remove them with a syringe, a delicate hook, or suction.
As we have mentioned, it is easy to remove. As for the water that has entered the ear, the patient should first sneeze with a candlewick inserted into his nostril after filling his ear with some loose cotton while lying on that ear containing the water; if it comes out this way...
Otherwise, take many smooth, flat pebbles the length of your fingers and warm them slightly over fire. The patient inserts one of them into the ear canal and rests on one leg from that side, striking the pebble in his ear with another stone.
He continues to do this pebble by pebble until all the water comes out. The water may also come out if one takes a reed or feather and inserts one end into the ear, while burning the other end over fire until most of it is charred; then repeat with another feather.
Do this repeatedly until all the water comes out or draw it out with a tube as previously mentioned in the case of gravel. As for removing the animal inside, see if its body is small like a flea or similar. If so, treat it as mentioned in the division.
If its body is large and perceptible to the touch, try to remove it with forceps and probes; this is easier than anything that grows in the ear. As for removing worms generated in the ear, if you have treated them as mentioned in the division in the article on catarrhs and your treatment has not been successful.
You should look into the ear towards the sun, if something of the worm appears to you, remove it with forceps or fine probes. If nothing appears to you from them, take a tube shaped like this.
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, insert the slender end into the ear as far as the patient can tolerate, then suck strongly. Do this repeatedly until all the worms come out. If they do not come out for you, seal around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you in the case of gravel.
If they do not come out as mentioned, use the catarrhs that I have mentioned and which those who came before have tried to kill worms. You will find this in the article on catarrhs. Pouring your ointments and medicines into the ear with this instrument is shown in this diagram:
As you see, it is made of silver or brass, narrow at the bottom with a small hole and wide at the top. If you wish, the cannon in the inside of the tube may be of solid brass. If you wish, you can take a syringe and wind cotton tightly around its end.
Then pour the ointment or juice or whatever medicine you want into the tube while it is in the ear. Then insert the syringe with cotton from above and squeeze it moderately with your hand until the ointment is driven into the auditory canal and he feels it.
Let the medicine be poured into the ear, and let it be warmed a little in the fire. Be careful that what is poured into it is not too cold or too hot, for the ear cannot bear it.
Chapter Seven.
In the Treatment of Deafness.
Some children may be born from their mothers with their ear canals not pierced.
It may also happen that some people have a blockage in the ear canal from a wound or growing flesh. This blockage may be deep in the ear canal, invisible to the eye.
It may also protrude slightly from the opening and be visible. The blockage that is deep in the ear and invisible is usually difficult to cure, while that which is visible should be treated by placing the patient's ear in the sun. Look into it and if you see the blockage, open it with a delicate speculum shaped like this: .
Its tip should be slightly widened, while the rest of the speculum should be smooth on both sides so as not to injure the ear. If the blockage is due to flesh that has grown in the ear canal, grasp it with a fine snare and cut it carefully until all the flesh is removed.
If the blockage is deep in the ear, take a fine, smooth probe, warm it slightly in the fire, and insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the blockage and the patient experiences hearing difficulty, gently press it.
Be careful not to injure the nerve of the ear, and then place a wick in the ear according to the width of the opening, soaked in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed or take a wick, soak it in water, and sprinkle powdered glass on it.
Use it. If you see that the ear has become swollen and hot, remove the wick and replace it with another wick soaked in a liniment made with rose oil to soothe the swelling. Then treat it until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs, dip a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use all the treatment that cuts off the mentioned bleeding as stated in the article on catarrhs.
Chapter Eight.
In the treatment of warts that appear on the eyelids.
These warts that appear on the eyelids may be moist or dry, so they should be held with forceps or a snare and cut at their base with a scalpel, then powdered alum should be applied to the area.
If blood bleeds from it, cauterize it with a gentle lentil-sized iron after cutting, for it is best to cauterize after cutting, and it often returns if any of its roots remain. And if it is cauterized with fire, those roots will be burned and will not return.
Chapter Nine.
In the treatment of ophthalmia that occurs on the eyelids.
It often appears on the eyelids something resembling a cold in its severity and stiffness.
And for this reason, it is called ophthalmia, which is the gathering of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid, and the procedure for it is to look: if the ophthalmia is protruding on the surface of the eyelid and moves in every direction, then its matter is easy, so make a transverse incision on it.
Then gently peel it off from all sides until you get rid of it, then hang it with a snare and cut it. If you are not able to cut it except after penetrating the eyelid by cutting, that will not harm the patient at all.  If the incision is large, bring it together with stitches and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, there is no harm in that, for the ointment will hold it together and cauterize it. If the ophthalmia is slanted inward toward the inside surface of the eyelid, turn the eyelid over and hang the ophthalmia with a snare without needing to make an incision, and cut it from all sides.
If the eyelid is cut, it will not harm anything; then wash the eye after cutting the bandage with salt water and treat the area with what heals so that the patient recovers.
Chapter Ten.
In the treatment of inflammation which occurs in the eyelid.
Inflammation is a redness that occurs in the layers of the upper eyelid and it most commonly affects boys; it makes their eyes heavy and they are prone to colds at night and they cannot look at sunlight. So that tears flow quickly to them.
That is why they are always leaning on their faces and sleep on them, and their eyelids under the eyebrows are wet, with swelling above them, and the inflammation is clearly visible. When you press the area with your fingers, you feel the inflammation between them. The procedure is to have the patient place his head in your lap.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare from it a wick, and make a circle from that wick to the extent that it surrounds the inflammation on all sides. Then place it on top of it and press with your fingers from all sides to gather the inflammation in the middle of the circle.
Then make an incision in the middle of that moisture with a scalpel, making a horizontal cut; the cut should not be larger than the one made during bloodletting. As for depth, you should cut through all the skin until you reach the inflammation.
In most cases, the inflammation will protrude from the incision in the form of a white piece of fat; grasp it with a cloth that you have wrapped between your fingers and pull it outward while turning your hand right and left until it is gone. Be careful not to increase the incision lest the scalpel reach the eye and injure it.
If the inflammation does not appear in the first incision, you should slightly enlarge the incision carefully until it protrudes, then pull it out as we said; then soak a cloth in vinegar and water, place it on the area, and secure it with a bandage. Some people crush salt.
And place it in the incision so that the remaining moisture dissolves, then treat it until it is healed. If a hot swelling occurs in the area, treat it with cooling poultices until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
On Types of Eye Stitching.
If hairs grow excessively on the eyelid, beneath the natural eyelashes, they harm the eye and cause various illnesses such as continuous tearing, relaxation of the eyelids, opacity, and thickening until it results in blindness.
Eye stitching is done in four ways: either by cauterization with fire, or with a caustic drug as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery; or by cutting and stitching, or with reeds as I have already described.
You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn back the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns back easily, leave it as such; otherwise, insert a needle with thread from underneath the eyelid and pass the needle with the thread through from above. This should be done near the hair itself, and the thread should be drawn upwards along the eyelid.
Turn it back with a spatula and then make an incision inside the eyelid, away from the excess hairs, with a scalpel - starting from the larger forceps to the smaller ones. Then pass the thread under the eyelid and place a small dressing of cotton or cloth beneath it. Finally, apply ointment to the eyelid.
The shape should be like an ace of spades leaf, but it should be sized according to how much you want to lift the eyelid because people differ in this regard; some may need a portion of the eyelid cut away proportionate to how much it has relaxed.
Some may need less cutting, all depending on the degree of eyelid relaxation. Then make incisions with a scalpel along the lines you have marked, starting from the larger forceps to the smaller ones. Each incision should be close to the natural eyelashes and about the width of a spatula.
Then the thread is inserted into one corner of the skin and it is peeled off completely. Then the two lips are joined with a needle and fine wool thread, the blood is wiped away and the remaining threads are glued to the eyebrows with some sticky substances.
If you wish to do so, or if not, it does not matter. Then the stitches and threads remain for about three or four days, then it is treated. If you wish, you may leave the wound unstitched and treat it with something that dries and tightens. For when the wound closes and heals, the eyelid rises. Stitching is preferable.
This method of cauterization was mentioned by those who came before, but it has drawbacks for the patient. It is a good practice and not dangerous. Another method of cauterization also exists, which is to learn on the eyelid a shape like that of an as leaf as we have described. Then the eyelid is raised with three forceps, either separated or grouped in this pattern:
Then what remains of the eyelid is cut with a small scissors in this pattern, cutting moderately:
If you cannot hold the forceps and they do not stay in place for you, take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the shape. Insert another thread near the larger opening and a third thread near the smaller opening. Gather the threads between your fingers moderately, then lift them up moderately with your hand.
Lift the entire skin marked as we described, then bring the two lips of the wound together with stitches and treat it until it heals. If a hot swelling appears when you cut or make an incision, soothe that swelling with cerates and similar soothing ointments.
The lower eyelid may also turn inwards, and the same cutting, stitching, and cauterization with fire or caustic drugs should be used. Cauterization with fire or a caustic drug is more effective and less painful for the patient than cutting and stitching. Cutting and stitching are preferable in both cases.
Cauterization with a reed is done in this manner: Turn the eyelid over and make an incision on the inner side as described above. Then fashion two reeds or thin pieces of wood, their length equal to that of the eyelid and their width less than that of a lancet.
Cut the ends of both sides where the threads will grip, then carefully bring them together over the remaining portion of the eyelid and tighten the reeds on both sides securely. Leave them for several days; the stretched skin will die, turn black, and rot.
It will fall off on its own; if it is delayed, cut it with pincers and then treat it until it heals. When the wound has healed, the eyelid will rise and the eyelashes of the eye will not droop. This is the image of the reeds, they are made in this shape and size in length and width exactly:
Chapter Twelve.
On removing ingrown eyelashes with a needle.
If it is one or two hairs, the procedure is as follows: Take a fine needle and thread through it a fine, smooth silk thread; then gather both ends and tie them in a very delicate knot, making the length of the thread about a span long.
Then attach another, thinner thread to the needle holder, shorter in length, and tie its ends if you wish. Have the patient place their head in your lap, preferably near sunlight so that the work can be clearly seen; for this is delicate work. Insert the needle with the thread into the base of the ingrown hair.
Pass it quickly through the eyelid until it emerges above the normal hair, then pull the thread up toward the needle holder and insert into the needle holder that ingrown hair; if there is only one or two or at most three.
Then draw your hand with it until the hair comes out with the needle holder in the eyelid along with the normal hair. If you pull the needle holder and the hair does not come out with it, pull the needle holder downwards with the thread that you attached to it until the needle holder comes out of the upper hole.
Then return the hair to it and draw them, do that until it rises in the upper hole and you see it with your eye. Then loosen the forceps and thread and pull them out, tighten the eyelid and leave it tightened for two or three days until the hair is fixed in its place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add a long hair from natural hair to it so that it rises with it, or leave it until it grows after a while, then lift it.
Chapter Thirteen.
In the treatment of the chalazion that occurs in the upper eyelid.
The chalazion that the eyelid is exposed to is called an arnebia, and this chalazion can be either natural or accidental. An accidental chalazion results from the inflammation of a wound, scratch, or burn, and so on.
The procedure for treating it involves incising the inflammation, separating its edges, and placing a wick of linen between them, which is then tied until it heals.  Things that dry and constrict should not be used in its treatment.
For if you do that, the chalazion will return worse than before. Instead, use things that soften it, such as fenugreek and rinsing with water in which licorice root and flaxseed have been boiled, and a diachylon plaster dissolved with some ointment applied to the lesion and treated with it.
The aim of its treatment is to try every means to prevent it from healing in the shape it originally had. This procedure we mentioned is only for partially correcting the chalazion, not for returning the area to its original shape.
Chapter Fourteen.
In the treatment of a chalazion that occurs in the lower eyelid.
This chalazion that occurs in the lower eyelid is actually called a stye and can be either natural or accidental. An accidental stye results from a wound, scratch, burn, or something similar.
The way to work with it is to take a needle with a doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, passing it through from the left armpit to the right armpit until the thread is at both ends of the flesh. Then, stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a wide spatula.
If the shape of the eyelid returns to what is appropriate, otherwise, take a retractor and place it on the incision site, turn the eyelid with it and make two incisions on the inner side of the eyelid, making the ends of the incisions from the corners of the cut that was made so that they meet and form an angle. Until when they come together, its shape will resemble this shape:
It is the Greek letter lambda, then remove that flesh to the extent that its sharp side is below what follows the eyelid, then bring together the scattered parts by two sutures sewn with wool thread, then treat it with the softening and dissolving drugs we mentioned until it heals.
And if the tear appeared from a cut, suture, or cautery, it should be slit simply without the hair of the eyelashes as previously mentioned, then separate between the lips with a twist as we mentioned.
In conclusion, in treating a tear whether it is from above or below, the work should be carried out according to what seems suitable to you from the shape of the tear, as it may vary greatly in form, and the skilled craftsman manages the trick in any way he can.
So that the shape returns to its natural form or approaches it, and the same disease guides you to what is suitable for it from work and tools in most cases.
Chapter Fifteen.
On Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Conjunctiva or Cornea.
This adhesion may be presented to many people, where the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye, preventing it from moving easily and hindering it from its natural functions. So you should insert the end of a retractor under the eyelid.
Raise it up or stretch it with a string, then cut the adhesion with a fine knife, not as sharp as other knives, but rather blunt so as not to alarm the patient while working, lest the knife slip and injure the eye with its sharpness. Cut it as if you were peeling away that adhesion.
Wait until the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the adhesion is completely healed, then pour salt water into the eye to wash it, or drip a solution of zangar ginger in water into it. Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen wick.
Place a bandage soaked in egg white over the eye, and after the third day use softened wicks until it is healed.
Chapter Sixteen.
On Cutting the Veil and Removing Excess Flesh of the Eyelids.
The veil comes in two types: either it is nervous, resembling a thin, hard membrane; or non-nervous, resembling a solid white moisture which breaks apart when touched with iron or pulled by a string.
No snare can be attached to it, and both types begin at the larger eyelid and gradually extend until they cover the viewer and block light and eye movement. The procedure for cutting them is to have the patient rest their head on your lap.
Then, open their eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand. Catch the veil with a slightly curved snare and stretch it upwards. Then take a needle, thread a horsehair or cowhair into it along with a strong thread, bend the tip of the needle slightly, and insert it into the middle of the veil.
Pass the needle through and tie the veil with the thread, then stretch it upwards. Peel away the side of the veil next to the pupil using the hair as if you were spreading it to its end, then cut off the remainder at the base of the eyelid with a fine knife or small scissors, leaving the natural flesh of the eyelid.
So that there may not occur from the piece a continuous flow of tears, and the eyelid may be stretched by the needle alone or by thread as we have said; then the end is pared with a smooth scalpel, such as this:
Care should be taken that the scalpel does not touch the corneal membrane, lest it make a hole and the pupil is injured; then after the cutting, some powdered salt or zinzabar powder is put into the eye and left until the next day, and then it is treated as appropriate until it heals.
But if the eyelid is not nervous and it is impossible to put a needle into it or fix a ligature in it, this kind of eyelid is often treated with medicines until it heals as described in the division; but if you wish to cut it, open the patient's eye.
Take a delicate smooth scalpel weak at the edge like this: And pare the eyelid with it from above, gently; if you see that it loosens and crumbles and the paring has only affected it, put a little zinzabar powder or red powder or powdered salt into the eye from your hour-glass and bind the eye until the next day.
Then repeat the work until it is all gone, except if you encounter a hot swelling in the eye, leave it and treat the hot swelling until it heals, then repeat the paring work on it until it is healed; as for the fleshy growth...
If the growth causes severe pain to the eye, suspend that growth with a ligature and cut off some of it; do not overdo the cutting lest there be a continuous flow of tears; then put red powder or zinzabar powder into the eyelids until it heals.
Chapter Seventeenth.
On Cutting the Warty Growths and Excess Flesh in the Eye.
Sometimes a red fleshy growth arises in the eyes of some people, piling up until it covers the seer or comes close to or overflows onto the eyelids and perhaps the eyelids turn outward and resemble a carnation.
The procedure is to have the patient place his head in your lap, then open his eyes and grasp all of that red flesh with suitable forceps.
Or hold it with a forceps or tweezers, and then cut the flesh one by one until it is all gone, being careful not to injure the eye while working. Your cuts should be made either with a scalpel as described in cutting for circumcision or with small scissors. Like those used to remove splinters, as its image will be shown in the chapter following this one.
Once you have finished cutting and all the fleshy growth is gone, fill the eye with pounded salt or drop into it red lead or a similar caustic medication, and apply cotton soaked in egg white to the outside of the eye to prevent hot swelling.
If some of the fleshy growth remains, and bleeding overcomes you and you fear hot swelling, leave the eye alone and treat it with what soothes swelling, then return to work on it until it is healed. Do the same for excess flesh that appears in the eye of this type.
However, you should avoid treating any weak eye, either by nature or by appearance, with iron instruments and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the organ can tolerate it.
Chapter Eighteen.
On Removing Splinters from the Eye.
Splinters are red veins that weave across the eye, preventing vision and weakening it over time.
Then comes the ligature, which is to order the patient to put his head in your lap and then to hang those veins with one or two ligatures according to your skill. The ligatures should be fine and flexible in this manner:
Or they may be double ligatures in one body in this manner:
Then, with fine scissors, carefully cut those veins and wipe away the blood from time to time until you see that the eye is freed from those veins and the blood has clotted. Be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the scissors and work in the morning facing the sun.
Be very steady in your work so as not to cut anything other than those veins; when you are finished, cauterize the eye with green or red vitriol so that its sharpness consumes what remains of the vessels. If you cannot ligate it all at that time, bandage the eye with something that soothes its pain.
Leave it for several days until its pain subsides and the hot swelling is gone; then resume work on it in the same manner until this image of scissors disappears from it.
Leave it [with the patient's head in the lap of a student, another drying his tears and observing the vision at both the front and back of the eye, and you] the principal thing in this work is to open the eye with fixed or triangular openers which a student holds.
Look intently, with the patient's head in a student's lap and another drying his tears and observing the vision at both the front and back of the eye; you have the option of starting the ligature from the top or bottom of the eye. The first method involves tying two ligatures on the upper side: one at the end of the crescent and the other at its beginning.
Hold them between the middle finger and index finger, then hang ligatures underneath opposite them; hold these with your ring finger and little finger and lightly remove your hand until you see that all the vessels have risen, cut them with the smallest scissors if you wish or with a fine probe.
And he inserts the needle holder and elevates all the layers until it rises above the muscle, without cutting the nerves, for tears and blood will flow freely upon you.
Then cut with scissors what is in excess of the crown above and below so that there remains nothing protruding except in the cornea; if you are able to lift it from the cornea, remove it with the needle holder, for this is better, and it may be possible in some people.
And if you cut it, it will become scarred for a few days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling is avoided, then resume working on it.
Chapter Nineteenth.
On Returning the Feather to the Nose.
Physicians call the feather a Nâsûra if they treat it with cautery or a caustic medicine as previously described, and it does not heal; then there is no recourse but to incise the swelling when ripe and extract all the moisture or pus within.
Until the bone is exposed, and if you see corruption or blackness in it, scrape it with an instrument of this form:
It is called a rough-headed instrument and is made of Indian iron, with its head rounded like a button, finely engraved with a file or graver; place it on the corrupted part of the bone and turn it between your fingers while slightly compressing your hand until you know that the corruption has been removed.
Repeat this several times, then pack the area with drying astringent medications. If the area closes and flesh grows there, and the flow ceases for forty days and does not recur, nor does any harm or incident occur.
Then know that it has healed; otherwise, there is no recourse but to return the Nâsûra to the nostril's perforation in the following manner: expose the bone again with iron or a caustic medicine. When the bone is exposed, take a borer of this form:
The point of the iron should be triangular, and its shaft conical, drawn down to a point as you see. Then place it on the bone itself, near the angle and a little distance from the eye with your hand. Then turn your hand with the handle until the bone is pierced and the patient feels it.
If he finds the wind coming out of it when he puts his hand over his nose, then forcibly compress the area with drying astringents as I have taught you. When the flesh grows and the place hardens, the material that was pressing outward will return to the nose, making it easier for the patient, God willing.
Chapter Twenty.
Returning a Protruding Eye.
If the eye protrudes entirely and no harm or defect has occurred to the sight, you should ease the patient, then loosen him in the cupping glass, and then apply a leech to the nape of the neck without restriction and suck gently.
Then place a poultice made of acacia, patience herb, frankincense, and mastic on the eye, and bind the eye tightly over the dressing with many bandages. The recipe for the bandages is to take many soft rags and fold each one four times, making many.
Then place them one on top of the other as much as the eye needs, and bind tightly over it with a strong rag, then repeat the leech sucking without restriction, then remove the leech and leave the eye bound for a day and a night.
If the bandage loosens during this time, it should be tightened again. Then remove the bandage after a day and a night as we said. If you see that the eye has returned, well and good; otherwise, repeat the poultice, bandages, tightening, and leech until it returns.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On Cutting a Cataract.
If a rupture occurs in the lens layer, then it protrudes and comes out beyond the eyelids like a grape, spoiling the appearance of man; and you wish to cut it, proceed as I describe.
This is done by inserting a needle into the base of the bunion from below upwards, then inserting another needle with a doubled thread into it from the side of the big toe, passing it through and leaving the first needle in place.
Then the doubled thread is cut and tied to some of the bunion around the needle, and it is tightened well. Then the needle is removed, and wool soaked in egg white is placed over the eye and left until the threads fall off with the bunion, then the eye is treated with something that strengthens it.
Until the wound is healed, and the bunion may be tightened from all sides with a circle of cloth so that the eye becomes more prominent, then it is tamped with a fine spatula that reaches the bottom of the eye, causing the egg-white fluid to flow and the eye to descend and become flaccid in place. Then it is tightened until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On the Treatment of Cataracts.
This condition, called a cataract, is a turbidity that collects in the eye resembling descending water but is not actually water. The procedure for this involves having the patient sit upright on a chair, then taking their head with your hands on both sides.
You move it until you see the turbidity descend downwards with your eye, then hold it still so that it does not return, and light will be released, and the patient will see things as they used to see them. If the turbidity does not descend, we know it is water. If the turbidity does not descend as described,
then have the patient sit between your hands, take a fine spatula and make a slight incision above the corneal membrane near the junction of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane in the limbus until the material comes out.
Then, if a cataract is extracted from the eye, pour hot water into which honey has been mixed, or water that has been boiled with fenugreek and honey, then treat it with all the usual treatments until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
We have already mentioned the types of water in our division and which are suitable for washing, explained in detail. You should take it from there according to its suitability. Then, you should have the patient sit facing you in a square position, near the sunlight.
You should then tie his sound eye and bind it tightly. Next, raise the eyelid of the affected eye with your left hand if the water is in the left eye, or with your right hand if the water is in the right eye.
Then place the tip of the hollow instrument near the pupil with the thickness of a millet seed, in the same white part of the eye as the smaller conjunctiva. Push the instrument forcefully while turning it with your hand until it penetrates the white of the eye and you feel it has reached something empty.
The depth to which the instrument goes should be the same distance as from the pupil to the last part of the black, which is the pupil of the eye. You will see this in the copper because it reflects like a mirror in the one looking. Then turn the instrument upward to the place where the water is.
Then press it downward repeatedly. If the water descends from its place, the patient will see what has been opened before him with his sight and the instrument in his eye. Then rest a bit. If the water rises, lower it again without taking the instrument out of the eye.
When the water settles and does not rise, carefully remove the instrument while gently twisting it with your hand. Then dissolve a little bit of refined rock salt in some water and wash the eye from the inside. Finally, place a moistened poultice or cloth over the entire eye.
Bind both eyes with a mixture of rose oil and egg white. In our time, we use crushed cumin with egg white. If the instrument does not enter due to the stiffness of the eye, for some people have very stiff eyes... It should be taken the bistoury which is called the briad, which has this form:
Then pierce it with the briad alone, and do not deepen the puncture, but rather lightly touch the spot where the cautery will be applied, then insert the cautery as we have described. When you have finished your work, prepare the patient lying down firmly on his back in a dark room.
He must abstain from all movement and coughing, and his food should be what softens his nature; he should not move his head to either side at all. The bandage should remain as it is until the third day, then you should remove it in that dark room and test his sight.
Show him objects, then replace the bandage until the seventh day. This should not be done at the time of treatment or after cauterization for a while, but rather it should be avoided before water ascends quickly with intense looking.
If hot swelling occurs, the eye should be unwrapped before the seventh day and treated with something that will reduce the swelling until it subsides. Only then should his sight be released and a veil placed over his face, training his vision from underneath for several days while he remains in that dark room.
He should then gradually leave the house and behave as usual. Know that a learner cannot do without observation many times before undertaking this procedure. I have heard from some Iraqis that one of them mentioned making in Iraq a hollow cautery that absorbs water.
I have not seen anyone in our country make such a cautery, nor read about it in any of the books of the ancients. It may be something new. This is an image of different types of cauteries so that he who does not know them can learn:
It is made of copper, specifically, and its tip has this particular shape, triangular with a sharp point.
Chapter Twenty-Four
In the Treatment of Flesh Growing in the Nose.
Various kinds of excess flesh may grow in the nose, some resembling scorpions with many legs, some cancerous and hard like copper, and some soft and not like copper.
If the flesh is soft and not malignant or cancerous, the patient should sit facing the sun, open their nostrils, and then a probe should be inserted into the flesh. It should then be pulled out and cut off from one side with a fine, sharp scalpel.
Continue this until you are sure that all the flesh is gone. If any remains that you cannot cut, scrape it off carefully with a fine instrument so that nothing is left. If bleeding occurs or a hot swelling appears,
treat it accordingly. If the tumor is malignant, remove it quickly until the bleeding stops and all the flesh is gone. Afterwards, pour broth or vinegar into the nose. If the nose opens and the moisture flows down the throat
you will know that it is healed. If the moisture does not flow properly, know that there is still flesh growing at the top of the loose bones to which the instrument did not reach.  In this case, you should take a thread of fairly thick cotton,
tie many knots in it, spacing each knot the width of a finger or less. The patient should then insert one end of the thread into their nose with a rod or whatever they can use after shaping it like a needle and pull on it until it reaches the cartilage.
The other end will come out of the throat. This is often done by boys in school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it. Then gather the end that comes out of the mouth and the end that remains in the nose.
Use the knots in the thread to tear away the flesh, continuing until you are sure all the flesh has been removed. Then remove the thread and after cleaning the blood, insert a wick soaked in Egyptian ointment into the nose. Keep it there for three days or more.
Until the ointment eats up all that remains of the flesh, then the last thing in the nose will be a lead tube for several days until it heals; if it needs drying treatment, that is used.
This is an image of the syringe with which ointments and medicines are dripped into the nose.
He makes a small lamp-like object out of silver or copper, open at the filling point and its passage as well.
And if you wish, you make the tube closed like a reed pipe and the syringe's filler flat.
It has a handle at its end as you see, which is held onto when the fat or whatever juices or liquid things are heated inside it.
Chapter Twenty-Fifth.
On Plantar Warts At The Tip Of The Nose.
Often a wart grows at the tip of the nose, it enlarges and increases with days until its appearance is unsightly.
Therefore it should be cut off at its first appearance, and all of it rooted out, then either cautery or a burning medicine that acts in place of cautery is applied to the spot. If cutting it fails until it enlarges, then look and see if it is hardened, stony-like in color, and with little sensation.
Do not expose it to the iron, for it is a cancerous tumor and I have often seen this tumor cut out, and great misfortune returned upon its owner. If the tumor is soft to the touch and not stony-like in color, and you see that cutting can be done throughout all of it... ...then drain the wart, cut it without hesitation or fear, and treat the spot with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Sixth.
On Sewing the Nose, Lip, and Ear. Know that if the connection is torn from a wound or something similar, it rarely succeeds unless in some people.
If one of these things should occur, examine whether the wound is fresh with blood; then bring the lips of the wound together by suture and treat it until it heals. If the separation has occurred and the two lips have become distinct, each portion should be pared down to the thickness of its apparent skin until it bleeds.
Then bring the lips together by suture, draw them tight, and scatter powdered myrrh and frankincense over them. Place a plaster of palm balm or other similar ointment on top and leave it drawn tight for two or three days, then remove it.
Change the dressing and leave it until the sutures come out on their own, then treat it with ointment until it heals. The method of suturing is to bring together the separation, either with needles as described in the suturing of the abdomen or with thread as explained there.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the Removal of Nodes Appearing on the Lips.
Many people may present with small, hard tumors inside their lips, some resembling caraway seeds and others smaller or larger. You should invert the lip and make an incision over each nodule, then suspend it with a ligature.
Cut it from all sides, then pack the site after cutting with powdered borax to stop the bleeding. Gargle with vinegar and salt, and treat the sites with astringents until the wounds heal.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On the Removal of Excess Flesh from the Gums.
Often, excess flesh grows on the gums, called by ancient practitioners an "apolus". You should suspend it with a ligature or grasp it with forceps and cut it at its base. Allow the bleeding to continue for a time, then apply powdered borax to the site.
Or if it is one of the tenacious dried sinews, if that flesh returns after treatment, it often returns, so cut it a second time and cauterize it; for it will not return after cautery.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
On Extraction of Teeth with Iron.
It may happen that on the surfaces of the teeth, both inside and outside, and between the gums, rough, unsightly scales may collect. These scales may darken and yellow or even green, to such an extent that decay reaches the gums and the teeth become ugly.
The patient should be seated in front of you with his head on your lap. Remove the molar and any tooth where scales or sand-like matter appear, so that nothing remains. Do the same for the blackness, greenness, yellowness, and other such discoloration until it is purified.
If all the discoloration is removed at first, well and good; otherwise, repeat the removal on another day, a second and third time, until you achieve your goal. Know that molars require various differently shaped instruments, depending on what is needed for the task at hand.
This is because the instrument used to remove molars from the inside differs from the one used to remove them from the outside, and that used between molars has yet another shape. These are several types of instruments which you should have prepared:
The Thirtieth Chapter.
On Extraction of Teeth.
You should treat the molar for its pain by every means and delay its extraction as long as possible, for there is no substitute if it is extracted, since it is a noble essence. Even if its extraction becomes necessary...
If the patient insists on having it extracted, you should make sure that the molar's pain has subsided. Often the patient is deceived by pain and believes it to be in the correct tooth, so he has it extracted, but then the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is also extracted. We have seen barbers do this many times.
If the toothache is in the tooth itself, then you should cut around the tooth with a strong forceps until the gum loosens from all sides, and then move it with your fingers or fine forceps, little by little, until it is loosened.
Then you can grasp it firmly with the large forceps, and place the head of the patient between your knees so that it does not move. Then pull the tooth straight up so as not to break it. If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it underneath from all sides gently, and wiggle it as you did before.
And if the tooth is carious or decayed, then you should fill that hole with a rag and plug it tightly with the end of a fine probe so that it does not crumble when you pull on it with forceps, and you should carefully cut around the gum from all sides.
And be careful not to break it, for if some of it remains, the patient will suffer more than he did initially. Beware of doing what ignorant barbers do in their shops, rushing to extract it without using what we have described.
They often inflict great harm on people, the least of which is that the tooth breaks and all or some of its roots remain. Sometimes they even remove part of the jawbone, as we have witnessed many times. After extracting it, gargle with a decoction or vinegar and salt. If bleeding occurs from the site, which often happens, then crush some alum and apply it to the area.
Otherwise, cauterize it if the alum does not work. The forceps with which you first move the tooth should have long tips and a short handle, and be thick so as not to bend when you grasp the tooth. This is an image of large forceps:
It should be as you see it, thick-handled so that when grasped it does not give way nor bend, short-armed, and made of Indian iron or well-tempered steel, with the ends squared off. At one end are teeth which interlock so that it grasps firmly and securely.
The ends may also be made like a file, so they are strong for grasping.
Chapter the Thirty-First.
On the Extraction of Tooth Roots and Removal of Broken Jawbones.
If, when extracting a tooth, the root breaks off, you should place cotton soaked in butter on the spot for a day or two until it relaxes; then insert a probe or forceps. Which has tips like the beak of a bird called pliers, and this is an image of pliers:
It should be made like a file inside, or like an escalpel. If it does not come out with these pliers, you should then dig around the root and expose all the flesh with a spatula, and insert a tool resembling a small awl; this is its image:
Short-ended and slightly thick, not tempered so it does not break. If the root comes out with this, well and good; otherwise, use these other instruments, of which this is an image: the first triangular at the end, somewhat thick:
An image of another delicate triangle:
We may also use this two-pronged instrument, which is also depicted here:
And other instruments and tools mentioned previously for extracting teeth, we may also use this instrument which resembles a large fishing hook;
Triangular at the end, bent, somewhat thick so it does not break, and not tempered. Know that instruments for teeth are numerous, as are all other instruments, almost impossible to count. A skillful and experienced craftsman may invent instruments for himself according to what work and diseases dictate.
For some diseases the ancients did not mention instruments because of the difference in their types, if a bone of the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth is broken or putrefied, then search for it in its place with what suits it from the instruments and forceps that have been mentioned in extracting roots.
And we will use a pair like this:
It should have some thickness to fix the bone so that it does not slip until the bone comes out, and we will fix the place with the appropriate medicines for that. If there is a slight putrefaction in the bone, then remove its pus and its blackness until it is purified, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Two
On Spreading the Erupted Molars onto Others
If the molars erupt in an unnatural way, they spoil the appearance, especially if this happens to women and delicate people. It should be looked at whether the molar has erupted behind another molar.
And it is impossible to spread it or push it back, so extract it. If it is stuck to another molar, cut it with this instrument:
It resembles a small beak and should be made of very sharp Indian steel, and cut it for many days due to the hardness of the molar, so as not to loosen any other molars. As for if it is erupting and capable of being cooled down, then cool it down with a cooler made of this:
It should be made entirely of Indian steel, with a very finely engraved blade, like the file used to make needles. Cool the molar a little at a time for many days gently so that it does not loosen and fall out, then smooth it last and pare it down a bit with some scrapers.
And if a molar has broken off and it hurts the tongue when speaking, it should also be cooled so that the roughness of the break goes away and becomes even and smooth so that it does not hurt the tongue or spoil speech.
Chapter Thirty-Third.
In the interlacing of movable molars with silver threads or with gold threads.
If the front molars become loosened and move about from a blow or a fall, and the patient is unable to chew anything edible lest they fall out, and they have been treated with astringent medications without success.
The remedy is to tighten a gold or silver thread, with gold being preferable because silver tarnishes and decays after a few days, while gold remains unchanged. The thread should be of medium fineness and thickness, according to the space between the molars.
The method of interlacing is to take the thread and insert its bend between the sound molars, then weave the ends of the thread between the movable molars, one or more, until the weaving reaches the sound molar on the other side.
Then weave back to the side where you started and tighten your hand gently and skillfully so that the molars do not move at all. The thread should be tightened at the roots of the molars so that it does not come loose. Then cut off the excess ends of the thread with scissors, gather them together, twist them with a forceps, and hide them between the sound molar and the movable molar.
So that it does not injure the tongue, and leave it tightened as long as necessary. If it becomes loose or breaks, tighten it with another thread, and thus enjoy it for life. This is an image of the molars and the manner of interlacing in two sound molars and two movable molars as you see:
It may happen that one or two molars return to their place after falling out and are interlaced as described and remain in place. This should only be done by a skilled craftsman, who may also carve bone from a cow's bone to make it into the shape of a molar and place it in the space where the molar has gone. And it is tightened as we said, and it remains and he enjoys it.
Chapter the Thirty-Fourth.
In cutting the frenum that appears under the tongue, it prevents speech.
This frenum that appears under the tongue may be natural, with which a person is born, or it may be incidental from a wound that has healed.
The procedure is to open the patient's mouth, place his head in your lap, and raise his tongue, then cut that nervous frenum transversely so that the tongue is released from its hold; if there is some stiffness and complexity and this is due to wound healing, insert a probe into it and split it transversely until the frenum is severed and the knots are untied.
Beware that the incision is not deep into the flesh, lest you cut an artery there and cause bleeding; then gargle after the cut with rose water or vinegar and cold water, and then place a linen wick under the tongue which the patient holds in every night.
So that it does not adhere again, if bleeding occurs, place powdered alum on the spot, and if blood overwhelms you, cauterize the area with a lentil-shaped iron suitable for that purpose. Then treat it with all other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter the Thirty-Fifth.
On removing the frog that is generated under the tongue.
It may happen that a tumor resembling a small frog appears under the tongue, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function and perhaps growing until it fills the mouth. The procedure is to open the patient's mouth opposite the sun and look at the tumor.
If you see it dark red or black, hard and the patient does not feel it, do not interfere with it because it is cancerous; but if it leans towards white and has moisture in it, insert a probe into it and split it with a fine spatula and free it from all sides.
If blood overwhelms you while you are working, place powdered borax upon it until the bleeding stops; then return to your work until you extract it completely; and then gargle with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with all suitable remedies until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
On the Treatment of Tonsillitis.
And whatever grows in the throat of all tumors may present within the throat glands resembling those presented externally, called tonsils; if you treat them with what I mentioned in the division and they do not heal.
Then examine whether the tumor is hard, dark in color and slightly sensitive; do not expose it to the iron. And if it is red in color and its origin is thick, do not expose it to the iron either for fear of bleeding; but leave it until it matures, then either cauterize it or it will burst on its own.
And if it is white, round and its origin is thin, this is what should be cut; the work is to look before working whether its hot swelling has subsided completely or decreased somewhat.
Then seat the patient facing the sun with his head in your lap; open his mouth and take a servant between your hands to press his tongue down with this instrument:
Made of silver or brass, it should be thin like a knife; when you press the tongue with it and the tumor is revealed to your sight, take a snare and insert it into the tonsil, drawing it out as much as possible without pulling any of the membranes along with it.
Then cut it with an instrument of this shape: resembling scissors, except that its two ends are curved; the edge of each facing the other is very sharp. It is made of Indian iron or Damascus steel:
If you do not have this instrument, then cut it with a scalpel of this shape:
A sharp instrument on one side and blunt on the other; after cutting one tonsil, cut the other with the same type of cut. Then, after the cut, the patient should gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs, he should gargle with water in which pomegranate rinds or bay leaves or something similar from astringents have been steeped until the bleeding stops; then treat him until he is healed. Growths other than the tonsils may develop in the throat and they should be cut as I described for cutting the tonsils alike.
I treated a woman for a tumor that had grown inside her throat, extending towards the voice box with little sensation; it was almost blocking the throat and the woman was breathing through a narrow passage and prevented her from eating or drinking water.
She was close to death if she had remained for a day or two, and the tumor had grown two branches that protruded from her nostrils. I acted quickly and inserted a probe into one of them and pulled it; thus, a suitable piece was extracted.
I then cut it where I could reach it from the nostril and did the same with what protruded from the other nostril. Then, I opened her mouth, pressed down on her tongue and inserted a probe into the tumor itself and cut some of it; only a little blood flowed.
The woman's throat immediately opened and she began to drink water; then she was able to eat. We continued to cut from the tumor repeatedly for a long time, and the tumor kept replacing what was cut until it became tiresome for both of us.
I devised a plan and cauterized the tumor inside her throat, so it stopped growing. Then I left that region and did not know what God had done with her afterwards.
Chapter Thirty-Seven
On the Excision of a Goiter.
That which is called a swelling if it descends to the eyelids and swells, and is white and rectangular, it is called a column; and if it is thick at the bottom and round, it is called a swelling. If it is treated with what we have mentioned in the division and the treatment is unsuccessful.
And I saw the hot tumor subside from it and it was thin, so it should be cut; and what was gathered together from it, round and without length, and was bloody or dark-colored or black, or without feeling, should be avoided from being cut.
There is danger for the patient in this, so if you see it on the characteristic I mentioned of its whiteness and length, the patient should sit facing the sun and press his tongue with the instrument whose description has been given before; then the snare should be inserted into the swelling.
And it should be drawn down and cut with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for cutting the tonsils; and you should not cut from it more than what exceeds the natural state, because if you cut more, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the cut, you should use what we described in cutting the tonsils and treat it until it heals; if the patient refuses to have it cut, then you should use a trick to cauterize it without fear or caution, and the method of cautery in this case is with a caustic drug.
Then you press his tongue with the instrument that we mentioned, then you take some of the caustic water that we mentioned in the chapter on cautery and knead it into a paste that is neither too thick nor too thin, and fill the cavity of this instrument. This is its shape:
The end of it where you put the medicine should have a cavity like that of a pomegranate spoon; and you place the instrument with the medicine on the eyelid itself, the patient lying on his side so that saliva flows from inside his throat, so that nothing descends from it into his throat and harms him.
Then grasp your hand on the medicine while you press it onto the wound for half an hour until you see it has blackened and the sting of the medicine subsides. If you wish, you may take some cotton wool and wrap it around the tip of a rod and soak the cotton wool in the medicine.
Insert the rod with the cotton into a tube from above so that the cotton adheres to the wound. Repeat this several times until you reach the desired degree of cauterization, then leave it. It will wither and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reapply the medicine, prepare it again.
After cauterization, wipe around the cautery with cotton soaked in butter and dry the medicine around it. Then gargle with cold water and treat externally with poultices and internally with gargles until healed. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and further from fear.
The wound may also be treated with something milder than cauterization and incision, treating it with fumigation in this manner: Take fennel, rue, savory, sage, wormwood, chamomile, and quinces or similar herbs, gather them all or some of them in a pot and submerge them in vinegar.
Boil the pot, which is coated with clay of wisdom, and make a hole in the middle of the lid.  Place the hollow instrument on top as follows: it is made of silver or brass.
Insert the end with the pomegranate into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the wound through the tube until the wound becomes softened, then repeat this several times until it dries up. Beware of performing this treatment at the very beginning of the swelling.
For it often increases the swelling, but it should only be done when the hot swelling has subsided. If you do not have this instrument, take a reed and fit an eggshell at one end so as not to burn the patient's mouth.
Because the eggshell prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, this is a good treatment and it is safe.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
On extracting thorns and other things that become lodged in the throat.
Often a bone, fishbone, or something similar becomes lodged in the throat, so what appears and is seen should be removed after pressing down the tongue with an instrument at the sunshine.
So that you can see what is in the throat, and what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before their food is digested in their stomach. Perhaps the lodged object will come out with vomiting or the patient may swallow a piece of lettuce or a radish root.
Or they may swallow a piece of stale bread, or you can take a piece of soft sea sponge, tie it with string, and then the patient swallows it. When it reaches the place of the thorn, pull the string quickly, doing this several times.
Often the thorn or bone will stick to it and come out. If it does not come out as described above, otherwise use an instrument made of lead in this form:
It should be slightly thicker than a pestle and at its end, there is a hook that the patient inserts into their throat gently while raising their head upwards. They must avoid touching their Adam's apple so as not to cause coughing which could push the bone or thorn further in, or the doctor may insert it with their hand.
Having the patient insert it is best as they know the location of the lodged object and push it down or pull their hand up with the instrument, all according to what is possible until it comes out.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
On extracting leeches that become lodged in the throat.
If you have treated the leech as mentioned in the section on drug treatment and it has not been successful, then look into the patient's throat at sun after pressing down their tongue with the instrument I have described for you.
If your sight falls upon the foreign body, draw it out with a small snare or a fine, tight forceps; if you are unable to do so, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the patient as far as the foreign body, then insert into the inside of the tube an iron instrument protected by fire.
Do this several times, and let the patient abstain from water all day; then he should take a mouthful of cold water, open his mouth into it, and gargle without swallowing a drop, moving the water from time to time with his hand.
For if the foreign body feels the water, it will fall into its place; but if it does not come out as we have described, cauterize the throat with urine and with a solution of saltpeter with the instrument which was described in the chapter on fumigation for laryngitis. Do this several times, for it will then fall out.
The method of working with the fumigation is to take a vessel containing live coals heated by fire; the vessel should be covered with a lid in which there is a hole, and the end of the instrument should be fitted into this hole. Then fumigate, and let the patient put his mouth on the end of the tube and close it so that the smoke does not escape until he knows that the smoke has reached his throat.
For the foreign body will then fall into its place; but if it does not, repeat the fumigation several times, and let the patient abstain from drink and eat salt and garlic, without drinking water; for it is certain to come out with this treatment. This is a drawing of an instrument with which to draw out a foreign body from the throat when it has been seen.
It resembles forceps, as you see, except that it has this extension which enters the throat; and its ends resemble the beak of a bird, with a roughness like a file so that when it grips anything it does not let go.
There is another instrument with which to press down the tongue; it is a broad iron ring of a size to fit the mouth above the tongue. It is introduced into the mouth standing on its side so that the mouth remains open against the will of the patient and he cannot remove it at all until it is removed.
Description of the instrument with which the mouth is opened to this exact measurement.
Chapter forty.
It discusses speech about tumors and their incision.
Tumors are of many varieties, delicately distinguished as will be mentioned one by one in this book. They differ in their incision and treatment depending on two factors: the type of tumor itself and its contents.
The second factor is the location in the body where they occur, for a tumor in the head is not treated like a tumor in the buttocks, nor is a tumor in a fleshy area treated like one in a joint; each has its own rules of treatment.
Some tumors should not be incised until the pus within them has matured and become complete, while others should be incised even when they are still immature, such as those located near joints.
For if a tumor occurs near a joint and is allowed to fester, it may damage the ligaments or nerves of that joint, leading to lameness in the limb; or the tumor may be located near a major organ.
Therefore, if you delay incising it until it matures, you may harm that major organ; or it may be located near the buttocks and should be incised while still immature.  A tumor near the buttocks must be incised while still immature so that it does not fester and spread into the buttock, becoming a danger.
And in some cases, it may not heal at all; you should know when to incise tumors that have matured completely – this is when the tumor pain subsides, fever disappears, redness and throbbing decrease, and the top of the tumor becomes indented along with other signs.
The incision should be made at the lowest point of the tumor whenever possible so that drainage flows downward, or in the thinnest and most prominent area; the incision should run lengthwise in the body if the tumors are located on the arms and legs.
And the places of muscles and tendons and nerves and arteries, in general in all flat places that have no bend. As for those that bend, let it go with a bandage according to that place. And if the tumor is in fleshy places, it is best to leave it alone.
Until its maturity is fully established, as we have said, if you bandage it before that, the pus will flow from it for a long time and it will be full of harm and filth, and perhaps its lips will harden and become rough. Some tumors may be bandaged across the body when necessary or according to what the limb requires.
And it is best to use one bandage for small tumors and a wide bandage or many cuts according to the size of the tumor for large tumors, and some tumors may need the skin to be cauterized and cut if it has become like rags.
And it has become to some extent dead, like what is shown in many abscesses and ulcers, some of which are cut with a three-cornered incision, and some are cut from it in the shape of an ace of spades or an Arabic plum.
Some of them use a round incision and a crescent incision, and so on from these incisions, and if it does not have a head like smooth, flat tumors, it is best to just bandage it with a simple bandage. And if the tumor is large and has collected for a long time and you bandage it, do not hasten so that all the pus comes out at that time.
Rather, draw some of it out, then tighten the tumor to another day, then draw out some pus again. Do this repeatedly gradually until all of it comes out.
Especially if the patient is weak or a pregnant woman or a young child or an old man, for the animal spirit often dissolves with the sudden exit of pus, and the patient may die and you will not feel it. So beware of this matter with extreme caution.
After you have incised these tumors, you should wipe the wound and look; if the wound of the tumor is small or if there is only one simple incision, use a bandage of linen or soft cotton. But if the tumor is large and the incisions of the cutting are many,
you should insert a wick into each incision so that they reach one another. But if the tumor has been cut away from some of its skin or has become wrinkled, you should stuff it with soft cotton or hemp from linen without moisture and tighten it until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals. If bleeding occurs while you are working, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a linen cloth in them and applying it to the bleeding spot several times.
If the bleeding continues, you should use the measures, treatments, and necessities that we have described in many parts of this book and in its division. If you are in the winter season and the tumor site has many nerves, you should moisten the bandages with a syrup and hot oil.
And place it on the area. If you are in the summer and the areas are hot, you should apply bandages soaked with water and oil or syrup and oil, all of which is cold, until the third day as we said, then you should dissolve the tumor and wipe it.
And use for its treatment what is appropriate until it heals. This is all you need to know about treating tumors in general. As for detailed instructions, I have mentioned how to treat each tumor, summarized and categorized.
Chapter Forty-One.
On the incision for tumors that appear on the skin of the head.
Small tumors appear on the skin of the head, and they are of a fleshy type contained in sacs; they resemble the gizzard of a chicken. There are many types, some fatty and others containing moisture like mud.
And some of them contain moisture like broth or soup, and the like, and some are petrified and solid; all of them pose no danger in cutting and removing them unless you encounter a vein when making the incision.
The procedure for cutting it is to first pierce it with the instrument whose form comes after this, which is called a dilator, until you know what it contains. If it contains moisture, cut it lengthwise in a simple incision as follows:
Begin the incision from line ~b~ to line ~j~, and once the moisture has drained, peel away the sac that contained it and cut it all out, leaving nothing behind at all. For it often recurs if anything remains.
Then soak cotton in soft ointment if available, otherwise in salt water, and fill the wound with it, leaving it until the next day. For it will consume what remains of the sac; then apply the cotton with myrrh again a second and third time as needed.
Until you are certain that nothing of the sac remains, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. If the tumor contains fatty matter, cut it as follows:
Make a firm incision, pulling the edges of the wound together with forceps, and peel it away from all sides. Exert every effort to remove the fascia that surrounds it. If you encounter a vein, do as I have previously described. Do the same for a petrified tumor when making an incision.
The treatment is the same as previously mentioned, and the incision on a petrified tumor is easier because it has little blood and moisture. Some of these tumors found in the heads of certain individuals have no moisture at all.
The head of an old woman, and I found the tumor like a hard, rough stone, white in color, which could not be broken even if someone threw it, and none of the other tumors that occur on the head were like this except for the tumors that occur on the heads of boys.
And at the bases of the ears, split them all with a simple incision and make its bottom flat so that the material flows easily downward, then treat it with what is appropriate for its treatment.
Chapter Forty-Two.
In the incision on pigs that occur in the neck, these tumors often occur in the neck and under the armpits and in the arms, and they may occur throughout the body. The one that occurs in the neck is usually single, but there can be many of them, some arising from others.
Each pig is within its own separate sac, as in hernias and tumors of the head as we described. There are many types of these pigs: some are petrified, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
I have not seen any of them in a good condition on palpation, and their appearance was close to the color of the skin, they moved in every direction, and were not attached to the neck nerve, nor to a vein or artery, nor were they depressed. It should be split with a simple incision from top to bottom of the body in this shape, from line ~J~ to line ~B~.
Remove it from all sides and spread the lips of the skin with a retractor or two retractors or many retractors if needed, as we said in head tumors. Remove it little by little so that it is on the neck without cutting an artery or nerve, and let the scalpel not be too sharp.
Lest your hand increase the cutting or agitate the patient, so that you cut what you do not need to cut. If you cut a vein or artery and are prevented from working, place powdered alum or some astringents in the wound to stop the bleeding.
Tighten the wound and leave it until the sharpness of the swelling subsides and the wound relaxes and tends to putrefy, for then the blood will stop. Then return to your work until you are finished, and then search with your index finger if any remains, and then cut off other small piglets and clean them.
If there is a large vein at the root of the piglet, it should not be cut from its origin, but it should be tied with a strong doubled thread and left until it falls off on its own without harm. Then the wound should be stuffed with loose cotton that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment and then treated.
And if the whole piglet is cut off, the lips of the wound should be brought together and sewn immediately after you know that there is absolutely no remainder; but if you see that a remnant of the piglet's bone remains.
It should be intended to cut it from its origin and base, and use the stitching as we have mentioned, and whatever piglets contain moisture should be bandaged with a simple bandage where you see the place of their maturation, and make the bandage what is below as we said.
Then use after the bandage, wrapping with Egyptian ointment or the like to consume what remains of corruption; and when you see that the wound is clean, treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Third
On the incision of the larynx for a tumor occurring within the throat.
The ancients mentioned this incision in the larynx, and I have not seen anyone in our country perform it; this is consistent with their statements. As for those suffering from angina, they should avoid making an incision in the larynx, as they will not benefit from it.
This is because all the veins and lungs will be diseased, while those with a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils, if there is no cause in the trachea, should use an incision in the larynx to escape the calamity that comes from choking.
If we wish to do so, we should cut the throat under three or four small circles of the trachea, in width between two circles as much as the cut is in the peritoneum and not in the cartilage. This place corresponds to the cut.
Because it is devoid of flesh and blood vessels are distant from it, if the healer is timid he should stretch the skin of the throat with a string then cut the skin until he reaches the trachea, avoiding blood vessels if he sees any.
Then he should cut the peritoneum as we have described, and deduce the cutting of the trachea from the phlegm that comes out of it along with the bubbling and the cessation of voice, and leave the wound open for a time. If the time when choking was feared has passed, bring the lips of the wound together with skin.
And sew it together without cartilage, then use medicines that promote flesh growth until it heals. The author of this book says the interpretation of this statement which we have recounted is only if they see the patient has had one of these tumors blocking his throat.
And if the patient is near death and about to expire, they should go to cutting the throat so that the patient can breathe on the wound for a while and be saved from death, but they are commanded to leave the wound open until the illness runs its course, which will take three days or so.
Then they are commanded to sew the wound and treat it until it heals. What I myself have witnessed is that a maidservant took a knife and sent it across her throat, cutting part of the trachea.
I found that the blood coming from the wound was slight, so I was sure that neither an artery nor a vein had been cut, and wind was escaping from the wound. So I proceeded to stitch the wound and treat it until it healed, and nothing happened to the servant except for a little pain in his voice.
And after a few days she returned to her best state, so from this we say that splitting the throat is not dangerous.
Chapter Forty-Four.
On the incision for the tumor that appears in the pharynx from the outside and is called elephantiasis of the throat.
This tumor, which is called elephantiasis of the throat, is a very large tumor the color of the body, and it is common in women, and it is of two types.
It is either natural or accidental, as for the natural kind there is no remedy, while the accidental kind comes in two types: one type is similar to fatty growths and the other type is similar to a tumor that results from the complication of an artery and it is dangerous to incise it. Therefore, it should not be exposed to iron at all, except for a small part of it, if you probe and examine it with a probe and find that it resembles a fatty growth and is not attached to any veins, then incise it as you would incise fatty growths. Remove it with its sac if it is in a sac, otherwise, excise all of it and then treat the area as appropriate.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On incision for different types of fatty growths.
Fatty growths are of many types, and I have mentioned all their types in the division, but we should point out here the difference between a fatty growth and an abscess since it is a common confusion: Then the gangrene is completed, at which time the fever and pain subside, and the ulcer is not accompanied by heat, fever or pain; it is enclosed in a peritoneal sac which is its special envelope and it is the color of the body. Its beginning is like a boil and it becomes like a pumpkin, larger or smaller.
It is of two types, either fatty or containing moisture. The colors of the moisture are numerous as mentioned in the division. If you proceed to treat the ulcer, you should first probe and examine it with an instrument called a speculum, whose image will be shown in the following chapter.
Determine the size of the tumor, then remove the speculum and look at what comes out in its wake. If liquid moisture comes out, regardless of its color, make a simple incision as mentioned for other tumors. If no moisture emerges after using the speculum, know that it is fatty.
Make a firm incision on it in this manner as I have instructed you, and secure it with forceps. Carefully remove the skin from all sides and preserve the sac if possible so that you can extract it intact with the ulcer.
If the sac ruptures during the procedure and you are unable to remove it intact, which often happens, remove it piece by piece so that nothing remains. For if any part of it remains, whether small or large, the ulcer will most likely recur.
If, despite your best efforts, a small amount remains, cauterize the wound thoroughly with some sharp caustic agents and draw the wound tight. Place something soothing on top of it to ease the hot swelling and treat it with all appropriate remedies until it heals. If the ulcer is large, sew its edges together and treat it with substances that promote healing.
If you encounter a sharp or dull throbbing pain and bleeding occurs, immediately cauterize the area with powdered litharge and leave it constricted for two or three days until the wound festers and the blood flow subsides. Then return to excise what remains of the ulcer.
Chapter Forty-Six
On Instruments in Figures.
Those which are used for incision and cautery, including figures of specula, which are of three types: large, medium, and small.
Figure of a Large Speculum:
Figure of a Medium Speculum:
Figure of a Small Speculum:
They are made of tempered steel, square-shaped and tightly fitting to facilitate entry into tumors. These are figures of probes called "burd" which are also of three types: large, medium, and small. Figure of a Large Probe:
Figure of a Medium Probe:
Figure of a Small Probe:
They are suitable for exploring tumors, wounds, fistulas, and cavities to determine what is inside, such as bones, etc. They are made round and polished smooth like needles, from Chinese copper or Spaniard copper, or copper, iron, or silver. The best are those made of Spaniard copper.
Probes can also be made of black lead and are suitable for probing fistulas with bends in their depths, so that they can bend along with those bends. They are also of three types: long, medium, and short.
Their thickness is made according to the width of the fistula, whether wide or narrow. Figure of a Large Lead Probe:
Figure of a Medium Lead Probe:
Figure of a Small Lead Probe:
Figures of Forceps: There are many types, including simple forceps with one hook which come in three sizes: large, medium, and small. Then there are blind forceps, also in three sizes. There are also forceps with two hooks, in three sizes, and curved forceps with two hooks. And there are forceps with three hooks, also in three sizes. All these types are needed for their specific purposes. Figure of a Large Simple Forceps: A simple drawing of a saw in the middle. A small simple drawing of a saw.
A large drawing of a blunt saw. A medium-sized drawing of a blunt saw.
A small drawing of a blunt saw.
A large drawing of a saw with two hooks. A medium-sized drawing of a saw with two hooks. A small drawing of a saw with two hooks.
A large drawing of a saw with three hooks.
A medium-sized drawing of a saw with three hooks. A small drawing of a saw with three hooks.
These are pictures of the knives that cut and pare with, which are three types because some are large, some are medium-sized, and some are small. A picture of a large knife:
A picture of a medium-sized knife.
A picture of a small knife.
Its cutting edges are limited and the other ends are unlimited, so that they can be used for paring when there is fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and so that the patient can find some relief from the burning sensation he feels when the tumor is pared.
These are pictures of probes, which are three types because some are large, some are medium-sized, and some are small. A picture of a large probe:
It is made of copper similar to the kohl applicators, and on one end it resembles a broad spoon consisting of two layers with a lancet blade hidden within it, resembling a bird's tongue that can be moved in and out as desired, as you see.
Pictures of lancets which are concealed between the fingers when probing tumors so that the patient does not feel them, and they are three types because some are large, some are medium-sized, and some are small. A picture of a large lancet:
Images of the instruments with which to cut blood vessels, they are three types because some are large, medium and small. Image of the large ligature.
It is made of copper or pewter, rounded a little to the length as you see and it should be at hand. These types of ligatures should be with you, large and small, so that you can cut blood quickly when necessary and when medicine is not available.
But do not use it to cut blood in every place in the body, but rather use it in fleshy places such as the muscles of the thigh and leg, and the muscles of the arm, chest, abdomen and groin, and similar fleshy moist organs.
And other small instruments can be made from it, resembling pistachio shells as in this image:
It cuts blood if it bleeds from a place of cupping or when cutting a vein or artery. It can also be made rounded as in this image:
Chapter the forty-seventh.
On the treatment of men's breasts.
The breast of some people swells up to resemble a woman's breast during puberty, remaining warm and unsightly. So whoever dislikes this should make a crescent-shaped incision on the breast like this:
From line ~b~ to line ~j~. Then remove all the fat, and fill the wound with salty medicine, then bring together the edges of the wound by stitching and treat it until it heals. If the breast sags downward and relaxes due to its size as it happens to women.
It should be incised in its upper sides with two incisions resembling a crescent shape, each connecting to the other at their ends so that the larger line encircles the smaller one as in this image: From line ~b~ to line ~j~, then the skin between the two incisions is peeled back, the fat is removed, and the stitching and dressings we have described are used, along with whatever treatment it requires until it heals.
If the amount you need to cut cannot be removed due to the patient's anxiety or excessive bleeding, then you should pack the wound with cotton soaked in an absorbent ointment and leave it until it absorbs any remaining fat, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter forty-eight.
On the treatment of tumors that appear under the armpit.
These tumors that appear under the armpit are of a hog-like nature, hard and enclosed in a sac; some contain fluids. Those containing fluids should be incised with a crescent-shaped cut like this.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~, and once all the contents of the tumor have been evacuated, pack it with soft cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove the cotton.
Treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals. If the tumor is of a hog-like knot, incise it as we described for hogs, whether or not pus develops. If pus does develop, use cauterization as previously mentioned.
Chapter forty-nine.
On incising a tumor that appears near an artery or vein, called an aneurysm.
If an artery is injured and the skin above it heals, a tumor often develops as a result. Similarly, a vein may also swell and form a tumor.
The signs by which one can tell whether a tumor or swelling is from an artery or a vein are as follows: if the tumor is from an artery, it will be rectangular and deep within the body. If you press on the tumor with your finger, you will feel a pulsating sensation.
When it is before a vein, the tumor is round on the surface of the body, and incision into these tumors is dangerous, especially if they are in the armpit, groin, and neck, and in many places on the body where they were very large, so treatment with iron should be avoided.
And if any of them were also in the extremities or head, they should be avoided.  As for those that are swollen at the mouth of the artery, a long incision should be made on the skin and then the incision is opened with forceps, then the artery is stripped and freed from its sheaths.
Until it is exposed, then insert a needle under it and pass it to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places as you have been taught for the tying of arteries in the fingers, then scoop the place between the ligaments with a curette until all the blood in it comes out.
Then the tumor will dissolve and you should use a treatment that produces pus so that the ligaments fall off, then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
But if the tumor is before a cut vein, you should hold as much of the tumor with the skin as possible with your hand, then insert a needle under the place that you are holding with your hand and pass it through with a double thread so that it comes out on the other side. Then tie the tumor tightly as I have explained to you about tying a grape from both sides at the ends of the thread, and if you fear that the threads will slip, insert another needle with another thread under the whole tumor where the first needle intersects.
Tighten your threads in four places, then cut the tumor in its middle so that what is inside it comes out, then cut off the excess skin and leave what was tied from it, then put a bandage soaked in syrup and oil on it. Then use treatment consisting of bandages and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter Fifty.
On the tumor that arises from nerve torsion.
Just as a tumor appears in the artery and vein, so it also appears in the nerve if there is a blow to it or excessive exertion or something similar. This occurs most frequently in the wrists and ankles.
And in every place where the joints move, it is a hard tumor whose color resembles that of the rest of the body and is most often painless. If pressed hard, the patient feels a kind of numbness. This tumor is not deep within the body.
But it is under the skin and moves in all directions, neither going forward nor backward. What arises in the joints should not be treated with iron, for it may cause suppuration. Nor should what arises on the head or forehead be treated.
Cut the skin with a scalpel. If the tumor is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it from the root. If it is large, hang it with thread and dissect it out; then remove it and bring the wound together with stitches. Treat it until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-One.
On cutting off warts that appear on the abdomen.
Warts, called fungous warts because they resemble mushrooms, often appear on the abdomens and other parts of the body of some people. They have a thin base and a thick head, sometimes with split lips. Some are small, while others grow very large.
I once saw a man with two warts on his abdomen that resembled mushrooms in every way. They had a thin, white base, split lips, and were constantly weeping moisture. I cut them off, and one weighed about eighteen ounces, while the other weighed about six ounces.
The operation for cutting them consists of looking to see if the patient is moist and the color of the wart is white, moist, thin in origin. Cut it with a wide scalpel and have your forceps in the fire, as blood often flows profusely when it is cut.
If blood overcomes you, cauterize it. If you see the patient cowardly and afraid of cutting with iron, take a tight lead thread and tighten it around the wart described above and leave it for two days, then increase the tightening of the lead, continuing to tighten it.
Continue tightening until the wart breaks off on its own without pain. If the wart is thick at its base, there is some fear and risk in cutting it, especially if it is in the abdomen; however, it may be possible to cut it in half or partially.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return, and treat it until the wound heals. Be careful not to cut a wart that is dark in color, numb, and looks malignant, for it is a cancerous tumor, and we will discuss cancer after this.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
On the Treatment of Cancerous Growths.
Cancerous growths arise from many causes, either from a rupture of the peritoneum on the abdomen from which the omentum or intestines protrude as is seen in all hernias; or from blood that flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned; or from wind that collects within it.
If it arises from a rupture of the peritoneum and protrusion of the omentum, the tumor will be similar in color to the body, soft, and painless, and its appearance will vary. If it arises from the protrusion of the intestines, its position will be even more different than what we have described. If you press it with your fingers, it disappears and then returns. There may be gurgling associated with it, and it increases greatly when entering a bath and during strenuous activity. If it arises from moisture, it will be soft.
It does not disappear when grasped with the hand, nor does it increase or decrease. If it was previously blood, then with these signs, the swelling will turn black. If it was previously newly formed flesh, the swelling will be hard and fixed at a constant size.
If it was previously wind, then touching it will be soft. The procedure for this is to look and see if the swelling arose from arterial or venous blood or wind. You should abstain from treating it, as there is fear and deception in doing so, as I have informed you in the chapter where I mentioned the tumors that occur from arteries and veins.
But if the swelling arose from the intestines or phlegm, you should order the patient to hold himself and stand straight and then mark with ink all around the swelling. Then order him to lie on his back between your hands and cut around the swelling with a wide scalpel on the spot you marked with ink. Then extend the center of the swelling upward with a large trocar and tie the incision site with a strong thread or silk suture tightly.
The ligature should be tight, then open the center of the tense swelling above the ligature and insert your index finger.  Seek the intestine. If you find that it has been caught by the ligature, loosen the ligature and push the intestine back into the abdomen. If you find phlegm, extend it with a trocar.
Cut off its excess. If you encounter an artery or vein, ligate it well and return to your work. Take two needles and thread strong threads through them. Insert the needles into the incision you made around the swelling, crossing them, and then tighten the swelling in four places on the needles.
If you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the tightened flesh rots and falls off on its own, or cut it if it softens and rots. Then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals. If the swelling arose from newly formed flesh within it...
Or if it is from moisture, the tumor should be cauterized as we have said, and the blood or moisture found in it should be drawn out, then it should be treated with something that will heal the area.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
In the Treatment of Cancer.
We have mentioned in the division the types of cancer and how the way to treat it is with medication, and a warning against treating it with iron lest it become putrid, and we mentioned cancer originating in the uterus and a warning against treating it.
And the ancients mentioned that whenever the cancer is in a place where it can be completely removed, such as cancer that occurs in the breast or thigh and similar limbs capable of being removed entirely, especially if it is early and small, but if it is advanced and large, it should not be approached.
For I have not been able to cure anyone from it, nor have I seen anyone before me who has reached that, and the work in it, if it is feasible as we said, is to proceed gradually and relieve the patient from the black matter repeatedly, then dissect it if it is in the veins with clear fullness.
Then the patient should be positioned in a way that allows for the work to be done, then forceps suitable for it should be placed into the cancer, then cauterize it from all sides with the skin being thoroughly examined so that nothing of its roots remains and leave the blood to flow without cutting it quickly.
Rather, squeeze the places and drain all the thick blood with your hand or with whatever instruments you can, and if during the work a great hemorrhage occurs from cutting an artery or vein, ligate the vein until the bleeding stops, then treat it with all the usual treatments until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Four.
On the Treatment of Fistula.
We have informed you in the division of the types of hydrocele and how water accumulates, as well as the signs of each type and its treatment with medication. The type that is treated with iron is the serous type alone, and the tuberculous and fleshy types should not be approached with iron at all.
For this is a fighter, if you have treated this kind of dry scab with medicines and your treatment has not been successful, then see if the patient has become excessively weak or if he has another illness besides the scab, such as
cough or diarrhea, or something like that, then beware of treating him with cautery, for it is dangerous. If you see the patient is strong and has no illness other than the scab alone and he is neither a boy nor an old man, then proceed as follows: have the patient stand in front of you. Let a servant stand behind him and squeeze his belly with his hands, pushing the water downwards towards the groin. Then take a pointed forceps of this form:
Limited on two sides, long and pointed at the end like forceps, but with a slight curve so that you do not penetrate to the intestines during the operation and injure them. Then look carefully to see if the scab originated from the intestinal side.
The incision should be made three fingerbreadths below the anus, above the groin. If the scab originated from a liver ailment, make the incision three fingerbreadths to the left of the anus. If it originated from a spleen ailment, make the incision three fingerbreadths to the right of the anus.
The incision should not be made on the side the patient wishes to lie on so that the discharge does not flow into that weakened area. Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and insert it into the incision, raising your hand.
With the forceps, separate the skin from the peritoneum as if you were peeling it off, removing a quantity equal to a fingernail or thereabouts. Then pierce the peritoneum until the forceps reaches an empty space where the water is located. Withdraw the forceps and insert the instrument shown in this illustration into the hole:
It is like a slender tube made of silver, copper, or smooth polished espadrille and has a small hole at the bottom. On its sides are three holes, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And its point may be made into the shape of a pen's nib in this manner:
At its top end is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it descends from its hour upon the instrument, and empties a moderate amount of water, because if you empty more than is necessary in time, the patient may die by dissolution of his animal spirit.
Or he may suffer a coma close to death, but empty it according to his strength and what indicates to you the patient's condition from the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his color, then the instrument is removed and the water is retained, because it is retained from its hour.
Because of the skin that holds the hole on the peritoneum, as you were told to cover it in that way, then you return the instrument the next day if you see the patient able to tolerate it.
And you also remove a small amount from the water, you do this for several days while being vigilant and cautious so that there is only a little water left. If you fear for the patient and leave a lot of water, treat him by burying in hot sand.
And a lot of sweating in the bath and the sun, enduring thirst, and treating him with drying medicines until he recovers. And cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the water as previously described.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
On the treatment of children who are born with their urethral openings unperforated or narrow, or in an abnormal location.
Some boys may be born with their urethra unperforated and it is necessary to perforate it from the hour they are born.
With a very thin trocar in this manner:
Then you place a thin lead pin in the hole and tie it, holding it for three or four days. Whenever he wants to urinate, loosen the pin, let him urinate and then replace it. If you do not use the lead, it is possible that the urine passing through the opening will not allow it to close.
As for the one who has a narrow hole, it is treated with lead as we said for many days until it widens. And those among them whose hole is not in its proper place - some are born with the hole at the end of the ridge and cannot urinate forward.
Until he raises his penis with his hand to above and is not born before that the semen cannot reach the womb straight, which is a very ugly cause, and the way to work in this is for the patient to lie on his back.
Then stretch his ridge with your left hand strongly and grasp the head of the penis with a blade or a sharp trocar the size of a pen, as if you were carving something so that its middle protrudes like a ridge and the hole falls in the center as it should be.
And preserve yourself from bleeding during your work, for it often occurs. Meet it with what cuts the blood and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
On the blenorrhagia that occurs in the foreskin and the ridge, blackness and corruption and adhesion of the foreskin to the ridge.
This blenorrhagia often occurs in the penis, it is a knot of foul pus and from it there are virulent and non-virulent types. The non-virulent type should be tied with a fine thread.
And cut it until you purify it all, then apply cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment to it, and then treat it afterward with palm ointment until it heals. As for the blenorrhagia if it is virulent and dark colored, you should use cautery on it after cutting and removing it.
If the blenorrhagia is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised man and some of it is inside the foreskin and some outside, you should first remove the blenorrhagia that is inside so that when it heals, then treat it from the outside.
For when you treat them together, you are not safe from the pouch tearing. Moreover, blackness and corruption may also appear in the labia and the pouch, so you should excise everything that has blackened or is likely to corrupt or has already corrupted.
Then apply honey with pounded, strained pomegranate rind and caraway seeds on top of it. Then treat it with all other remedies until it heals. If bleeding occurs, use cautery with a crescent-shaped iron in this manner:
For cautery is beneficial for both conditions, namely bleeding and a putrefied wound. If the abscess has indeed gone entirely at a certain time, you should insert a lead tube into the urethra so that the patient urinates on it. As for the adhesion of the pouch to the abscess...
This adhesion only occurs in those whose pouch was healthy and they had not been circumcised. It may also occur due to a wound or a tumor. You should then dissect it with a blunt probe until the ligature dissolves and the abscess is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them upon examination, you should dissect a portion of the abscess and the pouch. Because the pouch is thin, it may tear quickly due to its thinness. Then separate the pouch from the abscess with a fine linen cloth dampened in cold water so that it does not stick either.
Then treat it with an astringent decoction until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Seven.
On the purification of boys and the treatment of what afflicts them.
Circumcision is nothing other than separating a connection like all other surgical procedures, except that since it is something we do voluntarily and its use is particularly common in boys, we must outline the best method for performing it.
And the easiest path leading to safety, I say that those who came before us did not mention circumcision in any of their writings because it was not practiced in their laws, but rather something we have acquired.
By experience, I found that the majority of craftsmen and barbers use cleansing with a sponge and scissors, and they use tweezers and ligature with thread and cutting with a knife.  I have tried all these methods.
I found no better method than cleansing with scissors and ligation with thread, because cleansing with a sponge often causes the skin to adhere, as the skin of the foreskin has two layers; it may cut the upper layer and leave the lower layer.
He is then forced to make another cut and the pain resumes. Cleansing with tweezers does not ensure cutting the tip of the penis, as it may enter its hole. As for cleansing with a knife, the skin may slip and ruin your work or the boy's skin may be short by nature.
Many are born this way and do not need cleansing; I have seen this. As for cleansing with scissors and ligation with thread, experience has revealed its superiority because the scissors are proportioned for cutting, as the blade on top is like the blade on the bottom.
When you squeeze your hand in proportion to the blades, it cuts to an equal measure and at the same time, so that the ligature thread becomes like a wall for the skin of the penis from all sides, with no error whatsoever. The first step in the procedure is to deceive the boy.
Especially if he is one who understands a little, you should make him believe that you are only tying the thread around his penis and leaving it until the next day; then rejoice and delight him in every way possible and acceptable to his mind, then have him stand straight before you.
Do not have him sitting down; hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that the boy's eyes do not fall upon them at all, nor upon any of the instruments. Then insert your hand into his penis and blow on the skin, lifting it upward until the head of the penis emerges.
Then cleanse it of all dirt, and then bind the indicated place with a doubled thread; then bind a little below it a second ligature; then grasp firmly with your thumb and forefinger the place below the ligature and cut between the two ligatures. Then quickly raise the skin upwards and extract the head of the penis; then let the blood flow a little, for this is best and least likely to cause swelling of the penis; then dry it with a damp cloth and sprinkle over it dried, roasted pumpkin ashes which are the best I have found, or also powdered tragacanth.
Then quickly raise the skin upwards and extract the head of the penis; then let the blood flow a little, for this is best and least likely to cause swelling of the penis; then dry it with a damp cloth and sprinkle over it dried, roasted pumpkin ashes which are the best I have found, or also powdered tragacanth. Then apply a poultice from above, made of a boiled egg in rosewater mashed with fresh, soft rose ointment, and leave it on until the next day; then treat it with all usual remedies until it is healed.
This is an image of the scissors suitable for cleansing:
It should be a sharp, straight pair of scissors with pins, and the length of the blades should be equal to the length of the handles; as for the error which may occur in cleansing, it is sometimes that the whole or part of the skin is inverted when cut, so you should stretch it from time to time with your fingernail before the place swells.
Cut it evenly; if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, draw it out with a thread and cut it; but if after three days what is under the head of the penis remains swollen and warm, leave it until the hot swelling subsides, then remove it gently.
Cut it according to what suits you, and be careful not to cut the head of the penis, for cutting a part of the head of the penis will do no harm; treat it with the astringents which we have described in the article on astringents.
And if a part of the skin is cut away in excess and shrinks upwards, that will not do much harm either; treat it as we have mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Eight.
In the treatment of urinary retention in the bladder.
Urinary retention in the bladder is due to its blockage by a stone, congealed blood, pus, growing flesh, or something similar. If you treat that with the types of treatment described in the division mentioned.
And if the urine has not passed and you see that its retention is due to a stone in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should sit on his knees; then a man should mount his back and extend his belly towards his back; and the patient himself should grasp what he can.
Then the neck of the bladder will be forced to expel the stone backwards so that the urine will pass. If it does not pass as described and the matter becomes severe for the patient, then you should use its removal with an instrument called a catheter, which is shaped like this:
It is made of silver and is thin, smooth, and hollow like a bird's feather quill in fineness and length, about a palm and a half long; it has a delicate funnel at its head. The way to draw urine with it is to take a doubled thread and tie a wick or cotton firmly at its end.
Insert the end of the thread into the bottom of the catheter and cut it with pincers so that a bit of the wick enters the tube to plug it like a cork. Then grease the catheter with oil, butter, or egg white and have the patient sit on a chair.
Lubricate his urethra and perineum with wet ointment or oil and warm water, then gently insert the catheter into the urethra until it reaches the base of the urethra; then bend the urethra upwards towards the scrotum and push the catheter inside it.
Until the urethra is bent, then push the catheter inside until it reaches near the prostate gland; incline the penis downwards and keep the catheter inside; then push it until it reaches the bladder and the patient feels that it has reached something empty.
This is done on this rank because the passage through which urine flows is crooked, then the thread is extended with wool slightly tight so that urine follows the wool, then it is pulled out and the urine flows freely and the catheter is reintroduced.
This is continued until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter Ninety-Five.
How to Inject the Bladder with Zarqaq.
Instruments suitable for this purpose are made of silver or ivory, hollowed out with a long tube on a thin neck. You wanted to pour water and medicines into it, so it is done with an instrument called zarqaq, and this is its picture:
It is made of silver or ivory, hollowed out with a long tube on a thin neck, hollow throughout except for the end where there are three holes, two on one side and one on the other as you see.
The hollow space where the syringe is located should be on a scale that can be closed without excess, so that when you draw something wet with it, it is drawn in, and when you push it out, it is pushed away as far as the thinness allows for which oil is thrown in sea battles.
If you want to put moisture into the bladder, insert the end of the zarqaq into the moisture and pull it up with the syringe, the moisture will be drawn into the zarqaq. Then insert its end into the urethra as we described in catheters, and then push the moisture with the syringe.
That moisture will reach the bladder on time until the patient feels it, and this is a picture of a delicate injector that injects into the bladder as well:
It is made of silver or a sparrowhawk, its upper head resembles a small funnel, and underneath it is a notch where the ribbon is placed. Then take a camel's bladder and put the moisture you want to inject into the bladder inside it. Then tie it tightly between the two notches with a doubled thread.
Warm that moisture slightly over the fire, then insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra and tighten your hand on the bladder with the moisture firmly until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a thin piece and make a circle out of it, pierce it all around, then insert a tight thread through those holes as you wind it, then gather the circle as you gather a tablecloth after putting in it what you want of moisture, unguents, and water.
Then tie it to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder by pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter Sixty.
On Removing Stones.
We have mentioned in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicine, and we have pointed out the difference between a stone that is generated in the kidney and a stone that is generated in the bladder and the signs of all of that, and we have mentioned the stone in which work is done by hand and incision.
It is a stone that is generated in the bladder, especially one that becomes lodged in the urethra, and I will describe it with a clear explanation and brevity.
I say that the stone generated in the bladder is more common in boys, and one of its signs is that urine comes out of the bladder resembling water in its thinness.
Sand appears in it, and its mention is scratched and tampered with, and it often hangs down then spreads, and the buttocks protrude with many of them, and it is easy for boys to be cured from it until they reach fourteen years old, and it becomes difficult in the elderly, while young men are moderate between the two.
The one whose stone is larger, his treatment is easier, and the smaller ones are the opposite. So if we turn to treatment, it should be injected into the patient with an injection that brings out all the filth in his urethra because it may prevent the presence of the stone when examined.
Then the patient is taken by his legs and shaken downwards so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or he jumps from a height several times; then he is seated between your hands erect, with his hands under his thighs, so that the whole bladder becomes inclined downwards, and then it is examined.
You feel it from the outside; if you feel the stone in the space, hasten immediately to incise upon it; if it does not fall under your hand at all, then you should smear the middle finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a boy or the index finger.
If he is a full-grown boy, you introduce it into his urethra and search for the stone until it falls under your finger; then you transfer it little by little to the neck of the bladder, then press upon it with your finger and push it outward toward the place where you wish to make the incision.
You order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand and order another servant to extend his right hand upwards above the testicles, and with his other hand extend the skin which is below the testicles towards the place where the incision will be made; then you take the dissecting knife, which has this shape:
You make the incision between the scrotum and the testicles, not in the middle but to the side of the left testicle; the incision should be upon the stone itself, with your finger in the urethra pressing it outward so that the incision from outside will be wide and from inside narrow, as much as is possible for the stone to come out.
Do not make it too large, for perhaps the finger which is in the urethra will press the stone at the incision and it will come out without difficulty; but know that some stones may have angles and projections which make their removal difficult.
And some are smooth and resemble an acorn, and they roll easily so that their removal is easy; but if it has angles and projections, you should enlarge the incision a little; if it does not come out this way, then you must try to manipulate it, either by grasping it with forceps whose tip is like a file.
Let him position himself over the stone so that it does not escape. Then, either introduce a fine instrument with a blunt end underneath it. If this is unsuccessful, widen the incision slightly. If blood flow becomes excessive, cauterize it with alum.
If there are more than one, first push the largest one towards the bladder opening, then make an incision over it and push the smaller ones afterward. Do the same if there are more than two. If they are very large indeed, he should not make a large incision over them because this exposes the patient to one of two dangers.
Either he will die, or he will suffer constant urine leakage because the site will not heal at all. Instead, try to push them out or maneuver to break them with forceps so that they come out in pieces.
When you have finished your work, dress the wound with frankincense, myrrh, and mastic, and bind it tight. Place a cloth soaked in oil and wine or rose oil and cold water over it to soothe the hot swelling. Then let the patient lie on his back and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
When the bandage is removed, wash the area with plenty of water and oil, then treat it with palm-oil ointment and balm of Mecca until it heals. If there arises in the wound a hot swelling, pain, and the like, such as blood clotting in the bladder and urine retention, which is known by blood passing with the urine,
insert your finger into the wound and extract the blood, for if it remains it will lead to bladder corruption and suppuration. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply treatment appropriate to each type until it heals.
During all treatment periods, it is necessary to bind and bring the thighs together to hold the medications applied to the area. If the stone is small and has lodged in the urethra and urine flow is obstructed, treat it as I have described before resorting to incision.
Very often I have dispensed with incision in this treatment, for I have tried it and found it to be effective. It consists of taking a steel iron instrument shaped like this:
Its tip is triangular and sharp, fixed into a handle. Then take a thread and tie it to the rod below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.  Then gently insert the steel instrument into the urethra until the instrument reaches the stone itself.
Turn the instrument in your hand, little by little, aiming to pierce the stone until it passes through to the other side. Urine will then flow freely from it. Then grasp with your hand what remains of the stone outside the rod; it will crumble and come out with the urine, and the patient will recover.
But if this treatment is not feasible for you because of an obstacle, tie a thread below the stone and another above it. Then make an incision on the stone itself in the same rod between the two ligatures and remove it.
Then untie the ligature and clean out the congealed blood that has formed in the wound. The reason for tying a thread below the stone is to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other above it is so that when the thread is untied after the stone's removal, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
Therefore, if you tie the upper thread, you should lift the skin above it so that when you release it, it will cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter Sixty-One.
On Removing Stones from Women.
Stones rarely develop in women. If one of them does have a stone, its treatment is difficult and often impossible for several reasons: one is that the woman may be a virgin, and the other is that you will rarely find a woman who will allow herself to be examined by a doctor.
If she is a virgin or one of the close relatives, and thirdly that you will not find a woman who is skilled in this craft, especially manual work, and fourthly that the place of incision on the stones of women is far from the place of the stone, so it requires a deep incision.
There is danger in that, for if necessity calls for it, a female physician who is skilled should be taken, which is rarely found; if she is not available, seek a chaste and kind physician, or bring a midwife who is skilled in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some indication in this craft.
Prepare her and order her to do all that you command of her from examining the stone first, which is to see if the woman is a virgin; then she should insert her finger into her vulva and examine for the stone. If she finds it, she should press it under her finger.
Then order her to make the incision on her. If she is not a virgin and is an older woman, order the midwife to insert her finger into the vulva of the patient and examine for the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it very well.
If she finds it, she should guide it from the mouth of the bladder downwards as far as her strength allows until she reaches the origin of the thigh; then she should make the incision on her opposite the middle of the vulva at the origin of the thigh from whichever side she feels the stone.
Her finger should not be removed from the stone while pressing it underneath; the incision should be small at first, then insert the probe into that small incision. If she feels the stone, she should enlarge the incision as much as she knows the stone will come out of. Know that there are many kinds of stones.
Some are small, some large; some smooth, some rough; some long, some round; some branched. Get to know their types so that you can determine what you want. If the bleeding becomes excessive, sprinkle powdered alum on the spot and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and make sure to count among yourself the instruments that I mentioned for removing stones from men so that you may use them in your work; if bleeding overcomes you and you know by the pulse of blood that it is from a severed artery, then place the ligature on the spot.
Tighten it with ligatures, a firm tightening, and leave it alone and do not return to it; leave the stone and do not remove it, for perhaps the patient would perish. Then treat the wound. If the sharpness of the blood subsides after days and the place becomes putrid, then return to your work until you remove the stone.
Chapter sixty-two.
On incision for watery tumors.
Watery tumors are a collection of moisture in the white peritoneum that is under the skin of the testicles surrounding the testicle, and it is called the scrotum; it may be in a special membrane prepared by nature on one side of the testicle.
It may even be mistaken for another testicle, and it occurs between the skin of the testicles and the white peritoneum we mentioned; this is only rare. These tumors arise from weakness that afflicts the testicles and builds up this material, or they may develop after a blow to the testicles.
This moisture comes in many colors: it may be yellow, or bloody red, or dark purple, or watery white, which is the most common. The signs by which it is recognized are…
Where the water collects, if it is in the white peritoneum we mentioned, the tumor will be somewhat elongated like an egg and the testicle will not be visible because the moisture surrounds it on all sides.
And if the moisture is in a special membrane, the tumor will be round on one side of the testicle.
Because of this, a person may mistake it for another testicle. If the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white peritoneum, then it will be palpable. As for knowing the color of the moisture, probe the tumor with the square probe whose image we have shown; judge by what comes out from under the probe.
If we turn to treatment with iron, it is necessary to order the patient to be bled if he can, and you see that his body is full; then he should lie on his back on something a little high and you should put many rags under him; then you should sit on his left.
You order a servant to sit on his right and extend the patient's penis to one side of the scrotum skin and towards the direction of the abdomen; then you take a wide bistoury and cut lengthwise through the middle of the scrotum skin, nearly to the perineum.
You make the incision straight and parallel to the line that divides the scrotum skin in half, until it reaches the white peritoneum which you then dissect out and be careful not to cut it; the dissection should be done more from the side that adheres to the testicle and you should extend the dissection as much as possible.
Then you place a wide tampon over the peritoneum filled with fluid and extract all the water; then you separate the lips of the incision with speculums and elevate the peritoneum upwards, not touching the containing scrotal skin; you cut the peritoneum as much as possible, either entirely or in pieces.
Especially its thin side, for if you do not thoroughly cut it, you are not safe from the water returning; and if the testicle protrudes outside its skin while you are working, when you have finished cutting the peritoneum, return it and then bring together the lips of the scrotal skin with sutures.
Then treat it like all other wounds until it is healed; but if you find that the testicle has become diseased from some other cause, then it is necessary to tie the vessels in the spermatic cord to prevent hemorrhage and then cut off the testicle from the spermatic cord, remove the testicle and treat it as we have described.
If the collected fluid is on both sides, know that it is hydrocele; cut the other side as you have done in the first, and if it seems to you that the operation can be one, do so; then wipe away the blood.
Introduce wadding that has been soaked in oil or rose ointment into the incisions and apply a second layer of cotton wool soaked in wine and oil over the testicles. Cover the abdomen with a sheet and place a folded rag, the "rufayda", on top. Tie it from above with a bandage having six ends in this manner:
Then take two pieces of cloth, sew them together and stuff them with fluffed cotton as shown. Make the ends to be tied with cotton or damp wool and gather them tightly into a trouser belt. One of the ends should extend from the seat to the back.
The second end extends towards the groin, with the sides running down the thighs and the remaining ends on the upper arms. Gather all the tightness into a trouser belt. This bandage can also be made by cauterization instead of cutting with an iron.
This involves taking a fine, skinny iron and cutting the scrotum skin while protecting it as previously described until the white peritoneum containing fluid is exposed. Then take another iron in this manner:
It resembles a Greek eye and then cauterize the peritoneum while protecting it until all the moisture comes out. Then stretch the peritoneum with forceps and peel off the layer containing it, cutting it according to what is possible to remove it entirely. Be careful not to touch the egg with fire.
Know that this method is safer and further from bloodletting and better than working with incisions. If you encounter a hot swelling or bleeding or something else during the incision or cauterization, you should treat it according to what has been previously mentioned.
If the patient is cowardly and cannot bear this procedure because of its frightening nature, then use a bandage as I describe it. This is valid if it aligns with the evidence we have presented.
The abscess is watery, so the patient should sit on a high chair and then a wide speculum should be inserted under the swelling, and the incision should be made along the body with a wide opening so that all the water flows out, then place cotton on the area and tie it.
Leave it to drain the rest of the water, then treat it until the wound heals. If the water does not come out while you are cutting it, this is because the white membrane obstructs the mouth of the wound and prevents the water from coming out.
Then you should insert a goose feather or the instrument with which water is extracted from lovers, whose picture has been presented, or widen the opening of the wound a little.
Know that the water may return and collect after six months or so, and if it gathers, cut it in the same manner and the patient should rest for a few days.
Chapter sixty-three.
On incision of fleshy abscesses and their treatment.
Know that incision of these abscesses is a dangerous undertaking leading to death in most cases, so we prefer leaving them and staying safe from them. Nevertheless, I will mention the procedure and types of abscesses.
I say that many tumors can occur in the body, which are composed of anthrax, and this happens for many reasons, either from excess humor flowing into the anthrax or from a blow. The color of the tumor is the same as the body and there is no water in it.
The tumor is hard, and it may be petrified, its color dark and without sensation. It may also be due to the complexity of the arteries and their swelling, as mentioned earlier, or from the swelling of the veins. Swelling of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the tumor.
Do not press it with your fingers at all, but the one caused by swelling of the veins does not disperse anything when pressed with the fingers, and this type can be incised along with all other flesh.
And it is to cut the skin of the testicles, then to extend the testicle upwards and to remove it from the white peritoneum, and to free the spermatic cord from the vessels, and to tie the vessels and to cut the spermatic cord after freeing it from all sides of the testicle, if the testicle has adhered to those nascent flesh.
Then the testicle should be removed and cut off, and if the adhesion is between some of the peritoneums or among the vessels, then all that adhesion should be freed and cut in a circular manner.
If the growth of flesh is in the place of adhesion which occurs behind it, then it should all be cut and the testicle removed as we have said, and when your work is done, dress the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and syrup, then treat it with all other treatments until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Fourth.
On the Treatment of Hernia with a Testicle.
The testicle is a twisted tumor, somewhat like a cluster with relaxed ligaments, making it difficult for the patient to move, exercise and walk. In treating this ailment, what follows is similar to what has been mentioned previously.
But it should be mentioned that we act in this case as our predecessors did. I say that the patient should sit on a high chair, then push the spermatic cord downwards, and grasp the skin of the testicle with your fingers along with the vessels which are near the penis.
And have a servant hold it and stretch it firmly, then make a wide incision with a sharp scalpel in the direction of the vessels until they are exposed, then peel them off from all sides as I mentioned to you when stripping the arteries in the fingers, then insert a needle with a doubled thread into them.
Tie it at the first place where the hernia appeared, and also tie it at the last place, then make a vertical incision in the middle along the length of the body and remove all the foul and corrupted humors that have accumulated there.
Then treat the ovary like all other wounds in which you desire a delay to occur so that the vessels feeding one of the ovaries may fall away; there is no harm in that. But if the ovary presents with all its vessels, then it is necessary for one of the ovaries to be removed along with its vessels so that the egg does not become deprived of nourishment. For if the vessels are cut before they wither and cease to be of use, .
Chapter sixty-fifth.
In the treatment of intestinal hemorrhoids.
This hernia occurs from a rupture appearing in the extended peritoneum on the abdomen toward the groins, whereupon the intestines protrude from that hernia into one of the ovaries.
This hernia is either from a rupture in the peritoneum or from its extension, and these two types occur for many reasons, such as a blow, a leap, a shout, lifting something heavy, and so forth. The sign of it, if it is from the extension of the peritoneum, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time.
It does not occur suddenly and the swelling is level towards the depth because the peritoneum presses upon the intestines, and the sign of it if it is from a rupture in the peritoneum is that it occurs immediately with great sudden pain and the swelling appears distinctly under the skin nearby.
This is due to the protrusion of the intestines and their passage outside the peritoneum, and sometimes the omentum protrudes with the intestines; this hernia is then called an intestinal and omental hernia. It may also occur with flatulence, and pus may form in the intestines and become trapped there, resulting in the death of the patient.
Because it causes severe pain and rumbling, especially when pressed, the treatment of these types of conditions with iron is dangerous, and you should be wary of using it. The prescription for action is to order the patient to return the intestines to their interior with their hand if they happen to return.
Then he lies on his back between your hands and raises his legs, then you extend the skin next to the groin upwards and cut all the scrotal skin lengthwise. Then you insert pins into the edges of the incision as much as needed to open it with them.
The incision should be as long as the egg can be extracted, then you peel away the peritoneum under the scrotal skin until the white, firm peritoneum is exposed on all sides. At that point, insert your index finger next to the egg.
Between the white peritoneum under the scrotal skin and the second peritoneum, loosen the adhesion behind the egg, then with your right hand bend it inwards into the scrotal skin. With this, extend the white peritoneum upwards with your left hand and raise the egg with the peritoneum towards the incision.
You instruct the attendant to pull the egg upwards and you completely release the adhesion behind it. Then search with your finger so that there is nothing of twisted intestine in the white, firm peritoneum; if you find any, push it back into the abdomen below.
Then you take a needle with thick thread twisted from ten threads and insert it at the end of the peritoneum under the scrotal skin next to the incision. Then you cut off the ends of the thread bend so that there are four threads. Then you bind some of them together in a firm manner and tie the peritoneum under the scrotal skin with a tight ligature on both sides. Then you wind the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that nothing from the vessels feeding it can reach it. This is so that no hot tumor arises, and a second ligature is made outside the first one, further away by less than two fingers. After these two ligatures you leave a portion of the peritoneum under the scrotal skin as long as a finger bone.
This is so that no hot tumor arises, and a second ligature is made outside the first one, further away by less than two fingers. After these two ligatures you leave a portion of the peritoneum under the scrotal skin as long as a finger bone. And the rest is cut around in a circular fashion and the egg is removed with it, then the lower skin of the scrotum is incised in a line from which blood and serum flow as we have previously described, then wool soaked in oil is applied to the wound and a ligature is used as we have described.
And the white peritoneum which we said should be cut with caution to avoid bleeding, for this often occurs, is cauterized and the ligature is left until it falls off by itself; if it delays falling off, let it be moistened with hot water and a poultice applied that will cause sweating, until it falls off.
Then the wound is treated like all other wounds until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Sixth.
In windy hernias, I have not seen anyone dare to treat them with iron, as those who came before us described it should be done as we described in hernias which are accompanied by a testis; that is, the vessels are tied gently below after they are incised.
Then it is incised in the middle and the tumor is treated with what will open it up so that the vessels fall off, and the wound is treated as we have mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Sixth.
In a hernia that occurs in the groin.
As we said, a hernia may occur in the groin, and it prolapses from its location but nothing of the intestine descends into the scrotum, and even if some does descend it is slight and always returns.
But if it lasts for a long time, the opening in the peritoneum increases so that intestine and omentum descend into the scrotum, which occurs because of the extension of the peritoneum in the groin as we have said. And that is because the peritoneum stretches and then relaxes, the place bulges and protrudes, and it is treated by cautery as we have previously described.
It may also be treated with iron in this manner: the patient lies on his back between your hands, then the site of the warm hernia is incised transversely to a width of three fingers. Then the peritoneum under the skin is sutured.
Until the white peritoneum beneath it is exposed, you take a ligature and place it upon the site resulting from the peritoneum, pressing it down to the depth of the abdomen. Then you sew the two resulting sites on either side of the ligature to the peritoneum and bind them together with sutures.
Then you draw the ligature tight and do not cut the peritoneum at all, nor touch the testicle or anything else as I have instructed you in the treatment of intestinal hernias; then treat it like other surgical wounds.
When the sutures have been removed, you clean them and dress the wound until it heals; the peritoneum then contracts and the hernia does not protrude further.
Cautery is best in this situation as it is closest to safety.
Chapter Sixty-Eight.
On Relaxation of the Scrotum.
The skin of the scrotum often relaxes in some people without the flesh inside relaxing, and its appearance is unsightly. Therefore, he who wishes to treat it should put the patient to sleep on his back.
He cuts away all the relaxed skin on the thick skin, then brings the two lips together. If you wish to suture first, the excess relaxed skin with three or four sutures and ensure they are secure, then cut between the sutures.
Then treat it like all other surgical wounds until it heals and the sutures fall out.
Chapter Ninety-Six.
On Castration.
Castration is forbidden in our religion.
Therefore, I should not have mentioned it in this book of mine; however, I have done so for two reasons: one that it may be within the knowledge of the physician if he is asked about it and so that he may know how to treat someone who has undergone it; and the second that we often need to castrate some animals for our own benefit.
As for rams, weasels, cats and the like of animals, I say that castration is done in two ways: either by pressure or by incision and cutting.  That which is done by pressure, its method is that we seat the animal in hot water until its genitals relax, soften and dangle.
Then you press it with your hand until it dissolves and is not apparent to the touch. As for castration by incision and cutting, it should be that you hold the animal and compress the skin of its testicles with your left hand, then tie the spermatic cords and make one cut on each testicle.
Until the two testicles protrude, cut them off after you have skinned them and do not leave on them any of the peritoneum except the thin peritoneum that is on the vessels. This type of castration is better than that which is done by pressure.
Because pressure may leave something of the testicles so that the animal desires copulation, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy
On the Treatment of Hermaphrodites.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two types, one of which appears below the space or in the scrotal skin between the testicles in a shape like a woman's vulva with hair and urine may flow from what is in the scrotal skin.
As for women, there is one type which occurs above the vulva on the mons pubis like small male genitals issuing outward, one of them as if it were a man's penis and the two like testicles. The treatment of the three types is as follows.
The two types in men and the one type in women, it is necessary to cut off that excess flesh until its trace is gone, then treat it with the treatment of other surgeries until it heals. As for the second type of men from whom urine flows from what is in the scrotal skin, there is no action on it nor benefit whatsoever.
Chapter Seventy-One.
On the cutting of the vulva and the flesh that comes from the pudenda of women.
The vulva may have grown excessively beyond the natural state, so that it becomes prominent and unsightly, and in some women it may become enlarged to such an extent that it resembles the male genitals and is suitable for copulation.
Therefore, one should grasp the excess part of the vulva with one's hand or with forceps and cut it off, not cutting too deeply, especially at the base so as not to cause hemorrhage.
Then treat it with surgical remedies until it heals, and as for the nascent flesh, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
It may sometimes protrude outward like a tail. Therefore, some of the ancients called it the "tail disease," and one should cut it off just as one cuts the vulva, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Two.
On the treatment of prolapse.
Prolapse is when the vagina of a woman is not perforated or has a small perforation, which may be congenital or acquired. Acquired prolapse results from an underlying cause and is usually due to excess fleshy growth.
It may also be due to a thin or thick peritoneum, located either deep in the womb, on its sides, above it, or below it; it prevents copulation, conception, and childbirth, and may even prevent menstruation.  Knowledge of this condition is gained through examination by a midwife.
If the obstruction is apparent and nearby, if not, examine it with her fingers or a speculum. If the obstruction is due to thin peritoneum and is close to the labia, proceed by puncturing it. This is done by placing something resembling stirrups on the labia, then place both thumbs of your hands together.
The woman is laid on her back with her legs spread, then the labia are forcefully stretched until the thin peritoneum is pierced and the barrier opens. Then she takes wool, soaks it in oil, and places it on the spot, and has intercourse with the woman every day lest the place unite again.
But if the peritoneum is thick and dense, it should be cut with a wide spatula resembling an aspen leaf. If the barrier is of newly grown flesh, suspend it with forceps and cut it. Have remedies to stanch bleeding without cauterizing, such as quince, mastic, and frankincense, mixed with egg white.
Then use a wide lead tube so that the wound does not heal quickly, hold it for days and use a dry flax wick. Then treat it with all the remedies for healing until it is cured.  It may happen that another growth of flesh appears in the womb which should be cut in this manner.
Unless it is a cancerous tumor, for a cancerous tumor in the womb should not be treated with iron at all.
Chapter seventy-three.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts and red pimples that appear in the vulva of women.
Hemorrhoids are the swelling of the openings of veins until a great deal of blood flows constantly from them. If hemorrhoids persist, they become warts, as mentioned in the division of types and symptoms. We shall mention them here.
We shall speak of what is treatable and what is not treatable among them, and say that hemorrhoids and warts, if they are deep in the uterus and do not appear to the sense, are not treatable with iron. Only those that are in the mouth of the uterus and felt by touch are treatable.
The woman should enter a cold room, then the warts should be stretched with a speculum or a rough cloth and cut from their roots. Then, when blood flows, one of the styptic drugs which do not cauterize should be applied to them.
Like the cresses and parsley and frankincense and the like, then raise her legs to the wall for an hour, then lower them into cold water. If the bleeding continues, sit her in a decoction of marshmallow root, pomegranate peel and rue and the like, then take barley flour and knead it with honey and vinegar.
Apply it to her back, if the bleeding stops, otherwise adhere to the solid bandages on the breasts and armpits without restriction. Then take a wick and dip it in the juice of purslane or birthwort or the juice of elder branches with a rue drink and apply it to the area.
If the swelling subsides, treat the area with ointment until it heals. As for red lichen, it resembles the heads of rushes, rough in appearance, you should cut off what appears from it as I mentioned in warts and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Fourth.
On the incision of an abscess that appears in the uterus.
Many types of tumors may appear in the uterus, such as cancer, petrified tumors, ulcers, fistulas, ulcers, warts, hemorrhoids, fissures, corns and hot tumors. I have mentioned all these diseases, their types and symptoms in the division.
We should mention in this article the hot tumor that appears in the uterus if it is one of the tumors that collects for a period, how its incision with iron would be. You should look to see if the pain of the tumor at its beginning is sharp with throbbing, inflammation and fever.
And if you see it red when touched, do not rush to incise it and treat it with what helps ripening until these symptoms subside. Then she should sit on a chair with two seats and lean on her back.
And bring her legs together towards the lower abdomen, with her thighs spread apart, and place her arms under her knees and tie them with a suitable bandage.
Then the midwife sits on the right side and uses the instrument with which the mouth of the uterus is opened, the picture of which will come later. If you wish to use this instrument, you should estimate the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters from the instrument does not exceed the depth of the uterus.
It hurts the patient if the instrument is longer than the depth, so pads should be placed on the lip of the cervix to prevent the whole instrument from entering the depth of the uterus, and the spiral that runs in the instrument should be from the upper side.
You hold the instrument and the servant turns the spiral until the cervix opens, then if the abscess appears and is touched by the hand and is soft and thin, it should be cut at its head with a wide scalpel, and if all the time has elapsed.
A soft wick soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringents should be placed in the wound, and the wick should come out of the incision in the cervix, and pure wool soaked in water that has boiled with baker's yeast should be placed on the outside of the uterus and the vulva.
Then it is treated after two days with the ointment suitable for that until it heals.
The uterus and the wound may be washed by injecting it with water and honey, then with water that has been boiled with the root of licorice or long asparagus, then return to the ointment. If the abscess is hidden inside the uterus.
Then treatment with iron should be avoided and treated as mentioned in the division.
Chapter Seventy-Fifth.
On teaching midwives how to treat live fetuses that come out in an unnatural way.
The midwife should first know the shape of natural childbirth, and its signs are that if you see the woman leaning down and yearning to smell the air, it will ease what she is in labor with.
And hasten the exit of the fetus, know that this birth will be in a natural manner and its exit will be on its head with the placenta, or hanging from its cord, so if you see these signs, it is necessary to press her abdomen so that the fetus comes out quickly.
For if it descends on its head, the placenta will descend with it and be cleansed from those superfluities in a good manner. And except for this birth, it is unnatural and blameworthy, because it may happen that the fetus comes out on its legs and its hands come out before its head and legs.
Or one hand or one leg comes out, or its head and a hand come out, or it comes out folded, and perhaps it turns on its back, or something like these blameworthy forms. So the midwife should be skillful and gentle with all these things and beware of slipping and error.
And I will explain each form and how to deal with it so that you can recognize and understand them. If the fetus comes out on its head, this is a natural delivery, and if it becomes difficult for the woman and labor pains are hard for her and you see that her strength has weakened, seat her on a chair and order some women to hold her steady.
And apply a poultice of boiled fenugreek and wet ointments to her womb, then let the midwife insert a small speculum between her fingers and cut the placenta with it or cut it with her fingernail until what is inside flows out, and press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, the woman should be injected with fenugreek saliva mixed with henna oil; then order her to sneeze and tickle her with a feather, while holding her mouth and nose, for the fetus will come out in its hour. If the fetus's hand comes out first, it should gently be pushed back a little at a time.
If entry is not possible, place the woman on a platform and raise her legs upward; then shake the platform on the ground while the woman holds on so as not to fall when shaken. If the hands still do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or bind his hands with a cloth and pull them moderately, for he will come out, emerging on his feet. If the fetus emerges on its feet, you should push them upwards, then turn the fetus little by little until it is straightened. Then take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
If they emerge to the thighs, order her to move and push with a speculum, for he will come out. If he does not come out as we have described, or otherwise, return the fetus little by little until it becomes in its natural shape. Then it will come out smoothly. If he refuses everything that has been described.
Take saliva of the hyssop, saliva of fennel, fat from the marrow and dissolved mastic, and beat all of them in a mortar very well. Then apply it to the woman's vulva and lower abdomen. Then seat her in lukewarm water until the effects are felt.
If you see that it has relaxed below, make for her a suppository of rue and let her hold it in; if she holds the suppository for an hour, seat her on a chair, then push with a speculum, close her mouth and nose, and squeeze her lower abdomen lightly. The fetus will come out at its appointed time.
If he comes out in this manner, proceed to insert his hands a little at a time; then let the woman lie on her back and dangle her legs downwards while lying on a bed, clasping her hands together; then squeeze above her abdomen lightly. Then remove what is under her legs from the pillows so that she becomes upright below; if the fetus does not come out, take hold of both her legs and move them vigorously; then squeeze above the pudendal cleft lightly until the fetus ascends upwards; then let the midwife insert her hand and straighten the fetus a little at a time.
Order the woman to push until the fetus comes out, for the fetus is coming out obstructed, delayed by one of its hands.  If you can put back its hand, then do so. If you cannot put it back, make the woman stand and have her walk.  If she cannot walk, lay her down on her back.
Her bed and shake her legs vigorously; then use the forceps that I have described from the specula. If the pains seize her, seat her on a chair, then proceed to put back the hand and arrange the fetus into its natural shape.  Have the woman sneeze and order her to push until it comes out.
If the fetus comes out on its head with its arms extended and its face towards its mother's back, the midwife should grasp the fetus's hand and then turn it little by little, straightening it gently. Once it is straight, apply to the mother's vulva the ointment and specula that we have described.
Then have her move a little at a time; and if she does, seat her on a chair and order her to lean to the right side. Then have her push and sneeze her with a speculum. The fetus will then be born.
If it descends into the mouth of the womb in this manner with the placenta, split the placenta with your fingernail until you are rid of the moisture; if it is attached to the face and neck of the fetus, cut it from the cervix so that it will not be strangled and die, then push the fetus inside until it is positioned correctly.
Order the woman to shift several times, for it comes out easily; as for the birth of twins or many fetuses, know that twins are often born and three or four may be born and live, but that is rare. As for five, it is something outside of nature and they do not live at all.
And they are surrounded by one placenta, and they are separated by a partition membrane tied at the cervix of each one of them; they may come out as a single fetus comes out easily and naturally, or they may come out in a difficult manner as we have described.
If some of them are in distress during birth and take on the unnatural forms we have described, then treat them as we have described. The midwife should be gentle and do everything with care, patience, and devise every means possible to achieve safety.
Know that fetuses conceived in the womb may be miscarried; one, two, three, four, five, six, seven or more than ten may be conceived. I have heard it confirmed that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them conceived.
By the grace and knowledge of God Almighty, all this should be known by midwives, for they may encounter such situations one day and handle them accordingly.
Chapter Seventy-Sixth.
On the Expulsion of a Stillborn Fetus.
If you have treated the stillborn fetus as described in the section on treatment and it does not emerge, and you are forced to proceed manually, then you should observe if the woman is healthy and strong and does not exhibit any symptoms that would put her at risk of harm. In this case, she should lie on her back on a bed.
Its head should be inclined downwards and its legs raised, with an attendant holding it steady from both sides, or tied to the bed so that its body is not drawn during delivery of the fetus.
Then the mouth of her womb should be moistened with soft unguents, mixed with the saliva of the mastich tree and fenugreek seeds, then the midwife should anoint her hand with these unguents and saliva, and gently insert it into the womb. She should then search for a suitable place to embed the forceps, and the corresponding locations.
See if the fetus is coming out headfirst, then embed the forceps in its eyes, or in its temple, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its chin, or in its clavicle, or in places near the ribs, or under the scapulae.
But if it is coming out feet first, then in the vulva and the middle ribs; the forceps should be held in the right hand, its curve between the fingers of the left hand. The hand should be gently inserted and a forceps embedded in some of those places we have mentioned.
Until it reaches something empty, then embed another or a third forceps opposite it if needed, so the pull is even and does not lean to one side. Then extend steadily, but the extension should not be straight only; move it to every direction.
This will make it easier for it to come out, just as is done when extracting a tooth. Between extensions, the midwife should loosen her grip; if any part gets stuck, she should anoint some fingers with unguent and insert them from that side to turn what is stuck. If any part of the fetus comes out, she should move the forceps to other places.
She should lift it slightly while doing this until the whole fetus comes out. If a hand emerges before anything else and cannot be pushed back because it is compressed, she should wrap a cloth around it and pull until the whole hand comes out, then cut it off.
Whether in the wrist joint or elbow, and so it should be done in the other hand and in both legs. If the head of the fetus is large and subject to pressure during delivery, or if there is water collected in its head, a pointed bistoury should be inserted between the fingers.
And it should be split with it so that the water comes out, or it can be inserted with an instrument called a forceps, the image of which will come with the images of all the other instruments in the chapter after this.
The same should be done if the fetus is large-headed by nature, for it is necessary to split the skull or crush it with forceps as we said, then remove the bones with pincers. If the head emerges and gets compressed at the nape of the neck, it should be split until the moisture in the chest drains.
For the chest will then unite. If it does not unite and it is impossible for it to come out, cut what you can. If the lower abdomen is warm or contains pus, it should be poulticed so that the moisture drains from it.
If the fetus is on its legs, pulling it out is easy and straightening it to the mouth of the womb is simple. If it gets compressed at the abdomen or chest, it should be pulled with a cloth wrapped around your hand and the abdomen or chest should be split until what is inside flows out.
If all the other limbs are removed and the head returns and gets stuck, let the midwife insert her left hand. If the mouth of the womb is open, she should insert her hand into the cervix and use it to seek the head and pull it towards the mouth of the womb with her fingers. Then she should insert a spoon or two spoons and pull it with them.
If the mouth of the womb has closed due to a hot swollen tumor, it should not be forced. Rather, at that time wet fatty substances should be poured on it and poultices should be used, and she should sit in waters which soften and moisten.
If the fetus is on its side, if it can be straightened, use what we mentioned for the living fetus. If not, cut in pieces and remove it, and nothing of the placenta should be left inside at all. When you are finished with your treatment, use what we mentioned for the treatment of hot tumors that occur in the wombs.
If bleeding occurs, let her descend into grasping waters and use all other treatment; I have seen a woman who had been pregnant, the fetus died in her womb, then she became pregnant again.
The other fetus also died, and after a long time, a tumor appeared in her womb and swelled until it opened and began to discharge pus. I was called to treat her, so I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not close, so I applied some strong drawing ointments to it.
A bone came out of the place, then after a few days, another bone came out. I was amazed by this because there are no bones in the abdomen. I concluded that they were bones from the dead fetus, so I searched the wound and removed many bones, especially those from the head of the fetus.
I continued to do this until I removed many bones from her, and the woman was in excellent health. She lived for a long time afterward, with only a little pus coming from the place. I have presented this rare case here.
Because it contains knowledge and support for what the physician, the creator, tries to achieve with his hand in treatment.
Chapter Seventy-Seventh.
It contains images of the instruments needed to extract a fetus.
Image of a dilator to open the cervix.
This is the instrument used to straighten books, except it has two knobs at the ends of the wood, but this knob should be finer than the one for straightening books and should be made of ebony or boxwood, with each piece of wood being the width of two fingers.
Their shape is like a finger, and their length is one and a half spans. In the middle of the two pieces of wood there are two rails of the same kind of wood, firmly fixed therein. Their length is half a span or a little more, and their width is about two fingers or a little more. These two rails...
are the ones that are inserted into the mouth of the uterus to open it by turning the rollers, image of another instrument like it but finer and lighter:
It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of callipers, but it has two rails at its end as you see, the length of each rail being about a span and their width being two fingers. If you wish to open the uterus with it...
Make the woman sit on a bed with her legs spread apart, then insert these two rails into the mouth of the uterus while holding the end of the instrument below between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with callipers to whatever extent you wish to open the uterus. So that the midwife can do what she wants, image of another speculum mentioned by those who came before:
Image of the gun which pushes the fetus:
Image of the forceps with which the head of the fetus is seized:
It resembles pincers, with teeth at the end as you see. It can also be made rectangular like callipers in this shape. As you see it has teeth like a saw to cut and tear.
Image of a gun also:
Image of a spoon:
This spoon is a little thicker so that it does not break when the fetus is pulled with it. Image of a spoon with two prongs:
Image of two wide forceps for cutting the fetus:
All these instruments, the more numerous and well-made they are by the craftsman, the quicker his work will be and the higher his standing will be among people for his skill. So do not disdain any instrument from being ready at hand, for there will surely be a need for it.
Chapter Seventy-Eight.
On the delivery of the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, you should order the patient to hold herself and then sneeze with a speculum while you pull on her mouth and nostrils; if it comes out this way, well and good; otherwise, take a quantity.
And pierce a hole in the lid and put in it herbs which are open to the womb, such as pennyroyal, rue, fennel, chamomile, hyssop, wormwood, and angelica; all these drugs or some of them; and immerse it in water and place it on the fire. Then you put a silver tube on the hole in the lid and the other end into the mouth of the womb.
Hold it until the vapor reaches the bottom of the womb, then sneeze as we said; the placenta will come out quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to dip her left hand in sheep fat or camel saliva.
Then she inserts it into the vagina and searches for the placenta; if she finds it, she grasps it and pulls it out little by little until it comes out. If it is stuck deep in the womb, insert the hand as we have described until, when you find the placenta, pull it out gently, a little at a time.
So that the uterus does not fall out when pulled hard, but it should be moved gently to the right and left sides, then increase the amount of pulling; it will respond at that time and get rid of adhesion. If the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have described the treatment with sneezing and the treatment with the pot and herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, beware of violence in pulling on it again; but you should tie what has come out from the mouth of the womb to the woman's thigh and then inject her with four-part ointment; for it will soften it after a few days.
And it dissolves and comes out, but if it becomes putrid, a foul odor rises from it to the stomach and head, and this harms the patient; therefore, one should use appropriate incense.
Therefore, some of the ancients tried incense made from aloe wood and dried figs. Here is an image of the instrument with which women are fumigated when they have a retention of menses or placenta, etc.
It is made of lead, resembling a funnel, or it is made of copper. The thin end is placed in the vagina and the wide end on the fire. Incense is placed on the embers; it is held until that incense is gone, and then it is replaced.
Chapter Ninety-Seventh.
In the Treatment of an Unruptured Fistula.
Many boys are born with unruptured fistulas, often closed by a thin layer of peritoneum. The midwife should puncture this peritoneum with her finger; otherwise, she should incise it with a sharp curette, being careful not to touch the muscle.
Then she should place a wick soaked in wine and oil on it and treat it with ointments until it heals. If there is fear that it will close again, insert a lead tube into the opening for many days. Remove it when the child wishes to defecate.
An unruptured fistula may also result from the contraction of a wound or a tumor.  It should be incised, and then treated as described above.
Chapter Eighty.
On the Treatment of Fistulas That Occur in the Lower Parts.
Fistulas that occur in the lower parts are a complication and thickening that happens near the anus, either externally or within the space from one side, and there may be one or more fistulous tracts.
When this complication softens and opens, a watery, whitish fluid or thin pus may flow from it. Some of these fistulas may extend to the rectum and intestines; others are not connected. Those that communicate can be recognized by the passage of feces and flatus through them when the patient defecates.
Sometimes worms may come out of it, and there may be fistulas from it if it is in the space that penetrates to the bladder and into the urethra, or penetrates to the hip joint and to the tailbone. And what is known as a fistula penetrating to the seat is also known without penetration.
Insert your middle finger into the anus and insert a thin probe of copper or iron into the fistula if there is no curvature in the fistula, but if there is a curvature, insert a thin lead probe or a horsehair into it.
Until you feel the probe or hair in your finger, if you do not feel it at all and nothing of feces, gas, or worms protrudes from the hole as we have said, know that it is not penetrating, so hasten to treatment.
And if the fistula penetrates to the bladder or to the urethra, its guide is the exit of urine from it and its refusal to unite the place with medicines. As for if it penetrates to the hip joint or to the tailbone, its sign is the arrival of the probe there.
If there is no curvature to the bone and there is pain in the vicinity and pus constantly discharges from it, and treatment does not work in it and it does not unite with ointment, and these penetrating fistulas are all, there is no cure for them at all.
And treating them is a vain effort for whoever attempts it from ignorant doctors, but the one that is not penetrating and not chronic, healing is expected by iron as I will describe and what I have tried, which is to lay the patient down on his back between your hands.
Raise his legs upwards and tilt his thighs towards his stomach, then insert a copper or lead probe if there is a curvature in the fistula until you know where the probe ends. If the patient feels it towards the anus, then you should insert your middle finger into the anus.
If you feel that the probe has penetrated of its own accord, exposed and without feeling anything between your finger and it, either fascia or flesh, then know for sure that it has passed through. Do not tire yourself with it, for there is no healing from it as we have said.
They have said that it heals in some people rarely, and of the treatments from which benefit is hoped for is to heat a thin iron according to the width of the fistula as previously mentioned and insert it heated into the fistula until it reaches near the seat, then return it two or three times.
Until you know that all of that excess, tangled flesh which resembles a bird's quill tube has been burned, then treat it with a twisted cloth moistened in butter until that burned flesh comes out, then treat it with ointments made with salt. If it heals.
Otherwise, it will not heal with any other treatment ever. But if you insert the probe and it does not penetrate to your finger at the seat and there is a thick veil of flesh or fascia between it and the probe, and you see the fistula following the surface of the skin, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula. And while passing with the incision and the probe inside the fistula, continue until you reach where the end of the probe is, then the probe will come loose and fall out. Then cleanse those excess tangled flesh which resemble a bird's quill tube so that nothing remains of it.
Then treat it with ointments made with salt until it heals. If the blood overwhelms you and prevents you from working to cut those flesh, the best thing to do and the quickest benefit is to cauterize them with fire or a caustic drug because cautery with fire combines two good states: burning that excess flesh.
And it cuts the blood and dries the moisture, then treat it with a twisted cloth moistened in butter or powdered sulfur mixed with oil until the area festers and that burned flesh comes out in the pus. Then treat the wound at that time with ointments made with salt which promote the growth of hard flesh.
These are medicines that contain astringents and drying agents. If they congeal, the wound heals and there is no fear of recurrence. If the fistula has reached the depth of the seat and is far from the surface of the body, insert your finger into the seat and explore it.
If you feel the probe and there is a barrier of peritoneum or flesh between you and it, and it is close to penetration, then the only course of action is one of hope and chance. You should use one of three methods: either cauterize it as we have said.
Or make an incision until you reach its bottom so that you can insert the ligature and treat it from close proximity, but do not overdo the incision lest you cut the muscle surrounding the seat and cause the patient to involuntarily expel feces; then treat him as we have mentioned, for he may be cured as we said.
Or pierce that barrier after making an incision near the seat as we have said, either with a probe or another sharp instrument, then clean out all the adhering flesh in the incision as thoroughly as you can.
Then suture the entire wound along with the incision and the upper opening so that it closes, leaving the fistula open inside the seat; this will be easier for the patient, and the fistula may heal in this manner.
If you insert the probe into the fistula and it is on the side of the seat towards the surface of the body and the skin surrounding the seat, then take a probe with a pierced end like a shoemaker's awl in this manner:
And insert a twisted thread of five threads or so into it, then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its bottom. If it is perforated in the edge of the seat from the inside near
then pull the thread out of that hole by inserting your finger into the seat and pulling out the end of the thread, then gather both ends together and tighten them, leaving it for a day or two. Every time the thread cuts into the flesh, tighten it firmly so that the flesh between the two ends of the thread is severed and falls away, then treat the wound until it heals and is cured.
If the nostril is not perforated, perforate it as best you can, unless it is too deep, in which case do not do so on account of the muscle lest you should cut it; then proceed with it as we have described until it is healed.
The scalpel for splitting the nostrils has a very sharp point, and the other side is not sharp lest it should cut what is not needed, as you see.
Chapter Eighty-One.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids which bleed and their removal, and on the treatment of fissures.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are inside the anus, resembling red bladders or like grapes, and some are small and some large, and blood always flows from them.
They may be single or multiple, and they may be outside the anus, at its edges; but those which are outside the anus are, in most cases, less moist, from them flows a yellowish fluid or a little blood that oozes constantly, and they are the color of the body.
The treatment for those inside the anus is to order the patient to defecate and strain until the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids are visible to you. Then quickly grasp them with forceps or hold them with your fingernail and cut them off at their base; if the forceps do not hold them because of their moisture and relaxation...
...grab it with a coarse cloth or a piece of toasted bread, or pull it with your fingers and cut it off; then sprinkle some sharp grains on it after cutting so that they will act as cautery, or burn them as previously described in the chapter on cautery.
Then treat it with all the usual remedies until it heals. If the anus does not protrude for you, inject the patient with an enema containing a little spice to wash out what is in the anus and make it protrude quickly when the patient strains; as for the hemorrhoids that are outside the anus, their treatment is easy.
Take it with your fingernail or hang it on a thread and cut it, then treat it as we have mentioned until it is healed. And whoever dislikes cutting with iron should use its stalk in this manner: take a twisted thread and insert it into a needle.
Then draw the wart upwards and pierce it with the needle at its base from the other side, wind the ends of the thread under the needle while it is obstructing and tighten the wart tightly, then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this to all the warts and leave one without removing it.
So that excess blood flows from it, then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or quince on the seat and put it on the seat and order the patient to rest, then leave him until the warts fall off. When the warts fall off, treat them with ointments and all other treatment until they are healed.
As for the treatment of fissures, they often appear from dryness and constipation, if it persists and medicine does not help, then you should scrape it with a scalpel blade or your fingernail until it becomes moist and removes the upper crust that prevents it from healing.
Then treat it until it heals properly, if it does not heal, repeat the scraping more intensely than the first time until it bleeds well and peels, then treat it, for it will be cured.
Chapter eighty-second.
On the treatment of inverted and everted corns, dry warts, and calluses.
A corn is a round knot the color of the body, resembling the head of a nail, found throughout the body, especially on the soles of the feet and toes. Pain arises from it when walking.
Therefore, it should be cut around the corn and gripped with forceps or a thread and pulled out from its root, then treated; if you wish, cauterize it as previously mentioned in its chapter. As for dry warts, each one is a small, rough, hard, round bump above the surface of the body.
It is often presented in the hands of boys and its treatment is to lengthen the warts and cut them or cauterize them with a silk thread or hair until they fall off, and if you wish, burn them as previously mentioned with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Inverted and non-inverted warts may also be removed with the instrument which I have mentioned in the treatment of the mole; as for the mole, it is also a small, thick, adherent protuberance on the surface of the body going very deep, and if cold affects it, one feels in it something like the sting of an ant.
It occurs throughout the body, and most often on the hands; its treatment is to take a tube from a goose feather or a strong eagle feather and place that tube around the mole so that the circle of the tube surrounds it from all sides, then turn your hand with the tube until you cut what is around the mole.
Make it deep into the flesh and the mole will be removed from its root, and if you wish, you can do that with a copper or iron tube in this manner:
The top of the tube should be constricted and folded so that it is easy for the fingers to grasp and turn it, and if you wish, you can burn the mole as previously mentioned in the burning of warts, in the section on burning.
Chapter three and eighty.
On the instruments used for injection in the ailments of hemorrhoids, diarrhea, and colic.
The syringe may be made of silver, or chinaware, or brass, hammered or cast; and small ones and large ones may be made of this instrument according to those who use it. Those used for treating young boys are small, and those whose hemorrhoids are narrow or painful have very fine syringes. Image of a large syringe:
Its upper funnel, in which the cannula is attached, is wide, and it has a barrier where the cannula is attached as you see; its lower end, which is inserted into the rectum, is constricted and very smooth, with two holes at one side near the top, and one hole on the other side.
The size of the opening should be the thickness of the rod or slightly thicker, and the tube into which medicines are put should be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, fashioned like a small tray, with a diameter of one span.
It is pierced with many holes as it rotates, and the distance between each hole should be the thickness of a finger. Then, a tight thread spun from ten or so threads is inserted into those holes, gathering the tube like a tray. When medicine is placed in it, the top of the injector is tightly squeezed between two stones and then injected. This is an image of the tube and the hole:
To inject it, fill the sheepskin or bladder with warmed medicine as much as the patient can tolerate. Be careful that it is not too hot or too cold. Then, have the patient lie on their back and raise their legs upward.
Place a pillow or sheet underneath them, then grease the tip of the injector with oil, egg white, fenugreek saliva, or something similar. Then gently insert it into the rectum. A servant should hold the tube with both hands and squeeze it firmly until all the contents of the injector are emptied into the intestines.
Then remove the injector and have the patient press their legs against the wall. If the medicine urges them to expel it, let them hold on as long as they can. If they sleep with it all night, it will be most effective for softening the stool. If injecting for diarrhea, and they want it to come out quickly, repeat the injection until they are cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful tumors in the rectum, use a very delicate and smooth injector, smoother than those used for children. This is an image of a delicate injector with its skin pulled tight:
Chapter Eighty-Four.
On the Treatment of Wounds.
I have mentioned in the section on the treatment of what resembles burns, and I will mention here its treatment by hand and medicine completely. I say that surgical procedures differ according to what is being operated on and according to the location of the wound.
The things by which surgical procedures are performed are numerous, such as a stone bruise, a cut by a sword or knife, a spear thrust, or a stick or arrow wound and the like of many things.
As for surgical procedures according to the locations on the body, they are like a wound that occurs on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and the like of organs.
I will describe the treatment of some surgical procedures to make them a measure and a law for all surgical procedures, and I will begin with simple head wounds, especially since complex ones will be mentioned at the beginning of the third chapter of this book.
I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no bone fracture, and if it is from a stone bruise or the like and the skin has only been scratched and the wound is large and I fear the occurrence of a hot swelling for the patient, then hasten and apply a bandage over the wound immediately. Do not delay this and draw out blood for him according to his strength, unless something prevents cupping, especially if the blood coming from the wound is little; let the cupping be on the opposite side of the wounded area.
Warn the patient against overeating, drinking, and consuming coarse foods. If something prevents cupping, let him reduce his food intake and avoid meat and drinks.  Apply a cotton pad soaked in rose oil alone or with a decoction that has astringent properties to the wound if a hot swelling occurs.
And if you are confident that there will be no hot swelling, then apply a dressing to the wound if it is soft with its blood and has not been changed by the air that I will describe to you shortly. As for if it has been changed by the air, apply some ointments to it.
Until it discharges pus, then treat it until it heals. If the wound is large and was caused by a sword or similar weapon, and its edges do not meet with sutures, bring them together with stitches as I will describe in stitching abdominal wounds.
If the skin exposes the bone and hangs loose, and its adherence is only slight, cut it away then treat the wound with medications that promote firm flesh in place of the skin. Instruct the patient to eat strengthening foods such as heads and hooves, etc.
If the skin develops gangrene and does not adhere to the bone, cut away all the gangrenous tissue, cauterize it, then treat the wound. If in these wounds there is an artery or vein bleeding and the bleeding does not stop with medication, search for the artery.
If you find it, do not amputate it, but cut it with a scalpel and tie it off. If necessary, and what was mentioned does not work, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. If these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is easy; it suffices to treat them by leaving them covered in their own blood.
Before the air changes it, the formula for the poultice is to take one part frankincense, two parts mastic, and three parts slaked lime or unslaked lime; crush all of them, sift them, and fill the wound with it, binding it tightly so that it adheres well.
It will coagulate with the blood, then tie it securely on top with sutures and leave it undisturbed as long as there is no swelling, for the medication will not separate from it until it heals. If frankincense and mastic are unavailable, slaked lime alone may be used.
This same procedure may also be done with a linen cloth in many large wounds if it is carefully applied and tightly bound, provided the wounds are soft with blood and have not been changed by air. However, if the air has already somewhat changed them, especially during summertime,
There is no point in placing this poultice, as we have said, since holding some stimulating ointments on it or holding a gruel made from barley flour with water and honey on it will only serve to promote pus, after which it should be treated with all other remedies until it heals.
If a slight fracture occurs in the bone along with the wound, draw it together with plaster. The treatment of head fractures has been mentioned previously, under surgery of the neck. If the wound is in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound.
If a nerve or artery in the neck has been severed, if it is a nerve, there is no remedy other than to avoid treating it with anything that constricts severely, such as lead plaster and alum, for they will injure the nerve and tighten it.
Nothing cold at all should be placed on the wound, for the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain, which is the noblest of organs,  requires that any treatment be with soft medicines such as marshmallow washed in fresh water several times and moistened with oil or rose ointment.
If it is also washed with fresh water and all mineral medicaments in this manner, and soft ointments are applied; but if the wound is large, use sutures or bring its edges together with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has a depth and an abscess has formed at its bottom where pus has collected, lance it in the lowest part of it. If an artery has been severed in the wound and you see its blood flowing, amputate it, ligate it, or cauterize it if necessity demands.
If the wound has severed some or all of the cartilages of the larynx while the vocal cords are intact, bring together the edges of the skin with sutures over the trachea and do not touch the larynx itself but rather put it back into its natural shape, then bind it tightly and leave it for several days.
Then treat it with ointments that have astringent and drying properties until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, explore it. If there are bone fragments in it, draw them all out or as many as possible. Leave what you cannot remove until the wound becomes healed and dry, making its removal easier.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle on it the sawdust we have described. If bone becomes putrid and necrotic in the wound, treat it as follows, which will be mentioned in its chapter, in Surgery of the Chest and Between the Shoulders.
If a wound is from a spear or knife and you see a passage in it, observe whether wind comes out when the patient breathes. If so, know that it is a fighting wound. If there is no passage and the wound is fresh with blood, do not immediately put sawdust into it nor tighten it lest the blood becomes trapped within its passage.
For if it flows back to the heart, it will kill the patient. Instead, apply an absorbent ointment to it and dissolve it twice during the day. If you do not have ointment available, place an old piece of cotton in the wound to absorb any moisture that comes out and let the patient sleep on the wound.
Let it absorb what gathers in it. If the wound has been present for three days or more and the patient has not experienced tetanus, a poor heart rhythm, or difficulty breathing, and you see that all his other conditions are good, know that the wound is clean. Treat it with bandages and other remedies until it heals.
But if pus constantly forms and flows, know that it has become putrid. Treat it as follows in its chapter. Let the patient sleep on the wound so that what gathers in it may drain. If the chest or back wound has been present for some time, treat it with the stitching previously mentioned.
If it is large, treat it with sutures; if it is small, treat it with sawdust. If the wound has affected the bone and fragments have broken off from it, explore the wound and immediately remove those fragments if they are clean. If they are not clean, leave them until
If the wound is clean, it facilitates its removal; and as for all other wounds occurring in all other parts of the body, their treatment ruling is the same as we have mentioned.
Chapter Eighty-Fifth.
On abdominal wounds and protrusion of intestines and their suturing.
A rupture that appears on the abdomen may be large, or small, or medium-sized; if it is large, intestine(s) may protrude from it, and introducing them and suturing them will be more difficult and harder.
And the small rupture may also be difficult in another way; it is necessary for its return to be more difficult, and if the intestines are not promptly returned to their place, they will swell and thicken, making it harder to introduce them. Therefore, a medium-sized rupture has become the best because it is not as difficult to return the intestines with it as it is with these two types.
Know that suturing the abdomen is done in four ways; two types of sutures are suitable for suturing the abdomen and for suturing all other wounds of the body, and the other two types are specialized and apply to all wounds, but they are more specific for suturing the abdomen.
And I will describe them to you one by one with explanation, saying that if the wound is small and some intestine protrudes from it, and it is difficult to return it, this is due to one of two reasons: either because of the small rupture as we said, or because the intestine has been swollen before by cold air.
If this is the case, it should be warmed by dipping a sponge or wet cloth in lukewarm water alone, or which may have been cooked in it saffron and anise; and let the intestine be moistened with it until the swelling subsides.
A decoction containing astringents may also do this, and it is better than water alone in dissolving swelling; if you see that the swelling has subsided, moisten the intestines with water in which marshmallow or anise have been cooked; it will thus enter more easily.
If it is impossible for him to return after this treatment, make a small incision in the rupture with the instrument used for making incisions, and the first treatment if successful is better than incision. But one is compelled to make an incision only after necessity and failure of other methods, and this is the image of the instrument:
One of its sides is curved and limited, the other side is not limited, and the thin end is not as thin as a lancet but is somewhat blunt. It is an instrument resembling a small spatula, as you see. And if the wound widens and the intestines enter, they should be returned to their natural shape.
Its proper place, if you are able to do so, is best. But if the rupture is wide and is in the lower abdomen, the patient should lie on his back with his legs raised higher than his head; and if it is in the upper abdomen, his head and chest should be raised higher than his lower body.
And if the rupture is on one side of the abdomen, always make your aim and purpose to raise the side where the surgery is higher than the other side. This should be used in major surgeries and in medium-sized surgeries.
But in small surgeries, place it as you are able. Then have a careful attendant ready who will hold the entire rupture with his hands and bring its lips together; then he will expose a part of it at a time to the one stitching.
This is the description of a common stitch: take one needle or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leave a distance from the edge of the rupture equal to the thickness of a fingernail, and insert one needle without thread into the edges of the skin. Passing through both edges of the peritoneum under the skin, until it comes out on the other side. This has joined the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum, making four thicknesses. Then tie a doubled thread around the needle several times on both sides until the edges of the wound are firmly brought together.
Then leave a thickness the width of a finger and insert another needle, then interlock it with the thread as you did with the first needle. Continue doing this with as many needles as you need until the entire wound is sutured. Let the needles be of medium thickness.
Because very fine needles quickly cut the flesh and thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin, it is necessary for them to be of medium thickness, and it should not be inserted into the edge of the skin near the wound.
Lest the flesh quickly cut and the wound open before it heals, and do not space the stitches too far apart lest the wound fail to heal together. Then cut off the ends of the needles so as not to hurt the patient when he sleeps, and make him pads of linen cloth on each side to hold the ends of the needles.
Leave them until you know that the wound has healed together. This type of suturing with needles is thus most suitable for small surgeries because it may be sufficient to suture them with one or two needles, or so forth.
As for the description of suturing for the second type, it consists in gathering all four margins together by one needle threaded with a moderately fine and strong thread, namely the margins of skin and peritoneum at once, and then when the needle has passed through these four margins, return it from the side where you started.
Let the thread fall locked from above the wound so that the suture is like the stitching of a sack which is drawn tight, and place between each stitch a space the width of a small finger. This type of suturing is known to all people.
With this suture, a surgical incision was closed on a man who had been wounded in his abdomen by a knife. The rupture of the surgery was more than a span long, and it protruded from his intestines for about two spans from the middle intestine.
I stitched it up after his intestines were outside the wound for twenty-four hours. The wound healed in about fifteen days, and I treated him until he was cured. He lived many years afterward, conducting all his affairs as usual. The physicians had pronounced him incurable.
It is astonishing that I did not treat him with an ointment, for I was in a place where there were no medications at all. I would place clean cotton on the wound twice daily and commit to washing it with honey water until it healed.
As for one of the special types of suturing, I mention it according to the words of Galen, which is to begin the suture from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside. When the needle has passed through the skin and into the muscle going straight along the entire length of the abdomen.
I left the edge of the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle, and passed the needle through its other edge from inside to outside in the other edge of the omentum. When I had done this, I passed it again into the same edge from the omentum from outside to inside.
I left the edge of the peritoneum on this side and inserted the needle through its other edge from inside to outside, and as you pass it through the peritoneum into the edge of the omentum in that direction so that it passes entirely through.
Then I began again from this same side and sutured it along with the edge from the peritoneum on the other side, bringing the needle out through the skin nearby and then inserting it back into that skin, suturing the edge of the peritoneum on the other side along with this edge of the omentum.
I brought it out through the skin on that side and did this again and again until the entire operation was sutured in that manner. The overall description of this suture is that it resembles the furriers' double stitch.
To sew the peritoneum once from one side with a skin edge and to leave it once from the other side so that it drains, and as for the second type of particular stitching which he also mentioned, Galen's words are:
It is to sew it according to the example of how some healers sew it, by bringing together each part to its corresponding opposite, naturally joining the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge and the edge of the omentum to its other edge, and this is as I have described to you.
The needle should be inserted into the edge of the omentum closest to you from the outside and passed into it alone, leaving the edges of the peritoneum, then the needle is returned and passed from the outside to the inside in both edges of the peritoneum, then it is returned again.
And it is passed from the inside to the outside in the other edge of the omentum on the opposite side, and this type of stitching is better than the general easy stitching which was previously mentioned, these are Galen's words textually, and some have said that suturing the abdomen can be done with two needles. This is done by threading one wire into both needles and beginning by inserting one needle from your side and passing it to the other side, then inserting the other needle from the opposite side and passing it back to your side according to the stitching of a saddle girth, whether.
Know that if a rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, sewing it is more difficult than in all other parts of the abdomen. As for treating the wound, its ruling in treatment is like all other surgeries. That is, if you find the wound soft with its blood before the air changes it, and you return the intestines and stitch them tightly, then apply a poultice soaked in brine to it.
If the wound has been changed by the air, apply some ointments that you prepare to it so that it suppurates and the threads fall out, then the peritoneum and omentum will join together, and then treat it like all other surgeries until it heals.
If you do not have any medicines available, apply clean cotton wool to the wound as soon as it begins to produce pus and change it twice a day as I have instructed you until it heals. You will not need any further treatment in most cases if the wounds are simple. If you fear that the wound may involve the major organs,
You should soak soft cotton in lukewarm oil or rose ointment and place it around the areas between the armpit and groin. If he feels pain or a foul odor in his dressing, this often occurs, so inject him with a warm black astringent drink.
Especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestines and become a penetrating wound into his abdomen, and know that what was from the thick intestines is easier to heal and what was from the thin intestines is more difficult to heal.
As for the intestine known as the jejunum, it does not accept healing from surgery at all due to the abundance of large and strong veins, the thinness of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves. If what protruded from the wound is pus and you find it soft, return it according to how you returned the intestine.
If a period has passed and it has turned green or black, you should tighten it with a thread above the place from which it has blackened so that bleeding does not occur, for there are veins and arteries in the pus, then cut what is below that ligature.
Make the ends of the thread hanging from below the surgery, outside of it, to make it easy for you to pull and remove them when the pus falls out and the wound drains. When mentioning the wound that appears in the intestine, if a rupture occurs in the intestine and is small…
It may be possible to close it in some people, for I once saw a man who had been stabbed in the abdomen with a spear and the wound was to the right of the stomach. I sutured the wound and it became healed, from which feces and gas were expelled.  I treated him as if I did not expect his recovery. I continued to treat him gently until he was healed and the wound closed. When I saw that the wound had closed, I feared that the patient might suffer a mishap within himself, but nothing bad happened to him at all, and he remained in the best of health. It is true that he eats and drinks, has intercourse, enters the bath, and attends to his service. Some experienced individuals have mentioned that if a small wound appears in the intestine, it should be sutured in this manner.
This is done by taking large ants with heads, then bringing the lips of the wound together and placing one ant on them with its mouth open. When it bites down and tightens its jaws, its head will be severed, and it will adhere firmly and not come undone. Then another ant is placed near the first.
This process is repeated with several ants according to the size of the wound, and then it is replaced and the wound is sutured. Those heads will remain attached in the intestine until it heals and recovers without any harm to the patient. It is also possible to suture the intestine with fine thread.
The method for drawing the Egyptian colocynth, which is the adhesive substance extracted from it, after inserting it into a needle, is as follows: A portion of this thread is taken from the colocynth and drawn out, then a fine, twisted linen thread is tied to its end. This linen thread is then inserted into the needle. The colocynth thread is used to suture the intestine and then returned to the abdominal cavity. This type of suturing with ants and colocynth is a matter of trial and hope.
If the rupture is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy and it will not heal at all.
Chapter sixty-eight.
On the treatment of colds and influenza.
Know that any wound or swelling, if it becomes chronic, does not heal and continues to discharge pus incessantly, is generally called a "naasoor" (running sore), and we call it "zaqam" (cold).
It is truly a solid white tumor without pain and has a cavity like that of a bird's feather.
Therefore, some people called it a feather, and sometimes it is moist, constantly discharging pus. Sometimes the moisture may stop, and this moisture can be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
And when I discussed surgical procedures, I mentioned that any ulcer that does not heal and in which flesh does not grow is due to one of nine reasons, one of which is a lack of blood in the body or its poor quality, or because there is solid flesh inside it and on its edges that prevents the growth of good flesh. Or it is full of wounds and dirt, or the ulcer itself is putrid and the material it discharges is of poor quality, or the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or a pestilence has occurred in the town, or there is something specific to the town.
Or it is full of wounds and dirt, or the ulcer itself is putrid and the material it discharges is of poor quality, or the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or a pestilence has occurred in the town, or there is something specific to the town. Just as it appeared in the city of Saragossa, where diseases mature slowly and tumors heal tardily by nature, or because there is one bone or several bones in it; I have clarified all these reasons, their signs, and their treatments with medicine in the section on surgery.
Here I should inform you about the treatment of fistulas and colds that occur through manual work. Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body, some leading to large veins or arteries, or to nerves.
Or to the peritoneum, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to a rib, or to a vertebra of the spine, or to a complex joint, such as the hand and foot; some even lead near a major organ, and so forth.
Fistulas of this nature are among the difficult diseases that are intractable and do not accept treatment, working on them is a hardship and ignorance. If a fistula does not reach these locations I mentioned, there is hope and expectation of treating it.
And if you desire to ascertain this, take a speculum of copper or iron, if the passage runs straight, and probe it with that. If there is a bend in the passage, probe it with a speculum of thin lead, because lead softens its body.
If it turns aside upon entering towards the bend, and if the passage has many mouths you cannot ascertain them with a speculum, inject into one of its mouths; for the moisture which you inject into it will run towards the other mouths and flow out.
Then thoroughly investigate in whatever way you are able, to know whether there is bone or nerve there, or whether the passage is deep or shallow, or whether it is one passage with many mouths; and be insistent on all of this to the extent of your ability, through careful questioning and by feeling for pain when you press your hand upon the spot.
And such are the signs and causes of the tumor; and when you have established all of this truly, then proceed to treatment with confidence, which is that you look to see if...
the passage is outwardly apparent, near or in a sound location, far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or any of the locations which I have mentioned to you, then split open the passage as has been previously described and remove from it whatever there is of concretion and corrupt flesh and superfluous flesh.
And remove from its mouth whatever there is of flesh or a wen, and the like; and treat it until it heals. If the passage is deep-seated and runs straight, then you should split it open to the greatest depth possible and cleanse it thoroughly of all its corrupt flesh.
Then use a twisted pledget soaked in caustic medications and insert it to the bottom of the passage which you have reached with the iron; do this repeatedly until that caustic drug consumes all that remains at the bottom of the passage of corruption.
Then force it with ointments that grow flesh soundly until it heals. If it does not heal by that, excise it as described previously. If the cause of the sinus is bone and that has been confirmed, then explore and cleave it as I have told you unless something prevents you from doing so.
If a vein or nerve or principal member is revealed, as we said, then if bone is exposed to you and it has some corruption and blackness, scrape it until its corruption is gone, then treat it with what will cause it to grow flesh until it heals. If it does not heal and pus persists as it was doing.
Know that you have not reached all of the excision of corruption, so uncover everything on it again and thoroughly scrape and cleanse it with your utmost effort, then force it. If it heals, otherwise know that the corruption is in a distant depth, so uncover everything on it again.
Thoroughly scrape and cleanse it with your utmost effort. If the corrupted bone is a small bone and you are able to extract it, then extract it with fine forceps suitable for that purpose.
If there are many bones, thoroughly extract them all and do not leave anything behind. If any ligaments obstruct you without danger in cutting them, cut those ligaments and the flesh if there is some and free the bones.
If you are unable to extract the bones at that time, apply something that will make it putrefy and leave it for days until what is around those bones of flesh and ligaments decays. Preserve the wound so that the incision you made does not close during your work.
Rather, if you fear that, place cotton soaked in powdered sulfur with oil or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. If those ligaments decay and the bones soften, they will be easy to extract and draw out.
If it is one large bone like the shinbone or thighbone and what has decayed from it is only its surface, scrape it thoroughly until that blackness and corruption is gone, then compress the wound. If a large part of it has decayed and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it must be excised.
Cut it all the way to where the corruption ends, then dress it so that it heals and joins together. I will tell you about a cold sore that appeared on a man's leg as an example and aid for your treatment. This man was of adolescent age.
About thirty years ago, he experienced pain in his leg due to a cause that moved upon him from within the body until the humors reached the leg and there was great swelling and inflammation, and there was no external cause. Then time passed with the error of physicians until the swelling burst open.
Much matter flowed from it and his treatment was mishandled until the leg became ulcerated and there were many openings in it, all discharging pus and bodily fluids. A group of physicians treated him for about two years, and none of them were skilled in surgery.
Until they sent for me, and I saw his leg with the matter flowing from those openings in a great stream and the man had wasted away and his complexion had turned yellow. So I inserted a probe into one of those openings and it led to the bone. Then I explored all the openings.
I found that some of them led to others from all sides of the leg, so I proceeded and made an incision along one of those openings until I exposed some bone. I found it corrupted, eaten away, blackened, putrid, and perforated until the hole reached the marrow. Then I spread out what was revealed to me.
And I was able to remove the corrupted bone, and I believe that there was no corruption in the bone other than what I cut out and spread, and that I had eradicated it. Then I closed the wound with astringent medications for a longer period, but it did not heal together. So I returned and exposed the bone again above the first exposure.
I found the corruption connected to the bone, so I spread out what appeared of that corruption as well. Then I tried to close it by force, but it did not close or heal together. So I exposed it again, and I continued to cut away parts of the bone, aiming to close it, but it would not close until I had cut away about a span's length from the bone.
And I extracted it with its brain, then treated it with medications so that it healed quickly and was cured. Indeed, this repetition in his work and incision was necessary due to the patient's weakness, his low tolerance, and my fear for him of death because he would experience, at all times, a bad fainting spell from excessive vomiting, but he was completely cured.
And flesh grew solidly in the place of the bone, and his condition improved in his body, and his strength returned, and he behaved normally, and he was not harmed at all while walking. If a bone that has grown in a part of the body has been broken.
It should be spread in this manner: take a bandage and tighten it at the end of the broken bone, and order someone to pull it upwards; then make another bandage of thicker wool than the first one.
Then tie it to the flesh under the bone and extend its end so that the flesh is drawn downwards, while you expose the flesh from the place you want to spread so that the saw does not injure the flesh; place a plank or board firmly under the bone from below.
Because if you do this, the saw will not be prevented from cutting the decayed bone; and the sawing should be done slightly above the place of decay so that there is no decay in the cavity of the bone, and it does not appear outwardly to the sense, forcing you to spread it again.
But if the bone is decayed and not protruding, but connected to itself, and the decay is in its middle or part of it; then expose the flesh from all sides, then place a plank underneath and spread it from the first side where the decay is.
And when you have finished spreading it, spread it from the other side, the sawing should be a short distance from the decay as we said. If the decay is in a joint, cut the decayed joint itself and spread the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the corruption is in connection with two joints, there is no remedy but excision. If the corruption is in the web of the hand or foot, the matter is very difficult to treat; however, you should pare down the corruption as it appears to you and excise and purify it in any way that you can.
And by any means it straightens to you as long as a vein or nerve does not impede you, and know that the saws and knives for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones, their setting, their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, their solidity and fragility. Therefore, you should prepare for each type of work a tool suitable for that work.
And know that the operations themselves may guide you to the type of instrument you need if you have long practice and knowledge of the arts of this craft, for he who is skilled in the craft and has witnessed various types of diseases. May deduce for himself what instruments are suitable for each disease, and I have depicted for you at the end of this chapter several instruments.
You should make them examples to be followed and a measure by which to measure others, God willing, image of a saw:
Image of another saw:
Image of a small saw:
Image of a large saw:
The head of this rasp is shaped like a nail head, and it is engraved in the shape of an escutcheon. It is suitable for scraping the heads of joints if they are corrupted or a large, wide bone. Image of another small rasp:
Image of a wide rasp:
Its upper arch and blade are made of iron, and its handle is made of wood in the shape of a tight cone. Image of a rasp with a cavity:
Image of another delicate rasp:
Another simple depiction, with the end rounded.
A small, simple depiction resembling a probe.
Another small sectional depiction.
Its end, like a pestle, acts in many places of the scraping of bones. A simple depiction suitable for scraping what has been pierced from the bone.
Its end is triangular with sharp edges, made of Indian iron.  All the scrapers and cutters mentioned should also be made in this way. A simple depiction.
Chapter seventy-eighth.
On the amputation of limbs and the spreading of bones.
Limbs may become gangrenous from either an external or internal cause. If you treat that gangrene with medication and the treatment is unsuccessful, and you see the gangrene progressing in the limb and nothing stops it.
Then you should amputate that limb where the gangrene has reached, so that the patient may be saved from death or great suffering greater than the loss of the limb. A sign that this has happened is when the limb turns black as if it had been burned by fire.
Or it may become gangrenous after blackening, so that the gangrene spreads to the limb and takes hold of the entire body; hasten to amputate it. Similarly, if the cause of the gangrene is from the sting of certain creatures such as the sea scorpion, viper, centipede, or the like.
If the gangrene or sting is in the tip of a finger, amputate the finger and do not delay until the gangrene spreads to the hand. Similarly, if it has affected the hand, amputate it from the wrist and do not delay until the gangrene spreads up to the forearm.
Similarly, if it has affected the arm, amputate the arm at the elbow joint itself. If the gangrene is allowed to progress and you see it spreading toward the shoulder, do not amputate the shoulder at all, for that would mean death for the patient. Use other treatments as much as possible.
And do the same for a man if gangrene sets in his finger, cut off the finger at one of the joints. And if it sets in the toe, cut off the entire foot; and if it ascends to the knee, cut off the leg at the knee joint.
And if the gangrene has reached above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and resign the patient to death. The method for cutting off or removing a limb is to tie a ligature below the place where you wish to cut and another ligature above the place.
One attendant extends the lower ligature downward and another attendant extends the upper ligature upward, and you pare away the flesh between the ligatures with a broad spatula until all the flesh is exposed, then cut or remove it. Rags of linen should be placed on all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct spot and cause the patient excessive pain and a hot swelling, if bleeding occurs during your work, staunch the place quickly or apply some astringents to it, then return to your treatment until you finish.
Then bind the wounded limb with a suitable ligature and treat it until it heals. I will tell you an example of a man who had this same ailment in his leg, namely that blackness appeared on his leg along with a burning sensation like fire.
This gangrene first appeared in his toe, until it spread to the whole foot. The man amputated his own foot when he saw the gangrene spreading through the limb and felt intense pain and burning. He was cured afterward.
After a long time, this same gangrene appeared in his index finger. He came to me and I tried to repel that evil with the remedies I applied to his hand after cleansing his body, but the gangrene did not relent and continued to spread through the other finger.
Until the gangrene spread to his hand, he urged me to amputate it, but I refused, hoping to repel that evil and fearing for his life if I amputated his hand because the man's strength was failing. When he despaired of me, he returned to his town.
I was informed that he was completely cured after cutting off his entire hand. I have only related this story so that it may be of assistance in cases similar to this illness and serve as a guide on which to act.
Chapter Eighty-Eight.
On the Treatment of Abscesses and the Method of Injecting Them with Medicines.
If a tumor occurs in some fleshy organ and persists for a long time, until it collects matter and then bursts or is incised, discharging all the contents, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel.
And the skin upon it, like a rag, has become thin and not excessively corrupted so that it has affected neither bone nor nerve nor ligament; therefore, it deserves to be called an abscess and not a fistula, unless its duration is prolonged until putrefaction affects any of these organs.
Then it is called a fistula or a sinus. Its treatment consists in cutting away all that skin, especially if it has become thin and like a rag, and you are certain that it will not adhere to the place because of its putrefaction.
But if you expect the skin to adhere and it has not reached that degree of putrefaction, and there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with injection. That is, look at the abscess; if it is large and the pus which issues from it has a foul smell, then inject it with Egyptian medicine.
This is vinegar, oil, honey and ginger in equal parts, mixed together in a vessel and cooked over a fire until the medicine thickens and becomes like honey. Then you take what you need from it and thin it with water and honey and inject it into the abscess. Tie its mouth tightly and leave the medicine in it for two hours.
Then squeeze it out. Do this for several days until the abscess is cleansed and the foul odor disappears. If you do not have this medicine, you may inject with ash water; that is, take the ashes of vine wood or oak wood and pour water over them.
Then wash it and inject until you are sure that the abscess has been washed out. If the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or lye water, then inject it with water and honey in which some powdered ginger has been mixed.
Or inject it with honey and drink mixed together, since honey has the property of purifying and washing, and drink sticks to the abscess, especially if the drink contains some astringency and dryness. If you do this several times and are sure that the corruption of the abscess has gone, then inject it with something that promotes flesh growth in it.
Such as taking some palm ointment and dissolving it in rose oil and astringent syrup, or injecting it with some other medicines and ointments whose properties we have established in the treatise on ointments. If the opening of the abscess is narrow and cannot accommodate the syringe tube.
Then widen it slightly with iron, or insert a wick soaked in Egyptian ointment or cerate ointment into it until it expands. Likewise, if the mouth is also wide, gather its lips with stitches and leave an opening through which the syringe can enter without further ado.
And if the mouth from which pus flows is raised upwards, cut it in the lowest part so that the pus flows downwards, because if the pus accumulates in the depths of the abscess, it prevents flesh from growing there.
If you cannot cut the abscess downwards as you wish, then position the limb so that the pus flows easily according to what is available to you and make sure that nothing of the pus remains trapped at all.
As for the medicated substances that are placed on the abscess from the outside and how to apply them, it is to take some of the appropriate medicated ointment and spread it on a linen cloth, making sure the cloth is large enough to cover the entire abscess. Then cut a hole opposite the mouth of the abscess with scissors, slightly wider than the mouth of the abscess. Then spread some soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the hole and place it over it, spaced away from the mouth of the abscess so that pus can easily flow out. Do not remove the large cloth until later.
For several days, and the one on the mouth of the abscess is the one that you remove at all times so that what has collected in it may be discharged and so that you may know whether what flows from it is much or little, ripe or unripe.
And likewise, examine the place of the abscess itself to see whether its possessor feels pain in it or not and whether there is swelling in it or not. Then if you continue your treatment thus and see that the material which comes out on the mouth of the abscess is slight.
Know that the abscess has adhered or is about to adhere, then solve it on the morrow or in the third day. And when you have solved the wound replace the linen with other and renew the ointment. If after a long time there issues from the abscess thin pus do not despair of its adhering.
For its healing is near because some men are slow in the growth of flesh in their wounds and others are contrary to that. If after many days there issues from the abscess unripe pus know that the abscess has not adhered. If the adhering of the abscess is delayed
and its affair is prolonged increase the drying medicaments and let them be medicaments which are moist in their consistence and dry in their power, such as palm oil ointment if to it has been added an excess of an excess of an excess from alum. And the most effective treatment with which it is treated is to take palm oil ointment
and solve it with rose oil and sprinkle upon it old wine that is moderate in its consistence, then knead it with it and use it. You may do a similar act to this if palm oil ointment does not come to your hand. Honey if you cook it until it thickens and use it, or take aloes and myrrh and asafoetida and pound all of them and throw them upon the honey while it is on the fire then spread it upon a linen cloth and bind it upon the abscess or paint with honey which you have cooked until it thickens throw upon it the medicaments and place upon it the linen cloth and bind it.
For such a case, long zarwand may be used, as well as the root of the asphodel, the powder of caraway, and centaury singly or mixed together. They should be crushed, sifted, and sprinkled on the honey which has been described and applied. If the hidden malady persists and does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption within it.
If it has affected the bones or any of the other solid nerves or ligaments, treat it with the treatment for elephantiasis as previously described.
Chapter Ninety-Eight.
On the Treatment of the Daches and Sick Nails, Removal of Superfluous Fingers, and Splitting Together of Fingers.
The daches is much flesh that grows under the toenail or fingernail, and it may grow in all the fingers. If it persists and its treatment is neglected, it swells and becomes a hot tumor.
Or it may become corrupted and rotten until it eats away at the root of the nail, and perhaps it spoils it all. Corruption may even reach the bone, so that it has a foul odor, and the tip of the finger becomes broad and its color dark. If you treat it with what we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not succeed...
...then you should cut away with an iron all the excess that grows from the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward. Cautery is very beneficial in this case. But if the bone is sound and the nail is also sound...
...and the angle containing the nail had drawn the flesh inward, causing it to be pinched and swollen, then you should place a thin pledget under the angle of the nail that is pinching the flesh and lift it up, and cut away that flesh carefully.
Then place on the remaining flesh some burning, caustic medicines so that it all disappears, and then treat it with ointments until it heals. But if corruption has affected the bone, you should cut away that bone and remove it, for it will not heal as long as there is a corrupted bone at all.
If you see suppuration and corruption advancing in the finger, amputate it at one of the phalanges as previously mentioned, then treat it until it heals. If the nail receives a blow or contusion and there is severe pain therein, it is necessary to lance the affected area first.
Then split the nail with a sharp, slanting knife from above to below and be careful not to reach the flesh under the nail with the incision, for you will thereby cause the affected area severe pain and lead to the growth of excess flesh in that place. Then treat the area with something that relieves pain.
As for the extra finger that occurs in some people's hands, it may be entirely fleshy, or it may have bones in some parts of it, or it may even have a nail. Its growth may occur at the base of the joint of one of the fingers.
Or it may grow in one of the phalanges of the finger. Those that grow in some phalanges do not move, and those that grow at a finger joint may move. Any fleshy part should be easily cut off; cut it at its base with a wide knife.
As for those that grow at the base of a joint, their treatment is difficult; refrain from cutting them off. As for those that grow on a finger in one of the phalanges, its flesh should first be cut in a circular fashion down to the bone, then the bone should be spread with one of the saws suitable for that purpose.
Then treat it until it heals. As for the adhesion that sometimes occurs between the fingers, it is common and may be congenital or result from a wound or burn. It should be split.
So that the fingers return to their natural state, then place a wick or a thin, shredded rag soaked in rose oil between them so that they do not adhere quickly and separate them, or put a thin lead plate between them until the area heals properly.
And if some of the fingers are joined to the palm, cut that union according to what seems fitting and suitable for the shape of the limb.
Chapter Ninety.
On Cutting Arteries.
Arteries are twisted, thick veins filled with black phlegm that occur in most of the body's organs, and they are most common in the legs, especially in the thighs and calves of carriers and laborers. First, one should use strong repeated shaking of the body to dislodge the black humor.
Then, let the patient be bled from his basilic vein. The treatment with iron is of two kinds: one is to cut and extract the black blood, and the other is to cauterize the artery and remove it entirely. As for cutting it, this is done as follows: first, soak the leg in hot water.
Until the thick, murky blood dissolves, then bind the patient's leg from above his thigh to below his knee with a bandage. Then cut the artery in one place or two or three wide incisions.
Then, draw out the black blood with your hand from below the leg to above and from above to below until you have extracted the amount of blood that you deem sufficient or what the patient can tolerate, then bandage it and order him to avoid foods that produce black bile. Repeat the vomiting and bleeding.
When the veins fill up and this harms the patient, but as for cauterizing it, do this: shave the patient's leg if it has a lot of hair, then immerse him in a bath and soak his leg in hot water until it reddens and the artery swells or let him engage in strenuous exercise.
If a bath is unavailable to heat the limb, then cut the skin opposite the artery lengthwise, either at its end near the knee or below it near the heel. Then open the skin with forceps and remove the artery from all sides until it is exposed to touch.
When it appears, you will see it reddish-purple. And when freed from the skin, it will also appear like a tendon. Then insert a ligature underneath it until it rises and comes out of the skin. Hang it with a blind, smooth snare, then make another incision near that incision about three fingerbreadths long.
Then flay the skin off the vein until it appears, then raise it with a ligature as you did before and hang it with another snare as you did at first. Then make another incision or many incisions if needed.
Then draw it and cut it at the end of the last incision at the heel, then pull it and draw it until it comes out of the second incision. Then pull it up to the incision above and do that until you pull it from the third incision, the highest of all, until it all comes out, then cut it off.
If it does not yield to pulling and drawing, insert a needle with a strong doubled thread and tie it, pull it, insert a ligature underneath it and twist it with your hand in every direction until it comes out. Be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, it will be very difficult to draw it out.
And a complication will befall the patient from it. And if you draw it all out, place wool soaked in syrup and rose oil or oil on the site of the operations and treat it until it heals. If the varicose vein is convoluted and has twists in directions...
And was not on a straight line as we mentioned, it should be incised at each side of its convolutions and twists and then hung with snares until it is all drawn out. Be careful when incising it not to cut or injure the vein, for it will be difficult to draw it out if you do so, and preserve your effort.
A diagram of the instrument used to incise the varicose vein.
Image of the Blind Syringe.
It does not have a guard like other syringes, nor is its tip sharp so as not to injure the vein. It is thick and curved, smooth because if it were thin, it would cut the vein with its sharpness.  Rather, it should have the advantage of thickness as we have said.
Chapter Ninety-One.
On cutting a vein in the arm.
This vein arises in the legs in hot countries such as the Hejaz and Arab lands, and in hot, barren countries with little vegetation, and it may arise in other parts of the body besides the legs. It is produced by putrefaction that occurs under the skin.
It also occurs within living bodies, worms, gourd bugs, and worms that develop between the skin and flesh. A sign of the beginning of this vein is a severe inflammation in the leg, then the area swells, and then the vein begins to emerge from that swelling.
As if it were the root of a plant or animal, so when its tip appears, it should be wrapped around a small piece of lead weighing from one to two dirhams, and tied, leaving the lead hanging from the leg.
Whenever anything comes out of it to the outside, wrap it in the lead and tie it. If it grows very long, cut off some of it and wrap the rest, and do not cut it from its origin before it all comes out because if you cut it, it will shrink and enter the flesh, causing a boil and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it should be manipulated and gently pulled until it comes out entirely, leaving nothing of it in the body. From this vein, it may emerge in some people to a length of five spans and ten.
It has been reported to me that it emerged from a man to the length of twenty cubits. If it breaks off while you are treating it, insert a bougie into its hole and press it with a long stick against the body so that all its contents are emptied out. Then try to clean the area with medications for several days.
Then treat it with the treatment of tumors, for this vein may have many branches, especially if it appears in the knee joint or in the leg itself, causing it to have many mouths from which a branch comes out. Treat it as we mentioned in the division and what preceded.
The second ninety chapter.
In the incision for worms generated under the skin, and it is called cow disease.
This disease is called cow disease in some of our countries because it often occurs in cows, and it is a single small worm that generates between the skin and flesh and crawls throughout the body ascending and descending.
It becomes apparent to the senses by its crawling from one organ to another until it pierces wherever it pierced in the skin at a spot and comes out, forming it from some putrefaction of humors as it occurs with worms and animals and pumpkin seeds in the abdomen.
And what is expected from its harm is that if it crawls in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open up in it and come out, thus ruining the eye. This occurs frequently. If you wish to treat it and extract it, it must be done when it is crawling and appears to the senses.
You should tighten what is above it and below it with a strong ligature, then make an incision on it and extract it. If it has sunk into the flesh and you do not find it, apply heat to the spot with fire until you burn it. As we said, the greatest harm expected from it is the corruption of the eye.
If you see that it has become in the head near the eye, tighten under it on the forehead with a strong ligature, then make an incision on it and extract it. The patient should take care to purify his body with purgative medicines for foul humors and abstain from foods that produce putrefaction.
The third ninety chapter.
On incision for the malady known as nafar.
This disease which is called in our country nafar is a pain that appears in some organs and then transfers from one organ to another, and I have seen it as I will describe to you.
I was called to a sick woman in some remote regions, and upon examining her arm, I observed a slight swelling in a vein of the forearm. After an hour, I saw that swelling creeping upwards along the vein like a worm, ascending rapidly as fast as mercury.
If it moves from one place to another, the pain departs from that location and settles in the elbow. Then I waited an hour and it ran throughout the rest of her body until it reached her other arm. She then told me that it circles her entire body as she had observed.
I was amazed by the speed with which it transferred from one organ to another. I had never seen this disease before with my own eyes in this manner, although I had heard of people experiencing pain that moved from one organ to another.  But I had never witnessed it firsthand as I did in this woman.
I surmised that the reason for this was because the woman was from the desert, with a lean physique and visible veins, which allowed this moving sensation to be perceptible. It would not appear in this same way in those who are well-nourished and have moist, delicate physiques with concealed veins.
Therefore, if you wish to treat it and the sufferer feels pain, and if it appears to you as we have described, bind tightly above and below it and make an incision so that the trapped air is released and the area is cleaned.
However, if you do not see it with your own eyes, treat it by rubbing the body and using remedies that expel wind and disperse it, such as loveage seeds, spikenard, and similar medications.
Chapter Ninety-Fourth.
On the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows may differ according to their types and according to the places in which they are located in the body. As for their difference according to their types, some are large and some are small; some are hollow glass arrows and some are solid glass arrows; and some have three corners and some have four corners.
Some have tongues and some have splinters. As for those that are located according to the organs in which they are located, they are of two types: either the organs are principal hollow organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and the like. So when an arrow falls into one of these organs and the signs of death which I will describe to you appear, then you should avoid extracting that arrow from it for death will befall its owner in most cases. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow has not been concealed in the depths of the organ, extract it and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain if an arrow strikes it and pierces the bone and injures the dura mater which is on top of the brain, is that he will suffer from severe headache, tinnitus, and dizziness.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow has not been concealed in the depths of the organ, extract it and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain if an arrow strikes it and pierces the bone and injures the dura mater which is on top of the brain, is that he will suffer from severe headache, tinnitus, and dizziness. And redness in the eyes, redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, vomiting sometimes and perhaps blood comes out of the nostrils or ears; perhaps speech ceases and the voice is gone; and a white moisture like porridge comes out from the wound's location and flows from it like meat broth.
If these signs appear, refrain from treating the patient and extracting the arrow if it has not come out. As for the signs of an arrow that has struck the heart, which is close to the left breast, and he feels as though it has been embedded in something solid rather than something empty.
Perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound; followed by coldness of the limbs, cold sweat, and fainting. Know that death is inevitable. And a sign of an arrow that has injured the lung is the exit of foamy blood from the wound.
And the vessels following the neck swell, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes with a high breath, and requests to inhale cold air. If the arrow has struck the diaphragm in the chest, it will be close to the small ribs and the breathing will be great with severe pain.
And he sighs and all the limbs of his shoulders move. If the arrow has struck the liver, severe pain will follow and blood resembling the liver in redness will come out from the wound. And if the arrow has struck the stomach, perhaps something undigested will come out from the wound along with food.
Its matter is apparent, and if the arrow has struck the abdomen and lodged there, and something of feces comes out from the wound or pus or a gut that has been pierced, then there is no hope for his treatment or for removing the arrow. If the arrow has struck the bladder and urine comes out.
And something has protruded from it outward, and the pain has intensified upon the patient, then know that he is lost. As for the rest of the organs such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, upper arm, vertebrae of the back, clavicle, thigh, leg, and anything similar from those organs, they have been spared in most cases.
Provided the arrow has not struck a vein or nerve, and the arrow is not poisoned, I will tell you some of what I have seen regarding these arrows so that you may deduce treatment from it. This is because an arrow had struck a man in the cartilage of his eye at the base of the nose.
I removed it for him from the other side, under the cartilage of the ear, and he recovered and nothing bad happened to his eye. I also removed another arrow for a Jew that had struck him in the cartilage of his eye under the lower eyelid, and the arrow was concealed and I had only reached its small tip that was stuck in the wood.
It was a large arrow, one of the hard composite arrows with a square iron head that was smooth and had no ears. The Jew recovered and nothing bad happened to his eye. I also removed another arrow from the throat of a Christian man and the arrow was Arabic.
He was the one who had two ears cut, and between his jugular veins, and he had plunged into his throat, I softened it until I took it out, so the Christian recovered and was healed, and I took out another arrow for a man who had placed it in his belly, and we thought he would die from it.
When thirty days or so had passed and nothing of his condition had changed, I cut open the arrow, worked around it and took it out; he recovered and no ill befell him. And I saw a man with an arrow embedded in his back, the wound having closed over it.
Seven years later, the arrow came out at the base of his thigh, and I saw a woman with an arrow in her belly, the wound having closed over it; the arrow remained and nothing changed in her condition, nor did she find it harmful in any of her natural actions.
And I saw another man with an arrow in his face, the wound having closed over it; he remained and did not find it very painful. There are many such cases, and I took out an arrow for one of the Sultan's leaders, which had been lodged in the middle of his nose, slightly inclined to the right.
The arrow was completely embedded, and I was called to treat him three days after the arrow had been lodged. I found the wound of the arrow very narrow, so I widened it with a fine probe; he did not feel it, but experienced a twinge and pain under his right ear from the incision on the right side.
I thought that twinge might be from the tip of the arrow, so I dressed the area with a bandage that had drawing power and ripeness, hoping that the area would swell and a mark of the arrow would appear. I then cut him open, but nothing happened in that area to indicate that the arrow had reached it.
I continued with the bandage for many days, but nothing happened. The wound closed during that time and the patient remained miserable from having it removed for a period until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me about it. I then put a sharp caustic medicine on the wound for many days.
Until it opened and I probed it, feeling the point of the fine arrow stuck in the wood, then I further widened the wound with that sharp medicine until the point of the arrow appeared clearly to us. And time passed with it for a period of about four months.
Then when the wound widened and I was able to enter the forceps into it, I drew and moved it, but it did not respond to coming out. So I continued to soften it and try various instruments on it until one day I seized it with firm forceps as will be shown in the figure at the end of the chapter.
And physicians used to rule that the cartilage of his nose could not be joined, but I joined it and the wound healed, and the patient recovered completely without any pain whatsoever, and I tell you how some arrows are removed so that this may serve as a measure and guide for what I have not mentioned.
For the details of this craft cannot be grasped by description nor encompassed by a book, but rather the skillful craftsman measures the little against the much and what is present against what is absent and deduces new work and new instruments when confronted with strange emergencies.
If we descend from this craft, I say that arrows are only removed from the organs in which they are lodged in two ways: either by drawing them from the place where they entered, or from the opposite direction. And those that come out from where they entered.
Either the arrow is prominent in a place of flesh, so it is drawn and pulled out. If it does not respond to coming out at the time it occurred, you should leave it for days until the flesh around it rots, making it easier to pull and remove. The same applies if it is lodged in bone.
If it still does not respond to coming out, leave it for days as well and try drawing and moving it every day, for it will come out. If it still does not respond after days, you should pierce around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine awl until it widens for the arrow, then draw and pull it out.
If the arrow that has penetrated is in the bone of the head and has been buried deep into one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of those symptoms which I mentioned to you have appeared from the wound, then refrain from drawing out the arrow and leave it until his condition becomes clear after several days.
Then proceed to draw out the arrow, and if it is deeply embedded and does not yield to your pull, then use the trephine around the arrow as I have described to you, and then treat the site until it heals. But if the arrow has become hidden in some part of the body and is out of reach, then search for it with a probe, and if you feel it, draw it out with some instrument suitable for the purpose. But if you are unable to do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow's penetration, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein in that location
then make an incision over it to widen the wound so that you can seize the arrow and draw it out. And if it has two flanges by which to grasp it, then free the flesh adhering to them from every side by any means possible. If you are unable to free the flesh in breaking the flanges and splitting them, continue until you succeed.
And if you attempt to extract the arrow in any location, use the twist of your hand with all its strength in every direction until you free it, and exercise the greatest gentleness lest the arrow should break and make it difficult for you to draw it out. If at the time you are unable to do so,
leave it for several days until the flesh around it decays, and then return to it; for it will then be easier to extract. If hemorrhage should interfere with you, use what we have mentioned in its chapter as treatment, and take every precaution against cutting a vein or nerve or tendon. Use stratagem.
In any case, you can remove the arrow, let it be gently and carefully and firmly as I have described to you, and you should use when drawing out the arrow to make the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is best.
If you cannot do this, use any form that is possible, but the arrow which comes out from the opposite side may have something protruding outwards, or you may find the point of the arrow by touch near the skin's surface and see it emerging.
Then make an incision upon it, let the incision be of such size that the forceps can enter, then draw it out, for it will easily come out; if it is caught in a bone, twist your hand in rotation until the arrow strikes against the bone and widens itself, then draw it out.
Otherwise, leave it for a few days and return to it until it comes out; if the arrow's shaft is still in, push it in with force, but if the shaft has fallen off and you wish to use pressure, insert a hollow instrument into it so that its cavity enters the tail of the arrow and then push it.
If the arrow is hollow, push it with an instrument that fits into that cavity, for the arrow will easily come out this way; if the arrow is poisoned, you should cut out all the flesh where the poison has entered, if possible, and then treat it with what is suitable for that.
If the arrow is in the chest or belly, bladder or side and it is near what can be felt with a probe, and if you are able to make an incision upon it, do so, and be careful not to cut a vein or nerve, and remove it.
Then stitch the wound if it needs stitching, and treat it until it heals; image of forceps used to draw out arrows:
Its tips are shaped like a bird's beak, made as if they were a file, so that when it grasps the arrow or something else, it does not let go;  and they can be made in large, small and medium sizes all according to the size of the arrow, and the width or narrowness of the wound.
Image of the hollow bullet.
Image of the solid bullet.
This is a solid-pointed end like an awl to facilitate its entry into the hollow arrow and propel it.
Chapter Ninety-Fifth
On Phlebotomy.
The veins that are commonly bled in the body are thirty veins, of which sixteen are in the head: the two temporal veins behind the ears known as the hssees and the two arteries in the temples that are visible, and the two veins in the eye sockets known as the viewers.
And the vein that stands in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose, and the two jugular veins in the neck, and the two veins in the upper lip of the mouth, and the two veins in the lower lip, these veins are known as the jaharks, and the two veins under the tongue.
As for the veins that are bled in the arm and hand, there are five veins: one of them is the cephalic vein, which is on the ulnar side, and it is commonly called the head vein, and the basilic vein, which is the middle vein, composed of a branch of the basilic and a branch of the cephalic, and it is commonly called the body vein.
And the basilic, which is located on the radial side, is also called the axillary vein, and it is commonly called the abdominal vein, and the brachial artery, which is located on the elbow, is the one that sticks to it and appears above the thumb clearly, and the asylem.
And it is the vein between the little toe and the next toe to it, has two branches, and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one of them is under the knee from the ulnar side, and the second is the saphenous, located at the heel from the radial side, and the vein of women, located at the heel from the ulnar side.
And in the other leg there are three veins like them, but as for the two veins behind the ears, stopping them is beneficial for chronic colds, migraines, ringworm, and foul chronic ulcers of the head, and I will describe how to stop them.
The method is to shave the patient's head and rub the back of it in the place of the veins with a rough cloth until it is well rubbed, then constrict the patient's neck with a turban until the veins appear behind the ears in the lower parts of the head. Then search for them with your finger and where you feel their pulse under your finger, mark that spot with ink.
Then take a sharp scalpel, the one known as a 'nasl,' and insert it under the vein in the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut the vein with the skin in a severed piece. The length of the cut should be equal to two joined fingers.
Or about that, and let out the amount of blood you want, then tie them with bandages and leave them until they heal. I have already mentioned cutting and cauterizing them at the beginning of this book. As for the two arteries in the temples, stopping them is beneficial for chronic migraines, severe headaches, persistent ophthalmia, and acute copious discharge directed to the eyes.
And the method of stopping them is as follows: constrict the patient's neck with a turban until the arteries become clearly visible and their pulse is evident beneath your finger. Mark them with ink at that point, then lift the skin from above the artery upwards with your index finger.
Insert the 'nasl' scalpel from below and lift the artery upwards, then sever it as you did with the other veins. Let out the amount of blood you need, then release the constriction on the patient's neck and place your finger on the artery for an hour.
Then you place cotton and a bandage on it, and tighten it firmly from above, leaving it until it heals. Their mention, severing, and ligation have already been mentioned in the beginning of the book. As for bleeding the forehead vein, it is beneficial after bleeding the temporal vein for chronic facial conditions such as tinea, ulcers, and erysipelas.
How to bleed it, as I will describe to you:  You strangle the patient's neck with a turban until the vein appears, then you take the instrument called the axe, and this is its image:.
You place the pointed fork that is at the head of the axe on the same vein and strike it from above with a comb or something similar, and leave the blood to flow in the amount you desire, then you loosen the patient's strangulation and bind him until he heals.
It may also be opened with a wide spoon, but it should not have a sharp end like other spoons, but rather a slightly wide end. You open it on the bias because the bone is nearby and the spoon might break if it were thin.
As for the two veins in the temples, they are beneficial for eye conditions such as scabies, redness, ophthalmia, and facial diseases. As for how to bleed them: you have the patient tighten his neck with a turban, then bleed them while standing above his head; let the bleeding be on a slight diagonal with a small spoon.
Since the area is not fleshy, if the spoon has a thin end, it may break. Then you send the amount of blood you need and place cotton on them and bind them for one night, then loosen them. As for bleeding the nose vein, it is beneficial for acute fevers.
And severe headaches, and facial diseases such as red scabies that appear on the nose, especially if they are chronic. To bleed it: you have the patient tighten his neck, then hold his nose with your left hand and take a thin, long spoon.
And insert it into the middle of the nose itself between the cartilage, for the vein does not appear there to the sense; then blood will issue from it. You should press your hand a little with the probe and draw from it the amount of blood you need, then tie it for a night, for it will harden quickly.
As for the veins, their benefit is in cutting them off for shortness of breath and the beginning of leprosy and black diseases that appear on the surface of the skin such as black vitiligo, ringworm, and foul sores. The way to cut them is to have the patient tie them under his neck with a bandage and the maker stands at the head of the patient.
And the patient sits on a chair, then you cut the vein lengthwise, making a wide incision, then draw from it a moderate amount of blood or as much as you deem necessary. Then do the same to the other vein and untie the bandage.
Tie the veins moderately so that the patient does not choke, and leave them until the next day, for the wound will heal. As for the jugular veins, their benefit is in cutting them after cupping the head, for it is beneficial for ulcers in the mouth, gum disease, foul sores, chapped lips, and foul sores.
Those that are in the nose and around it. The way to cut them is to have the patient sit facing you, tie his neck with a turban, then turn back his lips and look for the two veins, one of which you see on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, and identify them by their blackness.
You will also find thin, black veins around them, so cut them off completely. If it seems unclear to you and you do not know which ones they are, aim to cut the largest and clearest ones; similarly, do the same with the two veins that are on the lower lip.
As for the two veins under the tongue, their benefit is in cutting them after cupping the head for ulcers in the throat from diseases of the mouth and throat.  The way to cut them is to have the patient sit in front of you in the sunlight, raise his tongue, and look under it on one side for a vein and on the other side for a vein, both black in color.
Describe them in detail and memorize them, do not pay attention to cutting them for there are arteries beneath them; bleeding may occur from these arteries. As for the three veins that are incised at the elbow, they are the ones usually incised in people generally. Incision of these veins can be done in two ways.
Either by inserting a wide lancet or an olive-shaped one to the skin, or by making an incision with a scalpel, which is called "nashal" [and this is its picture], picture of the wide lancet.
It is wide as you see so it is suitable for opening the hollow, full, prominent, apparent, thick veins that contain thick blood; and this is a picture of the olive-shaped lancet.
This lancet is narrower and has a thinner tip, suitable for phlebotomizing the thin veins that contain clear, yellowish blood; and this is a picture of the nashal lancet.
This nashal, which is suitable for incision, comes in various widths and thinness according to the width and narrowness of the veins. It can also be distinguished from others and is well-known among craftsmen.
As for the basilica vein, which is one of these three veins, phlebotomizing it is beneficial because it draws blood from ailments that are located below the throat and neck, extending to the chest and abdomen. The phlebotomist should be cautious when phlebotomizing it and make sure it is on the neck; for there is an artery beneath it. If he errs and inserts the lancet further, he may cut that artery.
This will cause bleeding, so it should not be phlebotomized with a lancet for insertion, but rather incised with the nashal. If the basilica vein does not appear clearly, it should be avoided and another one chosen instead, or assistance should be requested from someone else.
Or phlebotomize the brachial artery in its place, for it is visible and incised with the nashal lancet as we mentioned. If you wish to phlebotomize the basilica vein specifically, before stretching the arm, you should feel the spot until you recognize the pulse location, then mark it with ink.
Then bind the arm and make a slanting incision in the vein with a scalpel, as we have said, taking care that the blow falls at a distance from the artery. And when you see puffing in the place which you marked with ink upon tightening the ligature, know that this puffing is the swelling of the artery; avoid it.
If you see the blood spurt during venesection as a boy's urine spurts and if the blood is thin and red, know that it is arterial blood; then hasten to put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger: if the blood stops, which it often does, bind the arm tightly.
Leave it and warn the patient not to neglect it, let him keep his neck still and not move it for several days until he is healed. If the bleeding does not stop and overpowers you and there is no medicine available to you at that time, amputate the artery if it appears to you; its ends will contract and the bleeding will stop.
Or take a pistachio shell, split it, and take one half; tighten it over the vein with a ligature and bandages until the next day. If the bleeding stops, well and good; otherwise treat it as previously mentioned, by applying styptic dressings to stop the hemorrhage. Cutting off his blood is not difficult in most cases.
Because of the small size of the wound and the ligature's ability to control it in the arm, inform him of this. As for the ulnar vein, its usefulness lies in drawing blood from the upper head and lower body since it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic as we have said.
The person who performs the venesection should be careful not to cut below the vein, for there is a nerve underneath. If he inserts the scalpel too deeply and injures the nerve, numbness will occur making it difficult to heal, and it may never heal at all. This nerve often presents itself to sensation.
If a vein is hidden in some people and thin, not clearly visible, it should be cut with a scalpel, avoiding the nerves as much as possible. If the vein is between two nerves, cut the vein lengthwise; as for the temporal vein, there is benefit to cutting it because it draws blood from the head.
It is useful for eye diseases, and in this vein especially if you wish to dissect it; with an olive scalpel or a wide rhinological scalpel because it is the safest of all veins as there is neither artery nor nerve beneath it.
However, when phlebotomizing, you should avoid the muscle head with the scalpel and aim for the soft spot. It does no harm if it is not hit on the first attempt to repeat the phlebotomy several times, unless it may swell in some people if it is not hit on the first attempt.
But that swelling does not harm it; as for the method of phlebotomy and its effects and what should precede its correction, the first thing you should know is that phlebotomy is used either to preserve health only.
Or it is used for diseases. Phlebotomy used to preserve health and maintain it, and to prevent diseases from occurring should be in one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the temporal, ulnar, and basilic, and phlebotomy should be in the beginning of spring when signs of fullness appear.
Phlebotomy should be performed on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours have passed since dawn. As for phlebotomy used for diseases, it does not have a limited time but whenever necessity and need dictate, whether day or night.
And in every hour and every time. Children should not be phlebotomized until they reach fourteen years of age, nor should the elderly who have passed sixty years of age be phlebotomized. If someone decides to undergo phlebotomy for any reason.
His intestines should be cleansed before bloodletting by a gentle enema if there is much retained slime, lest it be drawn into the veins during bloodletting from the intestine causing an excess of putrefaction which would harm the principal organs. The intoxicated, the drunken and the one under the influence of narcotics should not be subjected to bloodletting until that state has passed.
Bloodletting should also be avoided after a bowel movement, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sexual intercourse, exertion, exercise, staying up late and fasting, and everything that depletes physical or mental strength. Then, consider thinning the humors beforehand if the blood is thick.
with foods, drinks and medicines if possible, then he should enter a bath if there is no contraindication or engage in some exercise to thin the blood.  Bloodletting should be done in the early afternoon as we have said, and one should aim to clear their chest that day of all bad mental states.
Such as worries, anger and fear, and from all physical conditions such as excessive fatigue, exertion, and sexual intercourse and the like. Prepare his surroundings with things that people are accustomed to using, such as various perfumes, incense, and amusements, according to each person's ability.
Then the phlebotomist sits on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the patient sits. Then he extends his arm and the phlebotomist rubs it with his hand two or three times, then tightens the bandage with the tourniquet and twists it two or three times, the tightening should be moderate.
Because if the tightening is not moderate, either excessive tightening will prevent blood flow, or if it is too loose, it will also prevent blood flow. Then after tightening, the patient should rub their hands together briskly.
So that the veins swell and become apparent to the touch, then the phlebotomist wipes the lancet with a little old oil, especially, then places the index finger of his left hand on the same vein below the place where he wants to make the incision, so that the vein does not move away from the blow. For some veins are like a cord, they retreat when bled, and others are full of air, so when you place the lancet upon them they sink beneath it and deceive the phlebotomist, who does not open the vein; and if he opens it, the opening will be narrow.
Therefore the phlebotomist should be certain and proceed carefully in all these matters, then he should lower the lancet; if the vein opens at that time, well and good, otherwise he should try again a little below or above that spot quickly, unless the place becomes swollen.
If there is swelling or the patient becomes frightened, leave him for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, for it may bring on a hot boil, and he should not enter the bath; then he may repeat the phlebotomy if he wishes. If the lancet was inserted and the opening was small and the blood flowed thinly,
and you feared that the quantity of blood you desired would not come out, reinsert the lancet into the same opening carefully, keeping it straight, and enlarge the opening a little; do this quickly before the place swells, for in many people the place swells up at a small opening.
If you see that it has swollen, do not repeat the procedure at all, for it will not help; put something of oil of roses on it, for it will facilitate the flow of blood and is better in this place than oil itself or any other unguents.
Use oil of roses in all your phlebotomies of the veins when the flow of blood is difficult; also the faruq electuary and the shukhsnayay can do this if one of them is placed upon the spot, for it will thin and dissolve the blood if it is thick.
If a large boil should occur in the place of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially to one who has not been bled before or whose vein was opened small, then hasten and put a sponge soaked in warm salt water upon the boil and bind it for an hour, for it will dissolve.
And it should be done after all the blood has come out from the vein itself or from another vein; if something black or green remains in the place after a few days, it does not matter. If you wish, apply to it something of aloes and myrrh dissolved.
Or something of fig juice or the like, a tumor and swelling often occur when cupping the basilic vein; so place your hand upon it, and if you find it softens when you press upon it, then that swelling is bad, so beware of putting anything of what we mentioned upon it.
For it may bleed from an artery, but compress it with what constricts so that the place hardens and then treat it with all treatment until it heals. You should draw out blood from each person according to their strength and what color predominates in the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it thins; and if it is sharp, let it flow until its sharpness goes away.  Whoever is full and strong and needs to have blood drawn all at once...
...should widen the incision of the vein and let the lancet be wide; but for whoever is weak, it should be the opposite. And blood should be drawn in stages and the puncture should be narrow. The best thing to use for venesection is a sharp, well-tempered lancet that cuts, not punctures.
This type of venesection is safe from hemorrhage and severing a nerve, it is better and safer than venesection by crosswise and lengthwise incision. Whoever is accustomed to fainting during venesection should be given before the procedure some bread soaked in pomegranate juice or syrup.
If it is sharpened and blood has been drawn for him three or four times, if he has a cold temperament, let him take before venesection bread soaked in syrup of the quince, or in honeyed syrup sweetened with violets, or in fragrant pleasant syrup.
If syncope occurs during bloodletting and its cause is excessive blood loss, he should be given broth and thin wind-expelling drinks, and perfumed with musk, rubbed on his chest with it, and all that we mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope should be used.
As for whoever wants to lighten his arm and loosen his blood again, it is necessary for whoever bled him to vomit a lot and whose strength is weak to let out the blood little by little according to his strength on consecutive days.
As for whoever wants to lighten his arm and loosen his blood again, and whose body is strong, let him do so after seven or nine hours from his first bloodletting. As for whoever wants to attract blood from his body to the opposite side to which it leaned, it should be done for him on the second or third day.
As for whoever has a lot of blood in his body, which has heated up and become intense and caused fever, it is necessary that all the blood be drawn out at once, and a large amount be drawn out, and the incision be widened until syncope occurs, after you have ensured that all the conditions for bloodletting are met. And place your hand on his pulse while the blood is flowing so that death does not occur at the time of syncope, for this often happens if the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligence occurs; and it should not be done if you want to lighten the arm and loosen the blood again.
And if the mouth of the vein has closed and the blood is difficult to extract, do not pinch it forcefully or twist it hard, for that is very bad indeed. Rather, either leave it until you bleed him again, or remove with the lancet blade what has congealed in the mouth of the vein.
Or apply something of salt dissolved in water to it, or apply some of the sovereign remedy or the pulverized rue, and pinch it gently until the blood comes out. If the vein has become swollen, leave it alone.
Do not touch it until the swelling subsides, for if necessity requires the release of blood again, it must be done either by making an incision above that location or by making an incision in the other arm or vein.
As for bleeding the arm tendon, it is bled instead of the ulnar and basilic veins if they are not present or hidden because it is composed of them, and the way to bleed it is for the patient to put his hand in hot water until the arm reddens and the vein appears clearly, then tie a bandage above it with moderate tightness.
Then bleed the vein slightly sideways, neither wide nor long, and let the opening be wide, and make your incision above the wrist joint a little, and if the blood does not flow, put the hand back in the bowl of hot water and let the blood flow into the water.
Until it reaches the desired amount, and if you are in summer days, you may dispense with putting the hand back in hot water, and it is most likely that the blood will flow into the hot water during winter time, and bleeding this vein is safer than all other veins. Because there is no underlying vein or nerve, and as for bleeding the basilic from the right hand, it is beneficial for liver ailments, and the way to bleed it is to tie the wrist with a bandage or with your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells.
Because there is no underlying vein or nerve, and as for bleeding the basilic from the right hand, it is beneficial for liver ailments, and the way to bleed it is to tie the wrist with a bandage or with your hand after immersing it in hot water until the vein swells. And it becomes very apparent to the touch, then incise it slightly sideways, and even if you cut it completely, it will not harm it, be careful not to insert your hand deeply with the scalpel, for underneath it is the nerve of the fingers, and the location is bare of flesh, then return the hand to the hot water.
And leave it to flow freely, for if you do not return it to the hot water, the blood will coagulate in the vein opening and stop flowing. If you have extracted the desired amount of blood, apply ointment and salt to the vein so that it does not heal quickly.
And so it should be done with every narrow vein, and the benefit of stopping it from the left hand is that it is beneficial for splenic diseases, and you do the same in stopping it as you did in the second [vein], and as for stopping the saphenous vein, its benefit is for diseases in the lower part of the body such as uterine diseases.
And retention of menstruation, kidney diseases, chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs, and the like of these diseases, and the way to stop it is for him to put his foot in hot water and rub it until the veins flow, then tie it above the ankle joint with a bandage soaked in sweat where the vein is visible near the heel towards the thumb.
And many branches branch off from it on the front of the leg, so stop it in the widest branch or at the heel where they join, for this is better and safer, and if you stop it on the front of the leg, be careful of the nerves underneath it on the front of the leg.
And make your incision as if you were going to amputate it, and let the lancet be sharp. If the blood does not flow, put his foot back in hot water and let the blood run into it until it is emptied. If the phlebotomist misses the vein on the first attempt.
Then repeat the incision a little higher, for that place is safe and there is no danger to be feared from it if you are careful of the nerve as we said, and so do you with the saphenous vein on the other leg. As for the vein of Venus, its location is, as we have said, at the heel on the outer side.
And the benefit of stopping it for pain in the hip if it is due to hot blood, and how to stop it is for the patient to enter a bath and quickly tie his leg from the hip down to above the heel with four fingers using a thin long bandage. For it will not appear otherwise.
Then, if it appears, stop it in whichever position you find it, either by incision, which is better, or by cutting it off completely or making a slit. For its location is safe and it is very subtle in most people. If you cannot find it
And if it does not appear to the sense, then cut some of its fibers which are those that appear on the back of the foot towards the little toe and the one next to it, preserving the nerves and sending out the amount of blood you desire.
Then loosen the constriction and place cotton on the site of the phlebotomy and bind the area, for it will soon heal.
Chapter Sixty-Sixth.
On Cupping and How to Use It.
Cupping instruments may be made of horn, wood, copper, or glass. Cupping is performed in two ways: one is cupping with a restriction and the extraction of blood, and the other is cupping without a restriction.
This type of cupping without restriction is also done in two ways.
There is cupping at the two hollows of the neck on both sides, cupping under the chin below the lower jaw, and cupping at the shoulders. There is also cupping at the coccyx, cupping at the elbows, which are in the middle of the arms, cupping at the legs, and cupping at the wrists.
Cupping draws blood from the fine, delicate veins scattered throughout the flesh. Therefore, it does not weaken the body as much as phlebotomy. Cupping with fire or without fire should not be used for any diseases characterized by fullness until the whole body has been emptied.
If cupping is necessary due to illness or habit, we use it at any time: at the beginning, middle, and end of the month, and at any other time as well.
And some people, when blood increases in them to the point where they need it to be removed by cupping, experience heaviness and headache in their head. And others experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. And others experience itching in their face and sides, darkness, and blackness under their eyes. And some itch at the place of their cupping.
And some laugh excessively, and others taste blood in their mouth and their gums swell and they spit up blood, and some sleep excessively, and some see blood, redness, fighting, and wounds in their dreams, and things similar to that. So whenever we see something like that...
Especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we order cupping after two or three hours have passed from noon. As for the benefit of puncturing cupping, it benefits from heaviness in the head and water flowing into the eyes.
But it should be done after the whole body has been evacuated, and this cupping may be a substitute for phlebotomy from the head. It is warned that it should not be used by someone who has a cold brain or a cold, as it will greatly harm them.
Therefore, it should not be used by the elderly, nor by those who have cold illnesses in their head, and whoever indulges in it will develop forgetfulness.
Therefore, the cupper should be ordered to lower his hand with the cupping instrument a little downwards, fearing the development of forgetfulness. As for cupping the shoulder, it is a substitute for phlebotomy from the ulnar artery and phlebotomy from the basilic vein.
Therefore, it benefits from asthma, shortness of breath, headache due to the respiratory system, coughing, and fullness. Cupping on the shoulder should be raised a little because if it is lowered too much, it will cause weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for cupping the temples, it benefits from headaches, ophthalmia, migraines, choking, and pain in the roots of the teeth. It is a substitute for phlebotomy from the basilic vein. You should order the cupper not to deepen his hand with the instrument so as not to cut an artery and cause bleeding.
As for cupping under the chin, it is beneficial for ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gums and other diseases that are in the mouth, and it may replace cupping of the temples which are on the lips. As for cupping of the shoulders, it benefits from palpitations caused by fullness and heat.
As for cupping the abdomen, it is beneficial for what benefits cupping of the three veins: basilic, cephalic, and saphenous because it draws blood from all those thin veins that are in the flesh and draws those thin veins from thicker veins until the attraction reaches the three thickest veins.
The cupper should be instructed not to overdo the suction because the place is bare of flesh and beneath it are nerves and arteries. As for the single cupping that is applied on the sacrum, it benefits from hemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers below.
The cupper should be instructed that the cupping jar should be large and made of copper because the place needs strong suction and a glass cupping jar may break, and it requires a lot of suction. As for cupping the legs, it reduces fullness noticeably.
Because it draws blood from the whole body and benefits from chronic pains in the kidneys, womb, and bladder, and brings on menstruation, and benefits from pimples and boils and replaces cupping of the safenous veins and cephalic veins except that it weakens the body greatly and fainting occurs in most people, and cupping of the cephalic veins its benefit is close to the benefit of cupping the legs.
How to place the cupping jars: first, the cupping jar is placed empty and sucked moderately; the cupping is not left on for a long time but is placed quickly and removed quickly so that the humors are drawn into the area evenly. This is repeated continuously until the area becomes red and opens.
Redness of the blood then appeared, at which point it should be cauterized and sucking should be resumed gradually. Then look at the condition of the bodies; if a person has soft flesh with loose pores, only one cautery should be applied so that the place does not become ulcerated.
Order the barber to widen and deepen the cautery a little, and adjust the suction gently with light movement. If there is thickness in the blood, it should be cauterized twice; the first time to open a way for the thin blood and its water, and the second time to ensure the extraction of thick blood.
If the blood is very dark, cauterization should be repeated a third time to achieve the goal. In general, if we want to extract a little blood, one cautery is sufficient; if we want to extract a lot of blood, we cauterize more; and if we think the blood is thick.
It should be cauterized deeply, the moderate limit of the cautery being the depth of the skin only; ointments should not be used when applying the cupping glasses, nor water, and what the phlebotomist warns against. As for someone whose skin is thick, hard, yellowish, and with tight pores.
Their cupping glass sites should be greased with opening, softening, and dissolving ointments. If it is summertime, like the ointment of henna, violet ointment, sweet almond ointment, or pumpkin seed ointment.
If it is winter, it should be like narcissus ointment, lily ointment, chamomile ointment, hyacinth ointment and the like. If the excess is thick and cold, the ointment should be marjoram ointment, nettle ointment, milk thistle ointment, or burdock ointment and the like.
If the phlebotomist has wide pores and soft flesh, ointment should be avoided. These individuals should wash their cupping glasses after phlebotomy with rose water or cold water or fox grape water or pumpkin water or chickpea water and the like. As for someone whose blood is very moist.
It is washed with vinegar or with water and sumaq, etc. As for what has thick pus, it is washed with old wine or with marjoram water or a decoction of chamomile or chamomile, etc. And it should be avoided to cupping in the bath and after the bath.
Rather, it should be used an hour or two after leaving the bath and no one should sleep after cupping, what the cupper and the cupped should manage before and after cupping.
First, you should look if the cupper or the cupped is bilious and his blood is mostly sharp and inflamed, then he should take refrigerants like pomegranate and dandelion with vinegar, lettuce, sekandjbeen and jalab, etc., and make his food be game and lamb meat, skewers, and sparrow, etc.
And whoever is cold in temperament should be given honey syrup or mihrab syrup or basil skandjbeen, and take fragrant wine which is between old and new wine, and he should be ordered to eat little food and make his food game, onions, asparagus and white doves, and the drink on the day of cupping and bloodletting should be more than food.
And it may be necessary to give some people from the Farooq antidote or musk medicine or siltha before cupping and bloodletting or after them to strengthen the main organs and thin the blood, and it should not be given to pregnant women.
As for the cuppings that are without a condition, they are the cuppings that are placed on the liver and spleen and breasts and abdomen and perineum and place of kidneys and right thigh because these organs cannot bear a condition on them, but rather it is intended to draw blood from one organ to another.
Such as placing the cupping on the breasts in case of runny nose or using it to dissolve a cold wind that may have settled in the organ, such as placing the cupping on the abdomen and perineum, for it loosens the organ and heats it and relieves pain to dissolve that wind.
And it may be placed upon the kidney if there is a stoppage or stone in it, for by its strong attraction it might perchance open the stoppage or remove the stone from its place; and similarly it acts when placed upon the liver and spleen in case of wind which disturbs them. These specula may also be used empty with suction only.
It may also be used with fire, and it may be used filled with lukewarm water in cases of sciatica; that is to say, fill the speculum, let it be a large one, with hot water alone or with water in which some herbs suitable for that purpose have been cooked.
Then it is placed full upon the affected part, held there, and removed, and repeated as many times as necessary. This is a picture of the speculum which is used with fire:
Its mouth is of the size of two fingers open as depicted, and its depth is half a palm's breadth; there is on its side, towards the middle, a small hole just large enough to admit a needle, made of Chinese copper or yellow copper with a thick rim.
Smooth, flat and rounded so as not to injure the member when placed upon it; in its middle is a transverse groove of copper or iron where the candle is placed for the fire. This speculum may be made larger or smaller than what we have described according to the diseases.
And as for the use of it, specula for boys and thin people are not the same as those for men with large bodies. As for the way to apply this speculum by fire to the member: take a wick firmly fixed in a candle flame or a small candle made of pitch and place it upon the middle groove of the hardened rod which is in the center of the speculum.
So that the flame rises upwards towards the lower part of the speculum so as not to burn the patient's body; then it is placed upon the member, and the finger is kept on the hole we mentioned until when we have held the speculum as long as needed, the finger is removed.
The steam will then escape through this hole and the ligature will dissolve in place. The wick is then advanced along the line and replaced if necessary. As for the ligature used in the disease of elephantiasis with water, it has neither a rigid rod nor a hole.
It is only used by filling it with water and placing it on the member. This is its image:
The larger this ligature is, the more water it can hold, and the better it is.
Chapter Seventy-Seventh.
On the Suspension of a Leech.
Leechs are used in most cases for organs where ligatures cannot be placed, either because they are small, such as the lip and gums, or because the organ is devoid of flesh, such as the finger and nose.
The way to use them is to select leeches from fresh, pure water from springs and then leave them for a day and a night in fresh water until they are hungry and nothing remains in their stomachs. The body is then evacuated first by phlebotomy or cupping, and then the affected limb is wiped.
Until it reddens, and then the leech is placed on it. When it is full, it will fall off. If the area can be sucked by a ligature, this is more beneficial. Otherwise, wash the area with vinegar and then with plenty of water, rub and squeeze it. If bleeding continues after the leech falls off, and this is a discharge, soak a linen cloth in cold water.
And place it on top until the discharge stops. If there is a lot of blood, sprinkle powdered alum or saffron or something similar from astringents on it until the bleeding stops, or apply half a peeled pomegranate to the area.
Leave it until the pomegranate adheres to the area, as the blood will then stop. If you need to reapply a leech, do not use the same one if possible. If the leech refuses to attach itself, wipe the area with fresh blood.
Or insert a needle into the place until something of blood comes out, then apply it; if it feels some blood, it will stick to the location. If you wish for it to fall off, sprinkle something of alum or salt or ashes upon it and it will fall off the location.
Chapter III.
In setting bones.
This chapter is also about what is needed in the craft of medicine, namely setting broken bones and dislocations that occur in the bones.
Know, O my sons, that this chapter may be claimed by ignorant physicians and commoners, and those who have never browsed an ancient book or read a letter from it.
For this reason, this art of medicine has become nonexistent in our land, and I have never encountered a single competent practitioner in it. And whatever I have gained from it, I have gained through my long reading of the books of the ancients and my eagerness to understand them until I extracted the knowledge of this art from them, then I adhered to experimentation and practice throughout my life.
And in this chapter, I have drawn for you everything that my knowledge encompasses. My experience has gone into it after I brought it closer to you, purified it from the branches of prolixity, and summarized it to the utmost, clarified it to the utmost, and presented you with many images of the instruments used in it.
This is because of further elaboration, as I have done in the preceding two chapters. There is no power except with God, the Most High, the Great.
The First Section.
In it are general and comprehensive matters concerning the fracture of bones which must be presented before we begin to mention broken and dislocated members one by one,  it is necessary that we mention in the introduction to this chapter some general statements and sections. You are first compelled to understand them and grasp their truth, you and anyone else who is eager to learn this honorable craft.
And I say that if anyone suffers a fracture or dislocation or sprain or fall, it is necessary to hasten first to reduce it or loosen it or both. Unless something prevents it, such as weakness of strength or if what happened to him was a child or an old man, or the time was extremely hot or very cold indeed.
Then he should restrict his diet to cold legumes and poultry meat, and should avoid drinks and thick meats and overeating and all food that fills the veins with blood until the swelling is relieved and you do not expect any discharge of material to the area.
Then let the patient return to his original treatment that he is used to, and if the broken bone is in a cast, the patient should eat nourishing foods that are thick and strong, such as barley, rice, heads, acorns, and cow hooves. And eggs, tender fish, thick drinks and the like, for by this treatment, the fracture will heal faster and better. Know that broken bones, if they are in strong men and old men, cannot join and unite on their original nature at all.
Because their bones are dry and rigid, and what might connect and unite is only the softest part of the bones, like the bones of young boys. But nature grows on the broken bone from all sides something that resembles glue, which is thick and sticks to it and tightens it until some parts stick together.
It binds some parts to others until it comes in the utmost strength and firmness as it was originally, so that nothing hinders his actions.
Therefore, it is necessary for the patient to eat foods that contain strength, viscosity and thickness as we said. Know that fractures may differ in types according to the difference of organs because a fracture of the leg bone is different from a skull fracture and a rib fracture is different from a spinal fracture.
And so are all the other members contrary to each other, and I will mention every type of fracture in detail in its chapter. The type of bone fracture may also differ in itself.
For it may be a fracture by crushing without splintering, or it may be fractured along the length of the bone with splinters and detached fragments, both sterile and non-sterile, and the fracture may be with a wound and rupture in the skin, or it may be a slight crack.
Each type has a special method for setting it as will be mentioned in detail in its place, and what distinguishes a bone fracture is its crookedness, swelling, and tenderness to the touch, and crackling when you pinch it with your hand.
So when there is no apparent crookedness in the place, nor crackling nor disturbance when you touch the bone and the patient does not experience much pain, then there is no fracture; rather it could be a sprain or a slight crack or a minor fissure, so it should not be moved by stretching or pinching at all.
But apply to it the remedies that will be mentioned later as appropriate for the location, then bind it with a gentle compression. Know that if the bone breaks and splits into two without splintering, even though each part is separated from the other.
You should hasten to straighten and align it as soon as possible before a hot swelling occurs. If a hot swelling occurs, leave it for days until the hot swelling subsides, then straighten it in any way you can with gentleness and skill.
Know that setting and aligning it is easier than the bone in which splinters have occurred, then bind it as will be mentioned later. If there are splinters in the bone, it is necessary to stretch the broken limb from both sides, whether it is an arm or a leg.
Either with your hands if the member is small, or with two cords, or with a cord and your hand. The position of the member should be level on its natural shape so that when the broken bone extends, then cut away those excrescences in their places by every means you can manage with skill and gentleness.
Do your utmost to avoid causing the patient pain or anguish with your actions and strive to join one of the bones to the other in the best formation. At that time, you should touch and feel them with your hand; if you see anything amiss, correct it and even it out as much as you are able.
Beware of excessive tension and forceful wedging, as many ignorant people often do, and which frequently causes a hot swelling or inflammation in the limb, as I have witnessed from their actions many times.
Then, after the adjustment, refinement, and tension, keep that limb still and at peace. Warn the patient not to move it during his waking hours or sleep, and when he turns, is disturbed, or has a bowel movement, and in all his movements as much as possible, and to seek a position for the limb that will protect him from pain.
If he feels any pain or discomfort in the position of the limb, let him change to a different position where he does not feel pain, and still strive to make that position level and straight.
So that the limb does not become deformed if it is forced, and as for how to bind a broken limb, it is as I have described to you; know that broken limbs differ in size, shape, and nature. Those that are smaller, such as the arm, finger, forearm, and the like...
...should have soft, fine bandages. Those that are larger, such as the thigh, back, and chest, should have wide, firm bandages, because a broad bandage is needed to bind a large limb and tighten it evenly on all sides without any looseness.
Then, after you have finished smoothing it, you will apply the appropriate plaster for it. Place a soft bandage over the fracture site, then begin wrapping the bandage around the fracture itself three or four times, depending on what the limb requires, and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage, then take it up to the upper part of the fracture site.
Tighten it less than you tightened the broken area, then space the wrapping away from the fracture site a little and loosen the tightness gradually until you take something suitable from the correct place, then take another bandage and wrap it also over the broken area.
Wrap it then take the wrapping to the lower part of the fracture, and let your action in tightening and loosening the wrap be as we mentioned in the first upper wrap, then place soft padding or rags between the wrappings according to what straightens the fracture.
If there is any angulation, put something in it, otherwise do not put anything in it, then wrap another bandage over it and then apply firm splints over these wraps from your time unless there is swelling or a hot tumor in the limb.
But if there is swelling or a hot tumor, apply something to soothe the tumor and reduce the swelling and leave it for days, then tighten the splints on it at that time, and let the splints be from the wide halved reeds, carved and prepared wisely, or the splints may be from raven wood.
Which are made from pine, palm leaves, boxwood or hollyhock and the like of what is available from that, and let the width of each splint be in this image and shape exactly.
Unless the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be thicker and slightly wider than the rest of the splints, as for the length of the splint it is made according to what suits the broken limb in terms of its size. Picture of the splint:
Then bind the splints with another bandage according to your first binding, and then tie it from above with tight threads as we have mentioned regarding the tension, which is that your tension should be greater on the fracture site. The less tension the farther you are from the fracture.
The threads should be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should be made from damp linen, especially since thick threads, like those used by ignorant people who make their threads from twisted linen strips, are a grave mistake.
Because the tension with them will be excessive, and thin threads are also unsuitable because you will not achieve the desired tension with them. There should not be less than the width of a finger between one splint and another.
If the patient suffers pain from the ends of the splints after binding in the correct places, place soft padding or cotton wool underneath so that he does not feel any discomfort. As for a fracture with a wound and a rupture in the skin, we will discuss it separately.
Know that not every broken limb should be bound with splints from the first day. If the limb is large, splints should not be applied until five, seven, or more days have passed, depending on your confidence in preventing a hot swelling.
This is the description of the bandages which the ancients used to bind fractures, dislocations, and sprains - a general, brief bandage that sets bones and is suitable for most temperaments, especially boys and women because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
It consists of taking bran from the mill, which is the flour dust that clings to the walls of the mill during grinding, and kneading it as is without sifting it. Add egg white and make the dough neither too thick nor too thin, then use it.
Description of another plaster which sets fractures, dislocations, and sprains; take ten dirhams of each of mastich, lentisk, acacia, rosan, frankincense, and mastic, five dirhams of myrrh and patience from each, twenty dirhams of marshmallow, and twenty dirhams of Armenian or Roman clay. Pound all together and mix with marshmallow water or egg white if the patient's temperament is hot, then apply this plaster; it is good for uniting, quickly setting broken bones, and suits most people due to its moderation.
Description of another plaster which is also good for fractures and sprains; take ten dirhams each of frankincense, mastich, and white henna, five dirhams each of myrrh and patience, six dirhams of acacia, twenty dirhams of Armenian clay. Pound all together finely, sift, and knead with water or egg white, then apply.
Description of a plaster for joints and bones which have slipped from their places, and to relieve the pain accompanying them, as well as headache due to bone fracture; take purified wool and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, then apply to the area. This plaster has no power to set.
But it is excellent for relieving hot swelling and expelling pain, especially. Description of another plaster which sets broken bone; take the leaves of common fig and wild poppy and pound them all together, then apply them damp. Description of a shorter plaster used when a bone is set.
And if you want to analyze the rest of the swelling, take from the root of henna, chamomile, violet and carnation seed, one part of each; pound all together and knead with plaster if the member is not inflamed; but if it is inflamed, knead with coriander water or with water and apply.
Description of another plaster stronger in resolution than the first, used when a hard swelling occurs after bone setting; take from the root of henna, flaxseed, fenugreek, rosemary, marjoram, violet and chamomile, one part of each.
Everyone pounds and kneads it with water of rue or with fresh water or with plaster, all according to the heat of the member and its quiescence. As for Hippocrates, he did not mention in his book that it should be placed upon the fractured member when it is set.
Except for the cerate made from wax and oil alone, and he described it as being intermediate between thickness and thinness. As for Galen, he saw that things with hollows and a little heat should be placed upon the fractured member when setting it, such as myrrh and mastic and frankincense and what we have mentioned.
Description of a poultice that is beneficial for weakness and pain: take equal parts of flaxseed, sesame seed, human hair from a person who has recently recovered from illness, or bird feathers, mastic, and salt; pound it, sift it, knead it and apply it as a poultice.  As for the amount of time the bandage should remain.
Then it is removed; you should observe if the patient does not experience pain or irritation, nor any movement of the broken bone from its place, do not remove it for many days. If there occurs in that place severe irritation or disturbing pain or swelling.
Immediately remove it at once and do not delay that, nor leave the poultice on. Then take a soft rag or a sea sponge moistened with lukewarm water and wash the area until the irritation subsides and the pain calms down, then let the member rest for an hour.
Then place upon it wool that has been moistened with vinegar and oil or rose ointment and bind it for a night so that you are safe from the hot swelling, and the limb's swelling subsides and its pain goes away; then return it to gentle tension and a light poultice and do not tighten it as you did at first.
And be gentle with it until it heals. If you see that the swelling, redness, pain and swelling, and all the symptoms have completely gone and required a poultice and strapping, then repeat as you did first, whether or not anything of what we mentioned occurred in the limb.
Do not set it until after three, four, five or seven days; or even twenty days may be left, all according to the state of the limb as we have said, until if breaking is necessary and the flesh is about to unite upon it.
Then also increase the tension more than your initial tension altogether and also increase the strengthening of the patient's diet as previously mentioned, for if you see that the place of the fracture has dried up and become flabby more than is proper, know that nourishment is prevented from reaching it.
Then bathe it with lukewarm water each time you dress it, and let this be done every three days, and slightly reduce the tension, for by this action nourishment is carried to the limb and it heals quickly; but what ignorant binders do, breaking the limb again,
If it was not first bound as it should be and is set crooked, is a great mistake on their part and a deception; for if it were right they would have mentioned it in their books and acted upon it, and you would not see any trace of it from anyone among them whatsoever. And the correct course is not to do it.
Chapter Two.
On Fractures Encountered in the Head.
There are many types of accidental fractures in the head, with diverse shapes and intricate causes. Some fractures may result from a sword blow, either cleaving the bone entirely down to the dura mater beneath the bone. As a woodcutter does to wood.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called "woodcutter's" fracture. Or the sword may cleave only part of the bone, and its surface alone, without penetrating to the end; this type of fracture is called a "complete avulsion." The wound from these fractures can be either large or small.
Other fractures may be a crush or contusion, caused by a blow with a stone or a fall onto a stone or similar object. This type of fracture can either penetrate nearly to the membrane beneath the bone or occur on the surface of the bone.
The wound of these two fractures will also be either large or small, and the fracture may be hidden in the bone in the thinness of hair, which is a slight crack.
That is why this type of fracture is called hairy, and there is a fracture that occurs from a fall or a stone blow and the like, which enters the surface of the bone inside and makes the place concave, as it appears in copper when it is struck by a blow, part of it enters inside.
This is more common in the wet head bone, such as the heads of boys, and all these types of fractures may have free fragments and non-free fragments, and we will come to mention the treatment of all this in its place, and we recognize all these types of fractures by examining them.
And examine it with probes and remove the corrupted flesh from it, and as for the hairy type, it is known by exposing the bone, touching it, and smearing it with ink, then the fracture will appear black, and as for the treatment of the fracture, you first look at the patient's symptoms.
If you see from his symptoms an indication that is clearly indicative of fear, such as vomiting bile, stretching, loss of mind, interruption of speech, fainting, and a severe fever, redness and inflammation of the eyes, and other similar symptoms, then do not approach the patient or treat him. For death will befall him with these symptoms in most cases inevitably.
And if you see symptoms that do not alarm you and hope for his safety, then take him in treatment; for if the wounded man comes to you immediately after the injury, and this was in the winter days.
You should strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case, and if it is in summer days, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the membrane under the bone deteriorates, exposing those symptoms that we have described.
If the fracture of the bone has reached the membrane covering the brain and there is fragmentation and crushing, then it is necessary to cut off the crushed portion as I will describe to you: shave the head of the injured patient.
Expose the bone in any way you are able, according to the shape of the wound and what relieves the patient; if, upon exposure, blood flows or a hot swelling appears on the bone, treat it accordingly.
This is done by stuffing the area with cloths soaked in a decoction of roses and oil, cleansing the wound until the swelling subsides and bleeding stops; then proceed to grind the bone and extract it, which can be accomplished in one of two ways.
One way is to cut the bone with a delicate, narrow-bladed instrument, and this is its form:
Then use another cutter, slightly wider than the first, and this is its form:
Then use another cutter, also wider than the second; you should have several cutters of different widths and lengths, all with extremely sharp tips, made of Indian iron or good steel.
Use gentleness when striking the cutter so as not to shake the head and cause him pain. If the bone is strong and hard, you should drill around it before using the cutters with awls called "non-piercing" awls.
This is because they do not penetrate beyond the skull bone; their head has a circular shape below the sharp point, resembling a collar or small circle, which prevents them from plunging and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
You should have several of these awls, each suitable for the thickness of the bone, so that you are prepared to drill every skull with a sharp tip length and shortness according to the thickness of that skull; this is an image of three types: From large trephines, medium and small:
As for how to drill around a broken bone, you should place the trephine on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated, then move the trephine to another location and make the distance between each hole the thickness of a probe or thereabouts.
Then cut with the saw between each two holes and do this as gently as you can, as we have said, until you remove the bone either with your hand or with something else from some of the instruments that were prepared for that purpose.
Such as forceps and fine pliers, and you should be very careful that the trephine or saw touches nothing from the peritoneum. And if you have strengthened the bone and separated it from the peritoneum if it was attached to it and removed it, then it should be dressed.
And smooth any roughness that remains in the bone with another instrument that resembles a saw, but it should be thinner and finer than all other saws. If there are any small bones or fragments remaining, take them gently with the instruments you have.
Then treat the wound afterwards with bandages and ointments that will be mentioned, and as for the other side of the work, it is very easy and far from danger, something Galen mentioned and praised greatly. This is what he said: You should first begin by exposing the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and prominent, so that once you have exposed that part, you place the tip of this lens-shaped saw underneath it. And this is its image:
The lens-shaped part of it should be smooth so that it does not cut anything, and the sharp part of it is on its sides that extend in length as you see, so that the lens-shaped part rests on the peritoneum and the sharp edge of the saw is in the bone, then you strike the saw from one side.
With a small hammer, until you cut through all the bone gently, as it rotates and you are safe from the membrane where nothing terrible will happen at all, even if the healer is the most ignorant and cowardly of men, yes, even if he were asleep.
If anything of the membrane remains adhering to the bone in some places, scrape it off with the tip of the lens-shaped cutter itself and gently free it, for it will come away without harm or fear.
But if the fracture of the bone has not extended to the membrane and what has been broken off from the bone has a rough surface and fine splinters, then you should remove that roughness and extract those splinters with fine scrapers, several of which have been made in different sizes so that you can use whichever is most suitable and best for each place according to what your work dictates.
And the same broken bone and its shape, you should use in your scraping first the widest of those scrapers then use one finer than it and continue doing so in this manner until you arrive at using the finest and thinnest of them all.
As for all the other small, hair-like fissures and fine fractures, treatment suitable for each one should be used according to what leads to its healing; this is something that is not hidden from someone who has even the slightest experience in this craft and has considered what we have written and explained about major fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed after you have removed the bone, then you should take a linen cloth the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth folded in two or three. Soak it in syrup and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this as lightly as you can so as not to weigh down the peritoneum. Then use a broad bandage over it and do not tighten it except to the extent that it only holds the wound.
And leave it with this treatment for a day or two until the hot swelling is safe, then dissolve it and use afterwards medicines that have a drying effect, such as the root of asphodel and the powder of caraway and cinnamon and costus and the like. This means making a poultice from these medicines.
Apply it to the wound as is, dry. In general, use a medicine that will cleanse without stinging. Make every effort in treating the wound to keep it clean, with neither fat nor dirt in it, and do not allow pus to collect in it at all.
For pus, if it collects on the membrane of the brain, will spoil and corrupt it, and from that there will befall upon the patient a great calamity. It may also occur in the periosteum of the head when the bone is exposed, especially if his treatment is neglected.
If you see blackness on its surface and the patient shows the symptoms we mentioned, know that he is inevitably doomed. If the blackness occurred from a medicine applied to it, and that medicine had the power to do so.
You should take one part honey and three parts rose oil, beat them together well, soak a cloth in the mixture, and place it on the periosteum. Then treat it with the types of treatment that are appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter Three.
On setting a broken nose.
Know that the only part of the nose that can break is its upper section, either both or one, because they are bones. The lower part is cartilaginous and does not break but may suffer bruising, distortion, and displacement.
If one of its sections breaks, you should insert the little finger into the nostril and straighten the fracture from the inside with your middle finger and thumb from the outside until the nose is returned to its natural shape. Do this gently and carefully so as not to cause the patient pain.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and no finger has been joined to it, it should be straightened with the tip of a rod slightly thickened. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same, and hasten to set it on the first day of the fracture.
If possible, otherwise after the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling subsides, then insert a wick of linen cloth into the nostril opening if the fracture is on one side or insert two wicks if the fracture is on both sides.
Let the wick be thick enough to fill the nostril opening, and some of the early setters mentioned soaking the wick in ghee and changing it every day. I do not see that, but it should be soaked in egg white mixed with mill dust.
Then leave the wick until the bone sets and the cartilage hardens, and you may insert goose feather tubes in place of the wick after wrapping them with soft cloth, so their retention for a nasal fracture is firmer and so that the patient does not refrain from breathing.
This is not necessary if you wish to do it, and if you wish make the wicks. If during your work the nose swells with hot inflammation, bandage the nose with qirtayus or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil or something from the diachylon plaster.
If hot inflammation does not occur, it should be bandaged from the outside with fine semolina and powdered benzoin mixed with egg white, then a soft bandage should be placed on top, and the nose should not be tied with anything at all. If the nasal bones are fractured in a small break.
Or if they are shattered, it should be incised and removed with the instrument suitable for that, then the incision should be sutured and treated with ointments appropriate for healing and closing, and if a wound occurs inside the nose, it should be treated with a wick and lead tubes should be used. Until it heals.
Chapter Four.
In setting the lower jaw if it is broken.
If the lower jaw is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by a wound, and if the fracture is external only and has not been broken in two and pushed inward, then recognizing it is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side, insert the index finger of your right hand and raise the prominence of the fracture from the inside gently to the outside.
Your other hand, from outside the bone, controls its alignment. If the jawbone fracture has been split in two, a spreader should be used on both sides to straighten it so that it can be set. If it has occurred in the teeth, they will have to be extracted.
Or separate and tighten what you intend to keep with a thread of gold, silver or silk; then place the plaster on the broken jaw, followed by a folded cloth and then a large, tight splint or a piece of leather sole equal in length to the jaw. Then tie it securely from above, as convenient for you and conforming to its compression so that it does not loosen, and order the patient to refrain from speaking and keep still, and give him soft, liquid food. If you think that something has changed in any way in the shape of the jaw, proceed immediately to correct it on the third day.
Then tie it securely from above, as convenient for you and conforming to its compression so that it does not loosen, and order the patient to refrain from speaking and keep still, and give him soft, liquid food. If you think that something has changed in any way in the shape of the jaw, proceed immediately to correct it on the third day. Then fix what you have compressed with flour mixed with egg white or semolina flour after removing the plaster, and place a soft bandage on top of the dressing. As long as the bandage adheres to it and the bone's condition has not changed, leave it alone.
Do not loosen it until it heals and the fracture consolidates, for this fracture often consolidates in three weeks. If swelling occurs during this time, use what we have mentioned repeatedly to relieve it until the swelling subsides.
If the fracture is with a wound, and if it has become free of bone fragments, extract those fragments carefully in a manner suitable for removing them with an instrument. If the wound opening is narrow, widen it with a scalpel to the extent necessary.
Then, if you have extracted all those fragments and nothing remains, suture the wound opening if it is wide; otherwise, apply one of the ointments suitable for that purpose. And allow the wound to heal until it is fully recovered.
Chapter Five.
On setting a broken clavicle.
The clavicle most often breaks in front of the end at the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in one of three ways: either it breaks and splits into two without fragmentation, which is the easiest to set;
or fragmentation occurs in the fracture, which is more difficult to set; or the fracture occurs with a wound. If the fracture is without a wound, have two assistants: one to hold the arm next to the broken clavicle and the other to extend the neck toward the opposite side.
Then straighten the fracture with your fingers until it assumes its proper shape, without any bump or angulation; if you need more extension, place a ball of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit.
The ball will provide the necessary extension, and you will extend and raise the clavicle while pressing down on the ball with your hand until the fracture is set properly. If you cannot pull the end of the clavicle outward because it has sunk deep, the patient should lie on their back.
Place a medium-sized pillow under their elbow, and have the assistant press down on the elbow until the deep clavicle bone rises upward. At that point, correct the fracture and straighten it with your fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the clavicle has broken and is moving, it should be incised and that fragment carefully removed. If the fragment is lodged in the bone, proceed to cut it with one of the instruments prepared for that purpose. After placing the instrument under the clavicle, which preserves the peritoneum and is made of wood or iron, this is its form:
It resembles a spoon without a handle, and its width should be according to the size of the bone, whether large or small. Its length should also be according to what you are able to work with. Let it have two ends, as you see, one end wider and the other narrower.
If the incision made when removing the bone fragment is wide and you are confident there will be no hot swelling, bring the edges of the wound together with sutures. If the incision is small or you fear hot swelling, treat the wound with dressing and bandages according to the size of the incision.
If hot swelling appears, soak the dressing in rose oil and vinegar or wine and apply it. To fix the bone if there is no wound or incision, apply a poultice made of rye flour mixed with egg white to the bone. Place a soft bandage over it, then put a ball under his armpit if necessary. Take a long turban, about a span wide, fold the bandage and poultice over the bandage, and then take a splint from a thin board. It should be three finger-widths wide and long, then wrap it in cloth, place the cloth with the splint in the part of the turban that lies over the fracture, and tighten the turban around the fracture as it goes around. Tie it around his neck and under his sound armpit, then under the injured armpit. Wrap it several times on each side and adjust the tightness so that the fracture is firmly set—this will be clear to you.
The principle is that the splint should not be removed from the fractured bone. Therefore, the patient should be examined every day; whenever the ligament relaxes and you see that the splint has become loose, fix it and tighten the ligament. Then, make the patient sleep on his back and place a small pillow under his armpit at night while he sleeps.
This will raise his arm away from his side, raising the clavicle fracture with the raising of the elbow, or his arm is tied to his neck; and do not loosen the ligament unless there occurs in the place an incident of rubbing or swelling for twelve days.
Then renew the dressing if you see a need for it. Continue tightening and leave it until the clavicle fracture heals and unites, and becomes stronger during twenty-eight days. It may be in some people in less time than that.
Chapter Six.
In setting a broken shoulder. The shoulder rarely breaks in its wide part, but rather its processes; whenever it breaks in a place or breaks in the middle, this is known by touch, and according to the shape of the break, a mold is made.
Set it and return it to its natural shape in every way you can, then apply rye flour powder mixed with egg white and a soft bandage; place a folded cloth dressing on top, then a wide splint made of wood.
Make it thin enough to cover the whole shoulder or a little wider; if there is swelling in any place under the splint, even it out with a soft bandage so that the splint lies flat, then tie it tightly from above with a long turban.
Tighten it securely and make sure the splint does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day; whenever the bandage loosens, tighten it and adjust the splint if it has moved, let the patient lie on his right side, and the shoulder will heal in twenty days.
On the twenty-fifth day, if this period is completed, release the ligature and you will be safe, for it is one of the bones which there is no fear of its breaking or crushing; but if a fragment of bone should protrude and lie under the skin, make an incision over it and remove it. Do what I have mentioned in fractures of the clavicle to relieve a hot swelling if any such thing should occur.
Chapter Seven.
On setting a fracture of the breastbone.
The breastbone may break in the middle, which is rare; but its extremities are more frequently fractured and comminuted. If it breaks in the middle, it inclines downwards, and is attended with violent pain, difficulty of breathing, and coughing.
Sometimes blood is coughed up and the depression in the broken bone becomes apparent and unmistakable to the touch. To set it, let the patient lie on his back and place a cushion between his shoulders; then press his elbows together and bring the ribs into apposition with the hands on both sides, and adjust it as carefully as possible in every direction.
Continue this until the shape of the bone is restored; then apply a bandage and splint, placing over it a light splint made of thin wood, such as boxwood or holly, after wrapping it in linen. Adjust the bandage carefully over the broken bone so that it will not become loose; pass the bandage around to the back several times and tighten it firmly; then examine the bandage frequently and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it again.
If necessity requires the bandage to be removed, when pain, swelling or inflammation occurs in the part, hasten to remove it, take off the bandage and correct what has occurred by appropriate treatment; then replace the bandage if you deem it necessary. Direct him to wear a support until he is healed.
Chapter Eight.
In setting a broken rib, know that fractures in the ribs occur mostly in the thick places following the back and their ends from the front. This is because they are cartilaginous, and this knowledge is not hidden when examining with fingers.
Set the fracture by straightening it with your fingers as much as possible until the shape is restored, then bandage and constrict the broken bone with a splint if needed. If the rib fracture is angled inward, it will cause the patient severe pain.
And a collapse similar to that which occurs in those with pneumothorax may occur because the bone collapses the diaphragm and also causes him shortness of breath, coughing, and expectoration of a large amount of blood. This is difficult to treat, and the ancients have tried many tricks for it.
Some say that the patient's diet should consist of foods that produce flatulence and gas so that the abdomen swells and expands, pushing the fracture outward. We dislike this lest it aggravate the formation of a hot abscess. If it has already occurred, it will increase and strengthen it.
Some said that a cupping glass should be placed on the area and sucked forcefully, similar to drawing out pus. However, they fear that the cupping glass may draw further into the weakened area. Others said that the area should be covered with wool soaked in hot oil.
Padding is placed between the ribs until it is full, making the bandage even when wrapped around it. Then, treat the patient like one with pneumothorax with diet and medicine. If the patient is experiencing extreme hardship they cannot endure... …and the bone collapses the diaphragm in a harmful way, and we fear for the patient's well-being. So, we should cut open the area and expose the broken rib, then place the instrument that preserves the peritoneum underneath it (a description of which is provided later). We cut the bone carefully and remove it.
Then we bring together the lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures and treat it with ointments until it heals. If a hot swelling should appear during this time, hasten to soak lint in rose oil and place it on the area and treat the patient with something that will soothe the swelling from within as well.
He should lie on the side that is more comfortable for sleep until he is healed.
Chapter Nine.
On setting a dislocated vertebra of the back and neck.
As for the bones of the neck, if they are fractured, this rarely occurs, and what is more common is a sprain;  the same applies to the vertebrae of the back. If someone suffers from this and you want to know whether it will heal or not. Observe whether his hands have become relaxed and numb, lifeless, and unable to move, extend, or contract them; and if you prick or stab them with a needle he does not feel it nor experience pain in them, then know that it will most likely not heal, for he is lost.
But if he can move them and feels the pricking and stabbing, know that the marrow of the bone is safe and that the patient will heal with treatment. If a vertebra of the back has been similarly dislocated and you want to know whether it will also heal,
Observe his legs and see if they too have become relaxed, and what happened in the hands has occurred in them; then, if he lies on his back, wind and stool pass involuntarily, and if he lies on his stomach, urine passes involuntarily. And if he lies on his back and tries to urinate but is unable to, know that he is lost and do not concern yourself with treating him. If none of these things occur, the matter is less serious. The treatment for what has happened is to apply something to reduce the hot swelling.
Apply rose oil alone to the diseased vertebra, or with roasted egg yolks; apply this three times a day until the hot swelling subsides. Then, place one of the strengthening bandages on the area and tighten it with a bandage. Order him to rest and remain still.
He should not sleep except on the side where he does not feel pain until he is healed. If a fragment of bone or something else that has become healed has occurred at the time of the injury, it should be cut open and that bone should be removed. Then the lips of the wound are brought together if it is large, by stitching, and then treated with healing ointments until it heals. If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the tailbone, is broken, the thumb of the left hand should be inserted into the anus.
The broken bone is then straightened with the other hand, as much as possible and straightening is attained, then a dressing and splint are applied if needed, and then it is tightened.
If you feel a broken fragment in it, cut it open and remove it, then treat the wound with the treatment previously mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Ten.
On Setting a Hip Fracture.
Rarely are the bones of the hip fractured. If they are fractured, the fracture is usually one in which they crumble at their extremities and split lengthwise, tending inwards. This will cause the patient pain in that spot and a limp, as well as numbness in the leg on the side of the fracture.
To set it, pass your hand over it until you determine the nature of the fracture. If the fracture is only at the extremities, straighten that fracture as best as possible so that it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is lengthwise or has inclined inwards, lay the patient on their stomach so that you can set the fracture. Once it is straightened, apply a dressing and then place a splint made of wood or leather over it, and tighten it securely.
Do not worry about the fracture shifting or the splint coming undone. Straighten any hollows in the waist with padding to ensure an even tightening. Order the patient to sleep on their back or right side, and if they develop a hot swelling:
Stop extending it and dress the wound until the hot swelling subsides, then apply what will soothe it as previously mentioned. Then return to dressing the wound and tightening it as needed. If there are fragments or any part has broken off from the bone, they should not be removed.
Do not touch them but smooth them out externally as we have said and leave it tightened until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
On setting a fracture of the humerus.
The humerus is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder. If it breaks, set it in one of two ways: one is to take a smooth, curved stick of medium thickness in this manner:
Tie ropes at both ends and hang it from a high place. Then have the patient sit on a chair and lay his broken arm on the stick so that his armpit becomes stuck in the middle of the curve of the stick, then hang something heavy from above.
Or a servant extends it downwards, then the doctor straightens the fracture with both his hands until he returns the fracture to its proper place; the other way is for the patient to lie on his back and hang his hand from his neck with a rope.
Then order two servants, one to hold what is above the fracture with his hands and the other to hold below it, and each one extends it towards his side. If you want the extension to be stronger, tie a rope under the fracture and another above it, and have each of the servants extend them toward their sides.
If the fracture is near the end of the elbow, the middle rope should be placed under the armpit and the other below the fracture towards the elbow; likewise if the fracture is near the elbow, the ropes should be placed at that location and on the elbow itself.
Then gently straighten the fracture without violence until it is aligned as needed and a good union occurs, then tighten it if no hot swelling appears; but if hot swelling appears, leave it untightened until the seventh day and place on it a poultice soaked in vinegar and rose oil.
Even if the swelling subsides, then bind it tightly, and the method of binding it is to hold the dressing on the fracture, then hold a bandage of new cloth over the dressing, then gather the arm against the upper arm itself and place his hand open on his elbow.
Hold the cloth and bind it to the upper arm and arm so that the arm acts as splints if nothing prevents you from doing so and nothing changes for you from the broken bone, then if you fear that something will change for you from that, use splints.
It is to place on the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than all other splints, and let there be the width of a finger between each splint, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an increase of three fingers from each side.
Then tighten on the splints the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is for your binding to be tightest on the place of the fracture.
And the farther from the fracture, the looser the binding should be; if you see the placing of the splints and the binding as we have said at the time of your setting of the limb, then do so.
And if you fear hot swelling, leave the binding and splints until the seventh day as we have said, then examine the bandage every three days so that no roughness or bloating occurs in the place, nor is food prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightness; then correct all of that according to what we mentioned.
But if you are confident that none of that will happen, do not loosen the bandage except after many days, and let the patient lie on his back with his hand on his stomach, and a bolster stuffed with wool placed moderately under the upper arm.
And check at all times, night or day, lest the shape of the broken limb be displaced or the bandage relaxes, and correct all that with your utmost effort; make the patient's diet according to the rank we have presented, so that the food is mild at first until the bone begins to strengthen.
His food should be strengthened, for it is customary for the arm and leg to become strong in forty days. Then it should be set and he should use the bath and be treated with ointments suitable for that, if the fracture is severe and crushed.
The bandage should not be removed from it for fifty days or two months.
Chapter Twelfth.
On Setting a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is composed of two bones called the radius and ulna, one is small, which is next to the thumb, and the other is large, which is located below the smaller one. Sometimes the larger radius breaks alone or the smaller one breaks alone, and sometimes they both break together.
So when the smaller upper radius breaks, its setting is easy and its healing is faster. And when the lower ulna breaks, its fracture is bad and its healing is difficult. The worst of all is if both bones break together. If the bone that has broken is the smaller upper radius...
The physician should, when setting it, make the extension gentle so as to straighten it. If the larger ulna is the one broken, he should make the extension stronger. And if both radii are broken, he should make the extension much stronger indeed.
The shape of the hand should be placed when setting it and extending it on a pillow, with the thumb of the hand raised higher than all the fingers, and the little finger lower than all the other fingers, and the ring finger based squarely on itself.
Let the pillow be raised in front of him so that the patient is not troubled.
Then a servant extends the arm from below, either with his hand or with a bandage, and another servant extends it from above. Then the physician straightens the bone until he returns it to the best shape possible. If there are fragments in the fracture, they are removed.
Try your utmost to put each fragment back in its place. If a sterile fragment appears and it is undermining the skin, do not attempt to suture it. Instead, make an incision over it and remove it in the manner we have previously described. If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, we have devoted a separate chapter to it.
You will find treatment for that in the aforementioned chapter. If swelling appears immediately after your dressing and it is hot, apply a cloth poultice made with rose ointment and white wax. Let it be of medium thickness and bind it gently over the swelling until it subsides.
Then remove the rose ointment poultice and apply a dressing prepared from powdered barley mixed with egg white. After that, apply splints; let the splint placed directly on the fracture be slightly wider and stronger. Be aware that the number of arm splints is usually six.
Whether the fracture is in one bone or in two together, make your binding tightest at the site of the fracture. And the more you move upward or downward with the binding, the looser it should become. This follows what we mentioned earlier in the first chapter.
Let the cloths wrapped around the fracture be soft and damp, not overly firm. The thread used for binding should be linen, of medium thickness as we have described. Examine the limb and its ligaments after a few days.
If something requires correction, such as a rash that appears on the limb, immerse the limb in warm water until the rash subsides. Then leave the limb unbound for a night so it can rest, and afterward resume binding.
If the binding has loosened and the bone has shifted, or something similar has occurred, correct it to the best of your ability. Also observe whether the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tightness. If so, loosen it slightly and leave it unbound for a few days until nourishment flows freely, then resume binding.
If nothing mentioned above presents itself to the patient, then he should not be disturbed except after twenty days or so. Then his hand should be hung from his neck, with his arm kept straight, and care should be taken that he avoids agitated movements and sleeps on his back.
Know that this arm fracture will set in thirty days or in two and thirty, and perhaps even in twenty-eight, all depending on the temperaments and strengths of the individual cases.
Chapter Thirteen.
On Setting a Fracture of the Hand and Fingers.
The metacarpals of the hand and phalanges of the fingers rarely fracture, but they are often bruised.  Whenever a fracture or bruise occurs in the hand...
The patient should sit squarely with a chair directly opposite him.
Then he should place his hand on it, extended. The bone-setter's assistant then extends the fractured limb and straightens it; the doctor continues until a good union is achieved. If no hot swelling occurs, a bandage and splint should be applied. Then a cast should be placed over it, according to the size of the area.
If it has been wrapped in a soft cloth, and if the fracture is towards the bottom, near the palm, make a half sphere from cloth and have the patient grasp it with his fractured hand, then tighten it with a long cloth.
Let the splint be made of supple leather so that it conforms to the bend of the entire hand, and tighten it as needed. If the fracture is outward, a splint should be placed on top and another below in the hand so that the hand remains open and upright.
Then the tension should be held as the hand turns and a ribbon should be tied between the fingers. If a fracture occurs in one of the phalanges, and it is the thumb, straighten it as needed and then bind it with the hand. If you wish, you may make a small upright splint to support the fracture.
And it does not move if the fracture is to all the fingers like the middle finger, index finger or ring finger or little finger, then straighten it and bind it with the following healthy finger, or bind them all on a splint; this is best, or put a small upright splint on it.
As we said in the thumb and examine it while splinting it and keeping it away from hot swelling, then treat it as necessary when something of that occurs, as its description has been repeated.
Chapter Fourteenth.
In the Setting of a Femur Fracture.
The femur often fractures and is evident to the touch because it displaces forward and backward. Its setting is done by tightening a bandage above the fracture and another below it, with the patient lying on his stomach.
Then extend each bandage holder to its side in accordance with this if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, but if it is near the base of the thigh, a soft bandage should be tightened, either from wool or something similar.
At the base of the thigh towards the groin, the tension should be upwards and the other bandage below the fracture; likewise if the fracture is near the knee, let the bandage be near the knee so that the tension goes downwards. Then the physician straightens the bone with both his hands until it returns to its natural shape.
The bone then unites well, at which point the bandage and tightening should be maintained unless swelling occurs in the limb. If swelling occurs, leave it for several days until the hot swelling subsides, then return to its treatment.
As for tightening it, a wide, firm bandage should be wound twice or three times over the fracture, with any excess remaining. Then the leg is wound until the heel is at the base of the splint and a long thread is inserted between the thigh and leg near the knee from below. The ends of the thread are brought upwards on both sides.
Then turn the remainder of the bandage upon the leg and thigh, and place splints upon the thigh in the very seat of the fracture, making one splint of them for the bone of the leg; then stuff the interval between the thigh and the leg with soft linen, so that the tension may be equal.
Then begin to bind firmly in the middle, over the seat of the fracture, three or four turns; and the farther you carry the bandage from the seat of the fracture, let your binding be looser and less tight.
Then proceed to the ends of the thread which you had introduced between the thigh and leg, and tie them to the splints above; then pass the ends of the thread downwards until they reach the ankle, and tighten them there also to the ends of the splints on that side.
So that the bandage may not slip from its place, and leave it tight as long as the limb does not complain of pain, swelling, or distension, or anything of that kind; but if any such thing should happen, hasten to undo it and rectify whatever has occurred as we have repeatedly mentioned.
If there are splinters in the bone which project, it should be leveled if possible; otherwise, cut them out and remove them. Treat the wound as previously mentioned until it heals. This fracture of the thigh may sometimes be set without binding the leg to the thigh with splints.
As we have said in regard to the humerus and arm, but setting it in this way does not cause the patient to limp; if, however, you set it alone without binding it to the leg, the patient will always limp.
Know that the thigh takes fifty days to consolidate, or a little more or less according to the difference in constitutions and other conditions.
Chapter Fifteenth.
On Fracture of the Patella.
The kneecap is rarely fractured, but it is often bruised. Should a fracture occur, it will be either a crack or a shattering into fragments, and this may occur with or without a wound.
You rely on feeling to judge this, and you force it to straighten any separated parts with your fingers until they come together and unite as best as possible with care, skill, and precision. Then apply a dressing and a circular splint if needed.
Tighten the bandage above it accordingly, and in all cases you must follow the procedures we have described for other fractures, such as hot swelling, and so forth. Meet each occurrence with what is suitable until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
On Setting a Broken Leg.
The leg has two bones: one thick, called the tibia, and the other thin, called the fibula. These bones are subject to the same types of fractures as those in the arm. Therefore, setting them is done in the same way as setting an arm, and the process is one. If both bones are broken, the leg turns in all directions. If only the thinner bone is broken, the leg turns forward. And if only the thicker bone breaks below the knee, this will be clear to you.
Use traction and alignment, and bind splints accordingly, except that if the fracture is a severe one with many fragments, traction should be less forceful and gentler, and you must exert great care in setting it.
In addition to the work done on the arm, in setting a leg you must take two pine slats which are used for leveling rooms and place them between the splint's gaps, or use palm leaves or similar material.
Choose those that are slightly thick and not too thin, and let their length be the length of the leg from the knee down. Then wrap a cloth twice along the length of each slat and place one on one side of the leg and the other on the opposite side.
Let it be from the knee to below the foot, then bind the splints in three places at the ends and the middle; for by this binding, the leg is prevented from inclining right and left, and it is properly fixed. It may also be used with a trough of wood along the length of the leg.
Place it in this to keep it from moving, and it is best to do this in a fracture if there is a wound with it, then examine the leg every day and take great care of it for swelling or bloating or anything else. So when something like that happens, meet it with what is necessary until it heals, and the bone of the leg will be set in thirty days or so.
Chapter Seventeenth.
On Fractures of the Leg Bones and Fingers.
As for the heel, it is not subject to fracture at all. As for the bones of the leg, they may be fractured, and the fingers are rarely fractured, but they are more often bruised.
If the bones of the leg are fractured and you see that those bones are overlapping, let the patient place his foot on the ground upright as if walking, then put your foot on what has risen from those bones and step on it and straighten them.
Until it returns to its place, then carry a bandage and splint over it and put under the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads, then tighten the foot firmly after wrapping it with cloths and anything else it needs.
If three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones straight whether they were broken or dislocated; do as you see. As for if some fingers are broken, force and straighten them according to what I have described to you for setting the fingers of the hand.
Then put a splint for the broken finger along the length of the finger and let it be slightly wider than it, then put under the foot this board that I described to you and tighten it firmly, if the number of broken bones is two or three or more.
Place a splint on each finger, fitted into soft cloth and secure the board at the bottom of the foot. Let the head of each splint project outwards from the sole of the foot for proper alignment.
You should remember all that we have mentioned to you regarding the symptoms of fractures and treat each accordingly.
Chapter Eighteenth.
Fracture of the woman's pubic bone and the man's pelvis.
When a woman's vulva is fractured, seat her in a squatting position and then lean her slightly backward while supporting her from behind. Then have the midwife fill her vagina with cotton until it becomes like a ball.
Then shake the woman and raise her pelvis slightly, so that the cotton comes out until it forms a ball at the vaginal opening. This will reduce the fracture. Then apply a bandage to her back. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton gently so that she can urinate.
Replace it in the same way it was initially inserted and then return to her original bandage. Do this for seven days or so, as it will heal. If you wish, you can take a sheep's bladder, stretch a reed tube over its opening, and insert the whole bladder into her vagina.
Then blow forcefully into the tube until the bladder inflates inside the vagina; this will reduce the fracture. Then pack it with cotton and keep it for several days as we described until it heals. As for a fractured pubic bone in a man or woman, the same method is used to set it.
And treat it as we described for a fractured hip bone. It will not be hidden from you the correctness of these unusual fractures, which rarely occur, especially for those who have some experience and understand this book of mine, yes, because the fracture itself guides you in most cases.
On the right way to heal and tighten it, understand. As for a man if his thigh is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it, then place a bandage of cloth on it and bandage it, and leave it for three days or so until it heals.
Chapter Nineteenth.
On setting fractures of bones when there is a wound.
Whoever has a fracture with a wound, especially if the bone is large such as the thighbone or humerus or similar, should hasten to bleed him when conditions for bleeding permit as we have previously mentioned.
If the wound bleeds blood, you should hasten to staunch it by sprinkling powdered alum on it if nothing else is available. Then proceed with setting the fracture that same day and do not delay it.
If no hot swelling occurs, but if a hot swelling does occur, leave the setting until the ninth day until the hot swelling subsides and do not approach it at all on the third or fourth day for it is subject to bad symptoms.
If the broken bone is protruding onto the skin exposed, you should try to return it and set it straight with your hands gently and slightly stretching. If you cannot return it and set it straight with your hands, return it with this instrument which is made of iron seven or eight fingers long. And its width according to the size of the wound.
Therefore, the physician should acquire three or four of them according to what he needs for treatment in each type of fracture and let it be rounded with a slight thickness so that it does not bend when pressed upon during work.
And it should have a sharp end with a bend at its end, the top being thicker and from the middle to the bottom very thin. And this is its form:
It is called in Greek Periosteum, meaning a small awl. The sharp bent end should be placed on the protruding bone and pushed with it at once so that when the bone returns and becomes somewhat straight, you then align the ends of the fracture upon each other.
If the broken end is thin and the instrument has not grasped it well, the end of that bone should be cut so that the instrument can take hold of it. If you cannot reduce the bone at all as we have described, cut it according to its shape from the sections we mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the instruments as much as possible, then remove any remaining roughness and thin scales from the bone. If you have reduced the bone and the patient still experiences severe, painful distress afterward, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
If you are able to return it to its natural place, do so, for you will greatly benefit the patient. Once you have finished setting the bone, dip a cloth in a dark astringent solution, especially if it is summer, and do not put anything greasy on the wound.
So that decay and putrefaction do not occur, then use splints when you have finished setting the bone, and leave the wound uncovered by cutting a hole in the bandages with scissors to fit the size of the wound.
Beware of tightening the wound with a fracture, for ignorant physicians often do this and cause their patients either death or gangrene. Let your binding be soft and loose, unlike the binding of other fractures.
But if the wound is poor or a large wound, and you fear some of the bad symptoms we have described, and he finds worrisome pain in the area, do not put splints on it. Make him bandages from strong cloths in place of the splints and tighten them around him.
If after a day or two you see that pus has begun to form in the wound, remove the cloth that you have placed on it with the solution and then use the bandages and ointments that we are accustomed to treating wounds with, such as the quadripartite ointment and the like. You should also loosen the bandage.
You should inspect the wound every morning and evening until it heals and closes. The limb should be positioned so that pus can easily flow downward. If, after many days, the wound has not closed and the pus continues to flow, know that there are small bone fragments present.
You should then probe the wound with a surgical instrument. Any fragments that are clean and free of infection should be removed. If any fragments are infected and causing pain or swelling, they should be cut into smaller pieces and carefully removed in any way possible.
If the wound shows signs of cold, a bad odor, or any other type of corruption or decay, you should treat each symptom according to its description in the relevant chapter.
It is important to remember that if a large bone, such as the femur or humerus, is broken and you are treating the limb, you should not attempt to pull it or remove it from its position. Attempting to do so often results in death. Instead, leave it until it decays and it may then fall away on its own after twenty or thirty days.
At that point, you can treat the wound if there is a suitable area for treatment; otherwise, leave it alone.
Chapter Twenty.
On Treating Complications That May Arise Following Some Fractures.
This complication often occurs after a fracture has healed, particularly those near joints.  It can result in a deformed limb and may prevent the limb from functioning normally.
If the complication is soft, use astringent medications such as frankincense, myrrh, tamarisk, acacia, or similar herbs. Combine some or all of these with an astringent syrup, egg white, or vinegar.
Apply the mixture to the complication, bind it tightly with a bandage, and leave it in place for many days. Then remove the bandage and apply a fresh one until the complication disappears, God willing. Alternatively, you can secure a tight lead plate over the complication.
Lead has a property that removes everything that is implanted in the organs. If the implant has become hardened and intense, and necessity compels its removal, cut it from above and remove the excess that results, or scrape it with some instruments until it is gone, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In the treatment of a fracture, if it heals and the limb afterward remains weak and unlike its original state.
If a bone fracture heals and the limb afterward remains weak and feeble, then it is due to many reasons. One of them is either for the excessive loosening and tying of ligaments in a way that is not proper, or for the excessive tightening of ligaments until food is prevented from flowing to the limb, or for excessive immobilization, or for excessive movements at an improper time, or for a lack of blood in the body of the patient and its weakness.
And the treatment for this is to nourish the patient and enrich his body so that blood increases in it, use the bath and introduce joy and happiness to him, and then apply plaster to the limb so that the plaster attracts a great deal of nourishment to it, or continue immobilizing it with lukewarm water. So that nourishment flows into it and it returns to its natural state.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In the treatment of broken bones that heal crookedly and prevent them from functioning properly.
When a limb, after healing from a break, shows crookedness or a bony prominence or complication that has distorted the shape of the limb. Unless the limb has been prevented from its natural function, then one should not accept the opinion of someone who claims to break the limb again from the beginning, for many ignorant physicians and bone-setters used to do this in our country.
This action is highly reprehensible and leads to great deception, the easiest of which is the defect itself. But if the crookedness and complexity are soft, it should be straightened with water in which relaxing herbs have been cooked, such as marshmallow leaf and its root, rosemary and the like.
It is bandaged with relaxing compresses such as well-made diachylon, or saliva from the marshmallow root is taken and beaten with chicken fat and shear butter, and bandaged with it. Or, a ripe fig is taken and pounded with pigeon dove dung, and other remedies called anti-contraction agents.
And the complexity may be dissolved by continuous gentle massage with the hands, using the movement of the limb in all directions at all times. If the crookedness has been present for a long time and intensified and hardened, and necessity dictates treatment with iron.
It should be incised above and the bone connection released, and what remains of the crookedness or bone should be cut into delicate sections. Great gentleness and care should be used in doing so. Then the wound should be treated as previously mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
Dislocation is the separation of a joint from its place, hindering movement and deforming the limb. It causes severe pain to the sufferer. Whenever someone suffers a dislocation, they should be promptly treated to return it to its proper position.
Do not delay treatment at all, for if it is delayed, the area will swell and become difficult to relocate. Therefore, it should not be delayed, nor moved or stretched while swollen because this often causes the sufferer severe cramps and pain.
But if this happens, the patient should be bled immediately and then left until the swelling subsides somewhat. Then, the limb should be softened with hot water and oil, and gently relocated. Each joint should then be treated as described in its respective place.
And I have also arranged the chapters on dislocations according to their progression from the upper part of the body to the lower.
Chapter Twenty-Fourth.
On the Treatment of Dislocation of the Lower Jaw.
Dislocations of the jaws are rare, and their separation occurs in two ways: either a slight displacement where they relax a little, or a complete dislocation where they become fully relaxed. Towards the chest, so that the saliva of the patient flows and he is unable to hold it back, nor can he clench his jaw or speak clearly; as for slight dislocations, they often return on their own quite easily.
But if the dislocation is complete, it should be reduced quickly without delay; the assistant should hold the patient's head, and the surgeon should insert the thumb of one hand into the base of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side.
Or he should insert both thumbs if the dislocation is on both sides, and with the other fingers outside, align them; he then instructs the patient to relax his jaw and let it go in every direction, while the surgeon aligns the jaw and pushes until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to reduce them, especially if both jaws are dislocated, apply a compress soaked in hot water and oil to ease the reduction; do not delay the reduction as we have said. Once they are back in place, aligned, and the patient's mouth closes without relaxation, then place bandages of cloth over them with splints made of wax and oil.
Then tie them gently with a relaxed bandage; the patient should sleep on his back with his head elevated between two pillows so that he does not move it right or left and is not required to chew anything, but rather have soft, liquid food.
Even if the pain goes away and the jaw is set, let him eat what he pleases, but let him use it gently and not force open his mouth when eating, drinking, or yawning until the jaw is set and healed.
If difficulty arises in returning the jaws to their place when they have been dislocated and do not return to their positions, it often results in fevers and persistent headaches, and sometimes the patient's abdomen will swell and he may vomit repeatedly. If you see this, know that it is a serious injury.
And often those who suffer from this die within ten days.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On Returning the Jaw of the Shoulder and End of the Collarbone.
As for the clavicle, it does not dislocate inward due to its connection to the chest, but it may dislocate outward, which can be determined by touch. Force the patient to lie on his back and extend his arms.
Then press on the area with your hand forcefully, and it will return. Then place a bandage and splints on it and tighten them. As for its end which joins the shoulder blade, it rarely dislocates. If it does happen to dislocate one day, it should be returned and straightened as we have described and what is suitable for you.
Then place a bandage, splints and tightening on it, and order the patient to observe rest and quiet until he recovers. This same treatment is used to return the end of the shoulder blade if it has also been dislocated.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
On Returning a Dislocated Shoulder Blade.
Know that the shoulder blade can dislocate in three ways: one is towards the armpit downwards, the second is towards the chest, and rarely it can dislocate above the shoulder blade.
And it does not break off behind to the shoulder place, nor does it break off in front to the nerve place, and more often than not it breaks off and comes out below towards the armpit, especially in those with little flesh because it goes out quickly and enters quickly in them.
But as for those with much flesh, it is the opposite, meaning that it comes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty, and perhaps some people may experience a blow or fall, so the elbow swells and becomes hot, and they think that it has broken off, so it should be examined until its soundness is determined.
Then you proceed in treating it, and you recognize the fracture if it is below towards the armpit; if you compare between the fractured elbow and the sound elbow, you will find an apparent difference, and you will find the head of the elbow therein dented, and under the armpit upon touching the head of the elbow as if it were an egg.
And the patient is unable to raise his hand to his ear, nor can he move it with all movements; likewise, if it breaks towards the chest or upwards, you will find that apparent upon touching and it is not hidden.
And this fracture may be easy to return if it is soft or if the patient is a boy, and returning it is done by having a servant raise his hand upwards; then you place your thumbs under his armpit and raise the joint strongly upward to its place, and the servant raises his hand and extends it upward.
Then he puts it down; it will return quickly, if it does not return as we mentioned and the fracture has been for many days, then the patient should bathe in hot water and use a poultice that relaxes and softens, such as cooking the root of marshmallow and fenugreek and rosemary in water and using it.
Then the patient lies on his back and you place under his armpit a ball of wool that is moderate between softness and hardness, then the doctor puts his heel on the ball and holds the patient's hand with his hand and extends it downward.
And he will push the ball with his foot, for it will return to its place. And if you wish to return it in this way, it is that you prepare a man taller than the patient and stop him from the side of the flank and insert his elbow under the patient's armpit and raise his armpit upwards until the patient is hanging in the air. And another servant will pull the patient's hand down to his stomach, and if the patient is light, something else should be hung on him to weigh him down, for the dislocation will return from its time. It may also be returned in another way.
And that is to fix in the ground a long wooden beam whose head is round in shape like the pestle of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, then place it under the patient's armpit after placing a soft rag on the head of the wood and the patient standing upright along the wood.
Then he extends his hand down from the other side and also extends his body from the same side with force, for the joint will return to its place quickly. If it is difficult to return it by all that we have mentioned, use this treatment: take a wooden beam about two arm's lengths long. And its width is the size of four fingers and its thickness is the size of two fingers, it has a round head to make it easy to enter deep into the armpit in this way:
Then a soft rag is tied to the round head so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then it is placed under the armpit and the entire hand and arm are extended on the wood and the wood is tied to the upper arm, forearm and end of the hand.
Then the arm is placed on a horizontal ladder beam and the hand is extended downwards, and the rest of the body is left hanging from the other side, for the joint will enter its place quickly. And if it enters in any way possible, then it is necessary to put a moderate-sized ball of wool under the armpit.
Then a dressing is applied, prepared from flour dust with frankincense and egg white, to the whole shoulder as it turns upwards; then the ball is firmly tightened from under the armpit and bound over the dressing from above, and his hand is hung around his neck.
His hand is left unmoved for seven days, and the patient's food should be kept light so that the limb may become strong, for this is quicker for its healing; then after seven days or five it is unbound and exercised by movement. If it remains firm and does not relax, it is healed.
But if the joint dislocates frequently due to dampness or some other cause, cautery should be used with three white-hot irons as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery. If all this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days and the joint does not remain stable...
...the dressing and binding are repeated several times, but it does not hold, falls, and relaxes, and you cannot raise it upwards, know that the nerve in the head of the shoulder has been severed or stretched or relaxed; then know that the joint will never remain fixed in its place.
As for dislocation towards the chest, the breast and behind, it is reduced by pressure and extension with the hands until it returns, and all bandages and treatment are used until it is healed. If stiffness occurs in the limb after healing and movement is slow...
…let the patient frequently use the bath so that the stiffness softens and returns to its former state.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the Treatment of Elbow Dislocation.
The elbow joint dislocates with difficulty and also returns with difficulty. It dislocates in all directions, especially forwards or backwards. Its dislocation is not hidden from you because it lies under sight and touch in whichever way it has dislocated.
And if you join the dislocated joint to the sound one, it will become clear to you, by the obvious depression of the joint, that he cannot bend his arm nor touch it to his elbow, and you should hasten to return the dislocation from your hour before a hot swelling occurs for it.
For if a hot swelling occurs for him, it will be difficult to return it and it may not heal at all, especially if the dislocation is backward, for it is the worst of all types of dislocations, the most painful, and death often follows with it.
And if his fracture is something that can be returned, let a servant extend his hand with both of his hands and arms outstretched, and the doctor's hand from above the elbow and below it, while he pushes the joint with the thumbs of both his hands or with the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is forward, it may be returned by bending the hand at once so that its base strikes the elbow opposite it; but if the dislocation does not return, use extreme force, which is to extend the arm with two servants.
And let the patient also be held by two servants so that he does not move during the extension, then the arm is rotated in all directions after a folded cloth or a wide bandage is wrapped around it. And if the doctor touches the joint with his hands, he should rub it with oil to make it easier for the joint to slip.
Then the joint should be pushed hard until it returns, and after it returns, a bandage with a grip and drying with egg white should be applied to it and tightened firmly, and the arm should be hung from the patient's neck and left for several days.
Then it is loosened, and if the joint remains in place, the bandage is removed from it and left alone. If you see that the joint has not become strong, reapply the bandage and binding and leave it for several days until it strengthens and then remove it.  If he experiences pain after the joint returns and is released
If there is stiffness in movement, let him use moistening in the bath and gentle massage and pressure until it softens, or place on the joint a sheep's bladder then tie it and leave it for a day and a night, then remove it and put him in the bath, and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately.
Then repeat the bladder two and three times with entering the bath until it softens. And if you wish to place wet, softened cow dung mixed with butter and bind it on, do that several times for it will soften and return to its former state.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On the Treatment of Wrist Dislocation.
The wrist of the hand is often dislocated, and its reduction is easy unlike other joints; however, it is necessary to hasten its reduction at the hour it is dislocated before swelling or a hot tumor appears in the place.
To reduce the dislocation, place the patient's wrist on a board and have an attendant extend his hand; then the physician places his hand on the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns. However, he must look to see if the dislocation has moved toward the palm of the hand.
Let the patient place the back of his hand on the board when extending and reducing it, and if the dislocation is prominent toward the back of the hand let him place the palm of his hand on the board so that the physician's hand falls on the same prominence of the joint. If it returns immediately, or else bind it with a bandage that relieves swelling.
Leave it and do not let it reoccur, for it cannot bear it, and you will not be able to reduce it after several days have passed; however the joint remains on its place and does not harm the patient at all except if the hand becomes inactive and unable to grasp anything.
Then you know that the nerve has been cut or become diseased; there is no remedy except to bind it tightly, perhaps it will be of benefit and perhaps not. If the wrist has been reduced, apply the bandage we have described, then bind it tightly and leave it for five days.
Then it is softened and trained, for if its movement is difficult and there is any stiffness in it, soften it with warm water and rub it repeatedly until it becomes supple.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On the Treatment of Dislocated Fingers.
Fingers may dislocate in any direction, so when a finger dislocates towards the back of the hand or its palm side, extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumb until it returns. Then tie the tip of the finger and hang it towards the side to which it dislocated.
Leave it for two days, then release it and extend it until it stands straight that day. If it is at night, tie it in the same way, but do not stop loosening it during the day and train it with movement and tie it at night. Do this for days until it strengthens.
Do the same if it dislocates towards the palm side, tying it towards the same direction and repeating your initial actions until it heals. Likewise, do this for all other directions of dislocation.
Chapter Thirty.
On the Treatment of Dislocated Vertebrae.
When a vertebra from the vertebrae of the back or neck becomes completely dislocated, or when many vertebrae are displaced from their positions, there is no treatment, as death hastens to the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's stool comes out involuntarily, and they are often unable to hold it back. Often some of their limbs relax, either both legs or both arms, or one of them. If only one vertebra is displaced, it often returns to its place.
The dislocation can occur in four directions: the one that dislocates backwards is called a hump. As for its treatment, if the hump occurred in childhood, there is no treatment and it will not heal at all. But if it occurred from a fall or blow, etc.
The ancients have mentioned it with various treatments in lengthy discourse, most of which is not very beneficial. I have abridged this, so that a little suffices for much of what they have brought forth in terms of approximation to the meaning and its explanation, and I have depicted the instrument differently from how they have described it.
I say that the hump which occurs in front of the chest is neither curable nor treatable, nor is that which occurs on either side. Only that which occurs in the back can be treated, particularly as I will describe: by laying the patient face down.
On a level bench near a wall, spread out a damp mat underneath so that his chest is not hurt; then place an upright plank set in a hole in the ground at the head end of the bench and another plank toward his feet at the other end of the bench.
One attendant holds the plank, which is not fixed in the hole, and another attendant holds the other plank in that position; then a soft, tight bandage is wrapped around the patient's chest and under his armpits. The end of the bandage is extended to the plank at his head and tied there.
Then another bandage is tightened above his thighs, above his knees and at his ankles; all the bandages are gathered together and tied to the other plank at his feet. Then each attendant extends their plank with the bandage, and the planks do not move from their fixed positions.
However, they are not fixed as we have said, and the physician places their hands firmly on the hump until it subsides or places a board on it and then leans on the board with their legs until it subsides. If it does not subside with this treatment, take a board that is about three cubits long.
And a notch is carved into the wall we mentioned should be near the patient, into which the end of the board is inserted; then the middle of the board is placed on the hump and the physician places their feet on the other end and pulls tightly so that the hump is compressed.
Return it to its place, and if you wish to make it with a screw that is twisted by hand, which is to insert at the head of the patient in the last part of the stretcher two pieces of wood, each being an arm's length long, and at his feet also in the last part of the stretcher, two pieces.
Let the distance between each piece of wood be a span, and let there be made in each piece of wood a hole through which the screw is passed and all the wood is firmly secured to the ground so that it does not move at all, and insert a round stick which is the screw in which the ligature is twisted in the holes of the two pieces of wood.
And at its end there is a hole in which a stick a span long is fixed, with which it is twisted, and the same is done in the other two pieces of wood; then tighten the ligature that you tightened on the patient's chest in the screw at his head and the ligatures that you tightened on his legs in the screw at his feet.
Then a servant stands by each screw and twists his hand with the wrench with which the screw is twisted, and the surgeon straightens the bump as we have described, and this is a picture of the screw, the stretcher, and the patient.
Then, after the hernia has returned and the area is level, you should apply a dry dressing with egg white then a bandage, and place over the dressing a splint of wood which is three fingers wide or thereabouts, and its length should be as much as takes the place of the bump.
And on top of some correct beads, then it is tied with the ligature which should be used; the patient should use soft food until he recovers. If there remains some swelling in the place at the end of recovery, you should apply medications that relax and soften, while using the board we described for a long time.
You may use a lead plate for this; and it may happen that a swelling appears at the end of the dorsal vertebrae, which is mistaken for a dislocation; this is an extra bone that has grown, so do not treat it with this method, for death may occur.
Chapter Thirty-One.
In the treatment of luxated hip.
Know that the hip joint and the shoulder joint are only subject to dislocation, and are not subject to the slight displacement and subsidence that affect all other joints. The hip joint dislocates in four ways.
This is because it dislocates inward, outward, forward, and backward. Dislocation is most common inward and least common forward or backward. The sign of inward dislocation is that if you align the healthy leg of the patient with the injured leg, the injured leg will appear longer.
The knee will be more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient will not be able to bend their leg at the hip. The area below the hip will be warm and swollen, clearly indicating that the head of the femur has moved there.
The signs of dislocation outward are the opposite of these signs. The sign of anterior dislocation is that the patient can fully extend their leg, but cannot bend it without pain. Pain will be present in the knee. If they try to walk, they will not be able to move forward.
Urine retention and swelling of the groin will occur, and when walking, they will land on their heels. The sign of posterior dislocation is that they cannot extend the knee, nor can they bend it before bending the hip. Their leg will also be shorter than the other.
The groin will be relaxed and the head of the femur will be clearly visible near the waist. As for reducing these dislocations, if it is an old dislocation that has been present for a long time and the patient has not attempted to reduce it, then there is no treatment at all.
It should not be treated. But if it is a recent dislocation of any type, one of the four directions, then hurry to manipulate the joint, extending it inward and outward, and moving it right and left; perhaps
If the dislocation returns and does not require further treatment, it is sufficient. If it does not return in this way, a strong servant should be employed to support his leg from below, either with their hands or with a splint tied above the knee, and another servant to support him from above.
He should insert his hands under the armpits and then tighten a soft splint around the base of the thigh, with another servant holding the end of the splint. This servant should extend the leg either from the front from the groin to the shoulder or from behind to the back.
All of them should extend simultaneously until the patient is raised off the ground and suspended. This type of extension is a common one for all four types, if the dislocation returns as we said, or else each type requires its own specific treatment as I have mentioned.
As for the specific treatment if the dislocation is inward, the patient should lie on their right side and a splint should be applied to the base of the thigh between the head of the femur and the area below the groin.
Then the bandage is extended upwards from the groin to the upper body towards the shoulder. Another strong servant then takes hold of the thick part of the affected thigh with their arms and extends it outwards forcefully, causing it to return to its place.
This type is easier than all other types of treatment for returning this limb. If this proves difficult and you cannot proceed with this type of treatment at all, then both legs of the patient should be bound together with a strong soft bandage on the heels and knees.
There should be a distance of four finger widths between each leg, with the affected leg extended more than the other by two fingers. The patient is then hung from their head from a beam in the house, suspended at a distance of two arm lengths from the ground.
Then order a strong boy to embrace the head of the thigh and let another boy cling to the patient; then have the latter boy push hard against the thigh, for the joint will quickly return to its place. As for returning a dislocated jaw that is out.
The patient should lie on the plank as we described in Al-Hadba's work, and the bandage should be tightened on his affected leg, especially on his chest; then two planks should be placed, one at his feet and the other at his head; then an additional plank should be placed in the middle of the plank, securely fastened.
Wind a damp cloth around it so as not to hurt the patient, so that the plank is between his thighs lest he be pulled down during stretching; then each attendant stretches towards his side and the physician straightens the hip with his hands; if it responds by returning.
If not, place the board on it and press it down as we mentioned in Al-Hadba, except that the patient should lie on his right side; and if the dislocation is forward, stretch the patient's leg once while he is in this exact position on the plank.
The physician places the palm of his right hand on the affected thigh and then presses it with his other hand, while extending the pressure downwards towards the knee; if the dislocation is backward, the patient should not be extended downward.
Rather than being raised off the ground, he should be placed on something solid; and it should also be the case that if his hip is dislocated outward as we mentioned regarding his position on the plank while on his face with bandages tightened.
As we said earlier, pressing with the board should also be used on the location to which the joint has dislocated. If the hip joint returns properly and the sign of its return is not hidden from you, it is that you extend the patient's legs.
If you see them level and the patient draws up his leg and extends it without difficulty, know that the limb has returned to its proper position; then join the thighs together, apply a bandage and tighten with a turban so firmly that the hip does not move in any direction.
The patient must remain still for three or four days, then the bandage and ligature should be removed and the leg compared to the other. If they are equal in size, know that the fracture has set and allow the patient to walk. If you see any laxity.
Redo the bandage and tighten it according to your initial tightness, and leave it for another three days. Then remove it and allow him to walk slowly on it for several days until it strengthens, God willing.
Chapter the Thirty-Second and Thirty-Third.
On the Treatment of a Knee Fracture.
The knee fractures in three ways: inward, outward, and downward - meaning backward -  and it never fractures forward. A sign of a fracture is to order the patient to bring his leg up to his thigh.
If it does not touch the thigh, know that the knee is fractured.  To set all types of fractures, have the patient sit with his legs extended if he is strong enough, and have an assistant stand behind him to grasp his waist and twist him slightly backward. Then you should sit on his thighs.
Press your back against his face, place his leg between yours, then grip his knee with both hands, interlocking your fingers on his knee. Then squeeze the sides of his knee firmly with your hands while another assistant extends his leg until the knee returns to its place.
The sign that it has returned to its place is that the leg will touch the thigh easily and without force. Then bandage it, pressing the leg against the thigh, and bind them all together with a bandage for three or four days, then release it. Only allow a little walking for several days until it strengthens.
If it is impossible for you to return it in the manner we have described, otherwise use strong traction with bandages which I have previously described in the treatment of the hip until it returns.
Chapter thirty-three.
In the treatment of a fractured heel.
The heel may separate slightly or completely fracture, and the fracture can be either inward or outward. The sign of a fracture is that you will see the heel swollen and protruding towards the side to which it has fractured.
As for the treatment of a slight separation, it is easy to return it by gently pulling with the hands and straightening it until it returns. As for its treatment if it fractures completely, the patient should sit down and be held by a strong attendant from behind his middle back.
Then hold the patient's foot with your right hand from above and with your left hand from below at the ankle, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand twice then extend it with your left hand and push the front of the foot with your right hand toward the leg without force.
Do this twice as we have described, then push the front of the foot towards the leg in the third attempt while pulling on the ankle. If it returns in one or two attempts with this method and you see the foot straight, otherwise repeat the process because it will return.
If it refuses to return as we have described, otherwise lay the patient on his back on the ground and insert a strong peg firmly into the ground so that it lies between his thighs, having wrapped a cloth around it so as not to hurt the patient, then let an attendant hold his thigh.
Then another attendant extends the leg, either with his hands or with a bandage tied around the neck of the leg; then each attendant pulls contrary to the pull of the other and the peg remains fixed between the patient's thighs to hold him so that his body does not slip down during the pulling; then the doctor straightens the fracture with his hands.
Another attendant should hold the sound leg down; then, the jaw will return quickly. When the jaw returns and it becomes clear to you that its return is sound, apply a dressing and bandage, tightening it with strong ligatures, and tie the foot to the bandage below. Care must be taken of the nerve which is above the heel from behind.
So that the bandage is not tight on it and cause it pain, then leave it for two or three days. If the bandage loosens, tighten it again, then release it on the third or fourth day, and the patient must refrain from walking for forty days.
If he wishes to walk before this period, you cannot be sure that the jaw will not dislocate and become spoiled and no longer accept treatment. If a hot swelling appears, one should use what has been previously described in another section of the treatment and bandaging until it subsides.
Chapter Thirty-Fourth.
On the Treatment of a Fracture of the Fingers.
One should straighten what is fractured with a slight extension without force; this is not difficult but rather easy. If the fracture is in some of the phalanges of the toes, the patient should place his foot on a level surface.
Or on a plank while standing as if walking, then you should place your foot on what is above those joints and then step on it forcefully until it returns and you see that it has become straight and no prominence appears in the place.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot that will take the whole foot and has two heads, then tighten it firmly for three days, then loosen it and keep it from walking for many days until it becomes strong and you are safe from its return, God willing.
Chapter Thirty-Fifth.
On the Types of Fracture that Occur with a Wound or with a Break, or Both Together.
When something of this kind occurs and it is treated with medication and bandaging, death often follows.
Therefore, only one who is skilled in the craft, long experienced, gentle, compassionate, deliberate, neither hasty nor reckless, should undertake to treat such a condition. He should begin by using medicines that soothe only hot tumors and then leave the patient alone.
By God's will, only what I hope for safety from affliction with the lightness of the disease, and if you see some hope in it, return it to its initial hour before a hot tumor occurs.
If the member returns as desired, use a remedy that soothes hot tumors and treat the wound with drying ointments suitable for it. If the fracture is accompanied by bone splinters that have become detached, remove them. Follow what we have mentioned regarding simple diseases previously in their respective places.
Strive diligently and purify yourself from entering the path of risk as I have previously advised you, for that is most lasting for your reputation and safest for your appearance, God willing.
